S/2016/830

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 September 2016
Original: English

Third report of the Secretary-General on the threat posed by
ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member States
in countering the threat
I. Introduction
1.
In adopting its resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council expressed its
determination to address the threat posed to international peace and security by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL, also known as Da’esh) 1 and associated
individuals and groups, as well as emphasizing the importance of cutting off its
access to funds and preventing it from planning and facilitating attacks. In
paragraph 97 of the resolution, the Council requested me to provide an initial
strategic-level report, followed by updates every four months thereafter.
2.
The present report was prepared with the input of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team pursuant to Security Council resolution 1526 (2014) and 2253
(2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) (Da’esh), Al -Qaida
and the Taliban and associated individuals and entities, which supports the work of
the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011)
and 2253 (2015) concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al -Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, as well as in close
collaboration with the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, the United
Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and other relevant United Nations actors and
international organizations. In addition to providing an update on the gravity of the
threat posed by ISIL and associated groups and entities, I also consider the presence
and influence of ISIL outside Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, including in
Yemen, East Africa, and South and South-East Asia. In the report, I have adopted a
regional focus in highlighting the efforts and progress of Member States of South
and South-East Asia to implement counter-terrorism measures in a number of
thematic areas, and I consider how Member States are dealing with the issue of
foreign terrorist fighters who return to their home States. The use of information and
communications technology by ISIL, the issue of conflict-related sexual violence
and the range of technical assistance and capacity-building efforts undertaken by the
United Nations and its partners are also addressed.
__________________
1

16-16787 (E)

Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).

051016

*1616787*

S/2016/830

II. Overview of current threat
A.

ISIL under pressure in conflict zones
3.
Since my second report (S/2016/501), ISIL has continued to experience
significant military setbacks in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic. ISIL affiliates,
which had taken on a more prominent role, have also been subjected to sustained
attacks in their strongholds in Afghanistan and in Sirte, Libya. Th is has undermined
the group’s ability to achieve its key objective of holding territory. One Member
State reported that continuing military pressure in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic
had forced the group’s core leadership to change its command and contr ol structures
in those States by transferring decision-making powers downwards and reducing
centralized management (see S/2016/629, para. 7).
4.
The military setbacks have placed significant pressure on the grou p’s capacity
to generate assets, especially income from the sale of oil (see S/2016/501, para. 10).
Since the publication of my second report, ISIL has continued to struggle
financially, while at the same time attempting to adapt to its new reality. ISIL has
intensified its efforts at “taxation”/extortion to compensate for the loss of revenue
from oil and, by some estimates, earns as much as $30 million per month from this
revenue source, which includes forced “zakat”, business “taxes”, fees for electricity
and water, “rent” for seized real estate, and customs duties and passage fees (see
S/2016/629, para. 14). In response to these financial pressures, ISIL has increased
the rate and number of its “taxes” and has even been “taxing” the most
impoverished civilians, who had previously been excluded (see ibid.).
5.
The worsening financial situation has weakened the group’s ability to “govern”
(see ibid., para. 13). Salary cuts and delays in payment have also led some ISIL
fighters to abandon the group. 2 Reports of corruption, including theft of money
and gold, within its ranks may be another sign of the group’s deteriorating finances
(see ibid., para. 15).
6.
As ISIL continues to lose territory, its ability to raise funds through “taxation”/
extortion will also dwindle. Consequently, it may be forced to rely on more
traditional terrorist revenue streams, including criminal activities such as kidnapping
for ransom 3 and external donations. 4 According to one assessment, ISIL may also
become involved in various forms of smuggling, which might be less profitable, but
also more difficult to counter through military action. 3

__________________
2

Testimony of the Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing, Daniel L. Glaser, to the
Subcommittee on Terrorism, Non-proliferation and Trade of the House Committee on Foreign
Affairs and the Emerging Threats and Capabilities Subcommittee of the House Committee on
Armed Services, 9 June 2016.
3
House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, “The UK’s role in the economic war against
ISIL”, 5 July 2016, paras. 47-48.
4
Thus far, ISIL has not been dependent on external donations. As ISIL loses territory, not only
will it lose the revenue streams associated with its control of territory, but the “burn rate”
(indicating how fast it is using up its funds) will also decline (see S/2014/815, para. 79) as costs
associated with control of territory decrease. Thus, even if they continue on the same scale,
donations may account for a bigger percentage of the group’s overall income and play a more
significant role in its overall finances.

2/19

16-16787

S/2016/830

7.
The military offensive of August 2016 aimed at ending the group’s control
over the Syrian city of Manbij, combined with the continuing military pressure
exerted on ISIL in surrounding areas, will place additional pressure on the group,
including by limiting its access to international borders outsid e the immediate
conflict zones.

B.

Strategic competition and tactical cooperation
8.
The threat posed by ISIL continues to be significant and to diversify. Since my
second report, Al-Qaida and ISIL and associated entities have continued to compete
strategically. Despite the competing visions of “emirate” and “caliphate”, and
violent clashes concerning resources and territory, 5 however, ISIL operatives have
used their personal relationships with individuals from Al -Qaida to support their
preparations for major attacks in Europe (in 2015 and 2016) and Kenya (in 2015).
Member States also noted that Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and ISIL had
provided operational support to each other in Yemen. This demonstrates that
personal relationships between individual terrorists can be more important than a
shared belief in a radical ideology. Individuals who leave conflict zones to
perpetrate attacks in their States of origin or in other conflict zones may be able to
count on the support of a number of groups and therefore present an elevated
concern.

C.

Increasing numbers of returnees
9.
The military pressure currently being exerted on ISIL in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic has resulted in an increase in the number of foreign terrorist fighter
returnees, in particular to Europe and the Maghreb. This poses new challenges to
Member States. Foreign terrorist fighters and returnees have adjusted to
countermeasures taken by Member States through the use of “broken travel”,
encryption and the “dark net”.
10. Member States have informed the Monitoring Team that the number of foreign
terrorist fighters returning to their States of origin or residence and potentially
intending to perpetrate attacks, along with the number of individuals being
radicalized within those States, present a growing challenge to global security. The
relative frequency of arrests of active ISIL cells around the globe since my second
report demonstrates this growing risk.

D.

Modus operandi of external attacks
11. The increasing number of returnees may signal a weakening of the group’s
ability to retain fighters and supporters in conflict zones. However, ISIL has
responded to military pressure by increasing the number of externally directed and
facilitated attacks and by employing deadlier tactics. The modus operandi used by
ISIL operatives in conducting multiple, nearly simultaneous attacks, such as in

__________________
5

16-16787

Mainly in Afghanistan and the Syrian Arab Republic.

3/19

S/2016/830

Brussels, Istanbul (Turkey) and Paris, 6 poses particular problems in terms of the
security response. First, the flow of information into command and control centres
can be overwhelming. Member States reported that that was a deliberate tactic
aimed at making it more difficult for States to mount coordinated and targeted
responses (see S/2016/629, para. 5). The attacks in Paris in November 2015
demonstrated that the terrorists had studied previous active -shooter scenarios and
learned lessons about how to maximize confusion and casualties.
12. In addition to the large-scale operations mounted by ISIL overseas, there have
been numerous attacks perpetrated by individuals or small cells. In some cases, the
individuals have professed allegiance to ISIL in advance. In others, ISIL has
claimed the attackers as its “soldiers”. These attacks may have been inspired, rather
than directed, by ISIL, but their effects are just as significant, both in terms of the
impact on public consciousness and the loss of life.

E.

Continuing misuse of information and communications technology
by terrorists
13. ISIL continues to assert itself in cyberspace. Potential recruits are increasingly
instructed by ISIL recruiters to use closed forums and enc rypted messaging systems
(see S/2016/629, para. 6). This ongoing recruitment activity is helping to build an
ever-increasing transnational network of ISIL sympathizers and fighters, thereby
obviating the need for physical proximity between leaders and operational figures.
Moreover, ISIL continues to be a prolific publisher of online propaganda, the
continued military pressure notwithstanding.
14. Communications through the “dark net” or through encrypted messagin g also
undermine the ability of even the most sophisticated law enforcement agencies to
intercept, and act upon, terrorist messages. Consequently, Member States may lose
much of their acquired technological advantage over terror groups.

F.

Continuing use of conflict-related sexual violence
15. As noted in my second report (S/2016/501, paras. 44-47), ISIL continues to
systematically use sexual violence against Yazidi women and girls in Iraq and the
Syrian Arab Republic, as well as against other minorities caught up in the conflict.
Even though some women have managed to escape their captors, around 3,800
abducted Yazidis were still missing at the time of writing. This is a matter of grave
concern. Those who have escaped have described the appalling conditions under
which they were bought, sold, traded and abused. Both girls and boys are advertised
online and traded for weapons, suicide vests, cars and a range of other commodities.
Thus far, no formal mechanisms have been established to secure the release of those
held captive by ISIL. Those who have managed to escape have done so with the
help of their families and smugglers or by taking advantage of other opportunities.
Some have resorted to suicide as their only escape. The children of women who
commit suicide, or who attempt to escape, are beaten or killed as punishment.

__________________
6

4/19

The ability to carry out such complex attacks was also demonstrated by Al -Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb (QDe.014) in the multi-stage attacks perpetrated in Gao, Mali, on 31 May 2016.

16-16787

S/2016/830

16. In Libya, groups pledging allegiance to ISIL have, in some cases, subjected
forcibly recruited boys to sexual violence (see A/HRC/31/47).

III. Evolving threat posed by ISIL
17. To highlight the threat presented by ISIL to various regions of the globe, in
this report I focus on South-East Asia and Yemen and East Africa.

A.

Threat to South-East Asia
18. The rise of ISIL and its establishment of a “caliphate” have also reverberated
in South-East Asia, inspiring new individuals and re-energizing pre-existing terrorist
networks, 7 thereby presenting a resurgent threat to the region. According to one
Member State, for the first time since the Afghan conflict, South -East Asian
extremists have travelled abroad in a systematic manner to join a global militant
movement, thereby developing combat skills and establishing contacts. 8
19. South-East Asian foreign terrorist fighters are not only inspiring, but also
actively directing, attacks in the region. One Member State noted that the grenade
attack on the Movida nightclub in Malaysia in June 2016, which injured eight
people, had been directed by a Malaysian foreign terrorist fighter in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Numerous ISIL-related plots have also been disrupted by authorities in
South-East Asia, and hundreds of individuals have been arrested.
20. According to Member States, there has been an uptick in ISIL activity focused
on the region in recent months. In June 2016, a group purporting to be an ISIL
division in the Philippines released a video on social media depicting Indonesian,
Malaysian and Filipino fighters in the Syrian Arab Republic per forming executions
and urging countrymen who could not travel to the Syrian Arab Republic to join
ISIL in the Philippines, carry out attacks at home or send money, thus further
aggravating the concern that the southern Philippines could become a hub for
fighters from the region (see S/2016/629, para. 51). 9 Also in June, ISIL launched a
local-language publication focused on South-East Asia, 10 in a further indication of
the region’s growing importance to the group’s global agenda.
21. The group’s focus on South-East Asia is not limited to propaganda. Funds
have been channelled to the region from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, 10 for

__________________
7

Includes former Jemaah Islamiyah (QDe.092) supporters.
According to a recent regional risk assessment produced under the co -leadership of the financial
intelligence units of the Australian Reporting and Analysis Centre and the Indonesian Financial
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre and drawing on information from other regional States,
568 Indonesians are involved in the conflict in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic and 183 are
believed to have returned to Indonesia. Eight Malaysian foreign terrorist fighters have been
arrested and convicted upon their return to Malaysia. See “Regional risk assessment on terrorism
financing 2016: South-East Asia & Australia”, August 2016, p. 12.
9
A number of groups operating in the Philippines, including elements of the Abu Sayyaf Group
(QDe.001), have pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi. One Member State noted that the
Group’s capabilities with regard to kidnapping for ransom had grown and become more
sophisticated as a result of the ransoms received. See also S/2014/770, para. 50.
10
Information provided by a Member State.
8

16-16787

5/19

S/2016/830

example for the attack of January 2016 in Jakarta from an ISIL cell based in Iraq
and the Syrian Arab Republic to a network in Indonesia. 11 Funds have also been
collected locally to fund operations in the region. 10
22. The recent attacks in South-East Asia, such as in January 2016 in Jakarta and
in June 2016 in Malaysia, have not involved sophisticated tactics and methods. 10
Nonetheless, because the commitment to conduct further attacks is present, the risk
remains that battle-hardened returnees from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic 12 or
convicted terrorists released from prison who seek to re-engage with terrorist
networks 13 will bridge the expertise gap.

B.

Threat to Yemen and East Africa
23. In 2014, an ISIL-affiliated group was established in Yemen, with leadership,
direction and financing from the ISIL core in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic.
Member States of the region report that ISIL fighters of various nationalities 14 have
also joined ISIL in Yemen. Even though it has intensified its attacks, especially in
the Aden area, and has been recruiting in Yemen, ISIL has not yet mana ged to gain
significant local support and is generally rejected by the population.
24. As with attacks by Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula in the country, ISIL in
Yemen targets government buildings and officials. The fierce propaganda competition
between Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula and ISIL in Yemen notwithstanding,
there are no reports of direct clashes between them. Based on reports by Member
States, fighters from the two groups appear to be prepared to cooperate at the
tactical level.
25. The ISIL leadership has maintained a close interest in Yemen. It is monitoring
operations on the ground and gives guidance and direction to its fighters there. In
January 2016, an internal leadership struggle within ISIL in Yemen was swif tly
addressed by the ISIL core (see S/2016/629, para. 27).
26. Member States have observed the emergence of two ISIL cells in Somalia. The
first operates in the Bari mountains of the Puntland region. This group is led by
Abdulqader Mu’min, a former Al-Shabaab leader who switched allegiance to ISIL
in 2015. The strength of this cell is estimated by Member States at around 300
fighters, who receive financial and logistical support from ISIL in Yemen. One
Member State reported that a weapons shipment had been delivered by sea from
Yemen early in 2016. Member States reported that ISIL fighters in Somalia were
posting photographs of arms smuggled from Yemen on social media. Although ISIL
in Yemen is aiding the new ISIL faction in Somalia, the aid is deemed to be

__________________
11

“Regional risk assessment on terrorism financing 2016: South -East Asia & Australia”, August
2016, pp. 16 and 33. According to this risk assessment, “while outflows to foreign conflict zones
pose a high risk, concern is growing over signs of funding entering the region to support local
terrorist actors”, p. 4.
12
See, for example, Thomas Koruth Samuel, Radicalisation in Southeast Asia: a Selected Case
Study of Da’esh in Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines (Kuala Lumpur, Southeast Asia
Regional Centre for Counter-Terrorism, 2016), p. 105.
13
Information provided by Member States.
14
In particular Iraqi, Saudi Arabian, Syrian and Tunisian nationals.

6/19

16-16787

S/2016/830

insufficient by Somali ISIL fighters. According to the assessment of several
Member States, support is limited because ISIL in Yemen needs to focus its
resources on Yemen in order to tackle competition from Al -Qaida in the Arabian
Peninsula.
27. Member States noted that the second ISIL-aligned group, Jabha East Africa,
was operating in southern Somalia in the Raas Kaambooni area. In April 2016, the
group announced its allegiance to ISIL, criticizing Al-Shabaab and its links to
Al-Qaida and calling upon East Africans to leave Al -Shabaab and to view joining
ISIL as an opportunity to wage terrorism more widely. Member States pointed out
that the strength of that ISIL-aligned group could not yet be accurately determined.
28. Member States consider that ISIL faces strong resistance in Somalia from
Al-Shabaab, which sees ISIL as a new competing faction and has already killed
some of its own former members who had defected to ISIL. Member States also
noted that around 50 Al-Shabaab defectors had travelled to Yemen in February 2016
and that 17 had joined ISIL in Libya.

IV. Updates on implementation by Member States of the relevant
counter-terrorism resolutions
29. The emergence of ISIL and its success in recruiting foreign terrorist fighters
have created additional counter-terrorism challenges and increased the urgency of
the need to respond to the rapid evolution and escalation of the current terrorist
threat through enhanced counter-terrorism measures. The primary responsibility for
countering the threat of ISIL lies with Member States. In the present report,
I highlight implementation actions taken in South -East Asia, focusing on the issues
of returning foreign terrorist fighters and the steps taken by Member States, in
particular those of South and South-East Asia, to prosecute, rehabilitate and
reintegrate returning nationals.

A.

Implementation by Member States of South and South-East Asia
30. Several States of South-East Asia have been the victims of major terrorist
attacks. Since the first ISIL-backed 15 suicide bombing took place in Jakarta in
January 2016, Indonesia, Malaysia, 16 the Philippines and Singapore 17 have made
arrests and thwarted several ISIL-backed terrorism plots.

1.

Counter-terrorism strategies and institutional frameworks
31. Four States have introduced and continuously updated national counter -terrorism
strategies and have established national counter-terrorism coordinating bodies
consisting of all government agencies engaged in countering terrorism with the aim
of enhancing inter-agency information exchange and cooperation. They have also

__________________
15

Considered to have been inspired by a South-East Asian ISIL unit in the Syrian Arab Republic.
As at 27 June 2016, 213 terrorist suspects had been arrested in relation to ISIL activities.
17
On 5 August 2016, six terrorists were arrested for planning to attack Marina Bay in Singapore.
16

16-16787

7/19

S/2016/830

established special counter-terrorism units 18 within the police and the prosecution
services. The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has introduced
several regional instruments to combat terrorism, including the ASEAN Convention
on Counter-Terrorism of 2007 and the Comprehensive Plan of Action on Counter Terrorism. 19 In July 2016, at the twenty-third meeting of the ASEAN Regional
Forum, held in Vientiane, ministers for foreign affairs reaffirmed the importance of
fully implementing those instruments, but further work is needed.
2.

Criminal justice and legislation
32. Member States of the region continue to take steps to bring their legislation
into line with the requirements set out in resolution 2178 (2014). Two Member
States have responded swiftly to the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon by
introducing comprehensive counter-terrorism legislation. Two States have
introduced special and administrative measures. One State introduced two new
counter-terrorism laws in 2015 and amended its existing laws to prevent terror ist
incidents. One State has amended its code of criminal procedure to extend detention
periods during criminal investigations from seven days to six months for terrorism
cases, with a possible extension of more than six months. Three States have
indicated that they may cancel foreign terrorist fighters’ travel documents to prevent
their travel, and one State has introduced a legal provision to revoke the citizenship
of such fighters. These measures raise human rights issues that should be carefully
considered. Other States have not yet taken the steps necessary to implement
resolution 2178 (2014), including measures to criminalize foreign terrorist fighter
travel, the financing of foreign terrorist fighters, including their travel, receiving
terrorist training, the recruitment of members to terrorist groups, preparatory acts
and incitement to commit terrorist acts.

3.

International cooperation
33. Because terrorist networks and foreign terrorist fighter travel transcend
borders, Member States of different regions increasingly rely on international
cooperation with States beyond their traditional bilateral cooperation networks.
However, the assessments of the Counter-Terrorism Committee show that there are
numerous challenges associated with effective international cooperation in
stemming the foreign terrorist fighter flow.
34. In South-East Asia, there is no institutional or operational mechanism in place
to conduct joint investigations. Terrorism investigations are conducted by individual
States and investigative cooperation is rendered on an ad hoc basis only.
35. South-East Asian States adopted the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty among
Like-minded ASEAN Countries in 2004, and the secretariat 20 of the Treaty has
established useful tools on its website. However, neither the Treaty nor the website

__________________
18

Indonesia recently created a task force to counter foreign terrorist fighters, in addition to an
anti-terror unit and a counter-terrorist financing task force.
19
The Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate helped to develop the Comprehensive
Plan of Action on Counter-Terrorism.
20
The secretariat sits with the Malaysian Attorney-General’s Chamber.

8/19

16-16787

S/2016/830

has been fully utilized 21 by ASEAN member States. There is no regional agreement
on extradition.
4.

Countering the financing of ISIL and foreign terrorist fighters
36. Although many Member States continue to face challenges in effectively
implementing the requirements set out in the relevant Security Council resolutions
on preventing and countering terrorist financing, there has also been progress in
implementation. For example, the Indonesian financial intelligence unit will
establish a national training centre for ASEAN States in Bogor in October 2016 to
train, among others, officials of financial intelligence units, central banks and
bodies involved in efforts to combat money-laundering and counter the financing of
terrorism. Academic institutions, businesses, the media and communities will also
be involved in the development of educational tools.
37. States members of the Financial Action Task Force and similar regional bodies
are engaged in a review of the risks presented by ISIL and its affiliates with regard
to terrorism financing. The top six high-risk States in terms of money-laundering
and terrorism financing in South-East Asia and the Pacific regions are Australia,
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand. Two of the most affected South-East Asian Member States (Malaysia and Singapore) have robust
regimes in place to combat money-laundering and counter the financing of
terrorism. Another State (Indonesia) had been subject to the monitoring process of
the Financial Action Task Force as a result of strategic deficiencies, but made
significant progress and was removed from the process in June 2015. In April 2016,
the Philippines revoked its banking secrecy law to enhance its regime to combat
money-laundering and counter the financing of terrorism.
38. One of the primary challenges for South-East Asian Member States is
stemming the raising of funds for ISIL and other terrorist organizations. The most
frequently used method to raise terrorist funds in South-East Asia is self-funding by
legitimate sources. This presents a significant challenge for law enforcement. There
have also been reports of fundraising through the abuse of non -profit organizations
and crowdfunding. The physical transfer of cash is considered to be the most
frequently used method. Although there is a legitimate concern about the use of new
payment methods such as prepaid cards and e-money, terrorist financing through the
regular banking system is still expected to rise significantly.

5.

Law enforcement and border control
39. The design and implementation of comprehensive border-management
strategies continue to be challenging for many Member States, especially in a
context of porous borders. States have recognized, however, that putting in place
effective border controls remains an essential aspect of countering terrorism and
stemming the foreign terrorist fighter flow.
40. No South-East Asian State currently imposes transit visas, and ASEAN allows
free movement of people without a visa within the region. Many Member States of
this region are transit and destination States for ISIL fighters, however. All South -

__________________
21

16-16787

There is a strong need for technical assistance to enhance the processing of requests for mutual
legal assistance.

9/19

S/2016/830

East Asian States are increasingly aware of the need to enhance their border
management and international cooperation to effectively stem the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters. In November 2015, one State created a new border security agency
to strengthen the control of people and goods. Only one State 22 has established
immigration officers at border control points with direct access to the databases of
the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL). Only two States use
advance passenger information 23 to screen for potential terrorist movements at
border points. No State has a passenger name record system in place. 24
41. The issue of forged and falsified travel documents is also a major problem.
ASEAN is currently working to promote a digital identity initiative aimed at
creating a unique traveller card for all citizens of its member States. Four States
have introduced a national electronic identification mechanism with biometrics.
States of the region have exchanged specimens of valid passports and trained
immigration officers to detect forged travel documents.
6.

Countering recruitment and preventing and countering violent extremism
42. States of South-East Asia are paying increased attention to the development of
comprehensive approaches to countering and preventing recruitment and violent
extremism, including by establishing partnerships with non-governmental actors.
States have been strengthening community resilience against radicalization by
mobilizing, empowering and networking with religious leaders, community leaders,
teachers, young people, children, women, non-profit organizations and private
entities in their efforts to counter violent extremism.
43. States continue to express concern at the abuse of the Internet and social
media by ISIL and affiliates seeking to recruit new members and to incite th e
commission of terrorist acts. Governments are endeavouring to strengthen their
monitoring and regulatory capacity. For example, Malaysia has launched a regional
digital counter-messaging communication centre, which will be fully operational by
the end of 2016, and Indonesia is establishing a national cyber agency. The ASEAN
Association of Heads of Police and Japan have developed a shared database of websites
relating to terrorism, which provides for the translation into English of terrorist
propaganda in local languages to facilitate the sharing and analysis of information.
44. Governments and private communications services providers have been
collaborating closely in developing counter-narratives and reducing the accessibility
of certain content. Companies such as Facebook and Google have been providing
platforms and training for young people, content creators and bloggers, in
partnership with local government and civil society experts, on creating positive
counter-narratives in Indonesia and Malaysia. A number of States have introduced
and implemented laws and regulations aimed at detecting and preventing the use of
information and communications technology for terrorist purposes and using
e-evidence to bring terrorists to justice.

__________________
22

Singapore ranks third in the world in terms of screening against the INTERPOL database of
stolen and lost travel documents.
23
The International Civil Aviation Organization will make advance passenger information
mandatory for all its member States in November 2016. Singapore pla ns to introduce advance
passenger information by 2019.
24
Indonesia will introduce advance passenger information soon.

10/19

16-16787

S/2016/830

B.

Prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies
for returning foreign terrorist fighters
45. Since my second report, a growing number of Member States have addressed
the potential threat posed by returnees through a broad range of criminal justice,
administrative and rehabilitation and reintegration measures, as called for in
resolution 2178 (2014). Given the serious threat that terrorism presents to national
security and public safety, strong criminal justice measures are widely seen as the
most appropriate response. However, the evolving terrorist threat and the risks
posed by the increasing number of returning foreign terrorist fighters and deportees
have, in many States, inspired the development of a more flexible approach to
providing rehabilitation and reintegration programmes.
46. Several States report that a high proportion of their nationals returning from
foreign terrorist fighter destinations have either not met the threshold for
prosecution or that prosecutions can be brought only for relatively minor offences.
States continue to face numerous challenges in their efforts to generate and convert
intelligence into admissible evidence against suspected returning fighters. It also
remains challenging for Member States to determine the most appropriate and
proportionate responses to specific categories of travellers, including minors,
dependent family members, persons with mental disabilities and other potentially
vulnerable individuals, providers of medical services and other humanitarian needs
and disillusioned returnees, or defectors, who have committed less serious offences.
47. Member States have strengthened their efforts to take a more preventive
approach to terrorism, including by charging individuals with inchoate and preparatory
offence in the early stages before any serious crime or travel has taken place. In
such cases, individuals are likely to face only brief prison sentences, if any at all.
Many States have also found that a number of individuals charged with terrorism related crimes, including returning foreign terrorist fighters, have continued to
incite, recruit, finance and even plot or prepare terrorist attacks, either during or
after their incarceration. In the absence of effective prison -based rehabilitation and
aftercare programmes, imprisonment can even exacerbate the risks presented by
some inmates. A flexible, case-by-case approach to prosecuting returnees, which
provides for the possibility of applying criminal measures, administrative measures
and/or reintegration and rehabilitation programmes, can bring numerous benefit s,
including by enabling intervention before any serious criminal conduct occurs; a
response to cases that do not meet the threshold for prosecution; a risk -based and
proportionate response to individuals who have committed less serious crimes; a
reduction in prison-based recruitment; and a more long-term response for individuals
released from prison.
48. The overall progress made by Member States in developing and implementing
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies as part of a more comprehensive app roach
to cases relating to terrorism and foreign terrorist fighters remains more limited in
some of the most-affected regions (often in the same States in which criminal justice
systems are overwhelmed and lack the capacity to investigate and prosecute complex
cases effectively). Given that developing and implementing alternative measures for
terrorism-related cases presents new challenges for most Member States, several
Member States also require more time and experience to assess and evaluate the
effectiveness of their approaches.

16-16787

11/19

S/2016/830

1.

South Asia
49. Six Member States of South Asia (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India, Nepal,
Pakistan and Sri Lanka) have developed and implemented rehabilitation and
reintegration strategies as part of their approach to counteri ng terrorism and/or in an
effort to build peace, secure the transition from armed conflict or consolidate peace.
Most rehabilitation and reintegration programmes in South Asia are aimed at
addressing threats posed by domestic terrorist organizations and ot her non-State
armed actors. Those programmes could also strengthen societies’ resilience to the
increasing efforts of ISIL to radicalize and recruit in States of the region and could
be adapted to address the risks posed by returning foreign terrorist figh ters. The
programmes developed and implemented in the region are noteworthy for the
variety of ways in which they have used economic measures, including assistance
with housing, education and employment, to assist former terrorists and
ex-combatants to reintegrate into society. In some States of the region, such
assistance has been provided in the form of grants to ex-combatants’ families and
communities in order to ensure their support for the rehabilitation and reintegration
process. The efforts made by States of the region to engage with individuals’
families and communities in the reintegration process are also noteworthy and are
likely to have played a role in reducing repeat offending.
50. Persistent and widespread violence and insecurity in some Stat es of the region
continue to present obstacles to efforts by States to expand their rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes to the most-affected areas. Given the challenges faced by
the criminal justice sector, there is also a risk that such programmes will be
implemented in the absence of appropriate mechanisms to ensure oversight and
review by a judicial or other competent independent authority throughout the
programmes’ duration. This also presents the risk that offenders will lack
appropriate channels through which to challenge their detention or lodge complaints
about their treatment. Some detention practices, including in cases involving
minors, and poor prison conditions in some States of the region raise significant
human rights concerns.

2.

South-East Asia
51. South-East Asia has been managing terrorist prisoners and radicalized
returnees or deportees since the 1950s. All most -affected States of the region have
developed rehabilitation and reintegration programmes for terrorist prisoners.
Counter-terrorism-related prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration strategies
have been implemented in Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Singapore.
Thailand is currently developing its own approach, together with other States and
organizations, including the Global Counterterrorism Forum. Some States have been
able to rely on existing experience and expertise gained in using rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes initially developed and implemented in response to the
threats posed by localized terrorist organizations and non-State armed groups. Those
programmes have been adapted in response to current threats, including that posed
by ISIL and foreign terrorist fighters.

12/19

16-16787

S/2016/830

52. I should like to highlight some examples in this regard. In Indonesia, 25 all
deradicalization and rehabilitation programmes for terrorist prisoners are implemented
jointly by local governments and the national counter -terrorism coordinating agency
at 71 correctional facilities in 23 provinces. 26 In 2015, the Government built a
deradicalization centre 27 and is preparing to optimize and centralize the interpretation
of deradicalization programmes. Singapore established a religious rehabilitation
group in 2003 to counsel detainees alleged to hold extremist beliefs and to challenge
inaccurate or unfounded understandings concerning religious doctrine. Malaysia has
developed and published an integrated rehabilitation module for detainees to share
its experiences.
53. Approaches to rehabilitation and reintegration have included prison -based
programmes to prepare individuals to reintegrate into society following their
release, in addition to aftercare, welfare and rehabilitation services to reintegrate
former offenders. Rehabilitation and reintegration programmes are noteworthy for
the way in which they draw upon the support of religious and social counsellors,
together with community leaders and family members, in their implementation.
States of the region have made a concerted effort to share their research and
experiences with one another, as well as with States of other regions, systematically
evaluate and assess their own approaches and work with relevant organizations to
further strengthen those approaches. In some States, a lack of resources has
undermined the implementation of rehabilitation and reintegration programmes.
Repeat offending cannot be completely avoided, 28 but three States have achieved
success in this area, reportedly by convincing particular detainees to renounce
violence and obtaining their cooperation in counselling other terrorists and
extremists in order to redirect them to non-violent beliefs. Empowering former
terrorist inmates and victims is one of the most effective ways to counter
radicalization.

V. Range of United Nations efforts in supporting the efforts
of Member States to counter the threat of ISIL
54. Since my initial report, United Nations entities have taken a number of steps,
in accordance with their individual mandates and in partnership with relevant
international and regional organizations, to support the efforts of Member States to
counter the threat of ISIL.

A.

Foreign terrorist fighters
55. As noted by the Security Council in its presidential statement of 29 May 2015
(S/PRST/2015/11), the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Office has
developed a capacity-building implementation plan to stem the flow of foreign

__________________
25

Indonesia co-chairs the Global Counterterrorism Forum Working Group on Detention and
Reintegration.
26
There were 238 terrorist prisoners as at August 2016.
27
It has a capacity of 150 persons and a library.
28
For example, Bahrun Naim was a detainee in Indonesia and was released in 2014 .

16-16787

13/19

S/2016/830

terrorist fighters, acting in close collaboration with the Counter -Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate and the Monitoring Team. The plan includes
37 project proposals, submitted by 12 entities, which address the full “life cycle” of
the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon, including radicalization, travel and
financing, as well as eventual investigation and prosecution , rehabilitation and
reintegration in the case of returnees.
56. On 13 July 2016, representatives of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force Office, the Counter-Terrorism Centre, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)
and INTERPOL met Member States to provide an update on the funding situation of
the capacity-building implementation plan and emphasized the urgent need to
ensure project implementation. It was also noted that the Cen tre’s project to enhance
the understanding of the foreign terrorist fighter phenomenon had been affected by
the limited access granted by only a few Member States to returnees.
57. Since my second report, UNODC has continued to implement its global
initiative on criminal justice responses to the threat posed by foreign terrorist
fighters, which is aimed at strengthening national legal and operational frameworks
and the capacity of criminal justice and law enforcement officials to respond
effectively to the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters in compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 2178 (2014) and
2253 (2015). The initiative is also aimed at facilitating judicial cooperation,
including the sharing of good practices and information among the judiciary and
law enforcement at the national, subregional and regional levels. Assistance has
been provided to the States of the Middle East and North Africa, the Sahel, Central
Asia and the western Balkans.

B.

Criminal justice and legislation
58. UNODC has also developed, and is currently seeking financial support for, a
programme for South and South-East Asian States on strengthening legal and
institutional frameworks for the effective implementation and enforcement of
measures targeting the financial flows and economic resources of ISIL, Al -Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertaking and entities designate d in
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015).
59. During the reporting period, UNODC provided assistance on the prevention
and criminalization of certain offences regarding foreign terrorist fighters to
Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan through two workshops, held in Astana on 12 and
13 May 2016 and in Bishkek on 9 and 10 August 2016. UNODC has also b een
working with the national criminal justice institutions of Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
as well as Kosovo, 29 to develop a set of specialized training materials on the
prosecution of foreign terrorist fighters for criminal justice practitioners. An expert
group to discuss a module for judicial training met in Vienna on 6 and 7 September
2016.

__________________
29

14/19

References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999).

16-16787

S/2016/830

60. In May 2016, UNODC held two moot courts for criminal justice officers from
Yemen on the investigation, prosecution and adjudication of terrorism cases,
especially cases relating to terrorism financing and the incitement and glorification
of terrorism. From 9 to 11 May, UNODC conducted a workshop in which the
Jordanian judicial and law enforcement authorities discussed gaps and challenges
faced in the investigation and prosecution of terrorism -related cases.

C.

Countering the financing of terrorism
61. The Counter-Terrorism Centre capacity-building project on terrorist designations
and asset-freezing is aimed at helping national regulatory agencies, central bank
officials and private sector entities to identify, assess and take action against
evolving fundraising and funds-transfer typologies used by ISIL. The capacitybuilding project includes training relating to the strategic use of sanctions, effective
implementation methods, due process guarantees, recommended investigatory and
prosecutorial practices and compliance techniques. In response to Security Council
resolution 2253 (2015), the project has been expanded to include procedures relating
to the designation of ISIL affiliates and the freezing of their assets in a manner
compatible with international standards, including human rights standards.
62. The overall objective of the Counter-Terrorism Centre project on kidnapping
for ransom is to build the capacity of States and non-governmental organizations in
East, West and North Africa to achieve the safe return of hostages, while
simultaneously denying terrorist groups such as ISIL the benefits of ransom
payments or political concessions. Following two capacity-gap mapping events on
responses to kidnapping for ransom, the Centre delivered a first capacity -building
workshop on international best practices on addressing kidnapping for ransom, held
in Addis Ababa on 28 and 29 June 2016, for government experts from Burundi,
Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Somalia, Uganda and the United Republic of
Tanzania. The workshop was focused on practical issues such as terrorist trends and
case studies with regard to kidnapping for ransom; principles of hostage incident
management; inter-agency cooperation; best practices in family liaison; the role of
the media; principles of effective communication with kidnappers; legal aspects;
managing the involvement of third parties such as interpreters and intermediaries;
non-governmental organization perspectives; and post-release assistance. Six additional
workshops are planned under this project.
63. Over recent months, UNODC capacity-building activities for States in the
Middle East and North Africa have been focused mainly on strengthening judicial
and law enforcement capacity to cut off the revenues and economic resources of
terrorist groups, including ISIL. From 19 to 21 May, UNODC organized an
advanced training workshop for Yemen, at which emerging terrorism -financing risks
were addressed.
64. From 15 to 19 May, the UNODC Global Programme against Money-Laundering,
Proceeds of Crime and the Financing of Terrorism delivered a four-day course on
countering the financing of terrorism (“financial disruption”) to 20 representatives
of agencies from Bahrain, Oman, Qatar and Saudi Arabia, including prosecution,
law enforcement, security, finance and commerce officials. From 23 to 27 May, the
Global Programme also provided briefings to more than 500 representatives of

16-16787

15/19

S/2016/830

special operations forces from 85 States on the role of threat finance and financial
disruptions in countering transnational organized crime, terrorist financing, including
ISIL, and corruption. In addition, it delivered a four -day financial analysis course on
countering the financing of terrorism to financial intelligence investigators from a
State member of the Gulf Cooperation Council from 8 to 11 August. The exercises
and scenarios were focused on ISIL-related threats, including foreign fighter
facilitation, improvised explosive device construction and domestic attack planning,
drawing upon current cases from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Re public.

D.

Law enforcement and border control
65. Since 2015, UNODC, acting in cooperation with the World Customs
Organization, has been assisting Iraq to prevent terrorist groups, including ISIL,
from obtaining, handling and using dual-use chemical materials through the provision
of specialized training and the development of national strategies. It is currently
considering the procurement of the relevant equipment, subject to funding availability.
66. To assist Member States to comply with their obligation pursuant to resolution
2178 (2014) to stem the cross-border flow of foreign terrorist fighters, the Counter Terrorism Centre, in close cooperation with its project partners, the Counter -Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, the International Air Transport Association, the
International Civil Aviation Organization, INTERPOL, the International Organization
for Migration and the Monitoring Team, convened the third of five regional
workshops on raising awareness and building capacity with regard to advance
passenger information. Aimed at European States, the workshop was held in Vienna
in July 2016 in conjunction with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. In examining the critical role played by advance passenger information and
the transfer of passenger data in stemming the flow of foreign terrorist fighters,
States also discussed the need to take privacy and data-protection considerations
into account. The Centre has also initiated the planning of the fourth workshop, for
States of Central Asia and the Caucasus.
67. The Counter-Terrorism Centre continues its close cooperation with the Global
Counterterrorism Forum and United Nations entities, including the Counter Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Monitoring Team, the International
Organization for Migration, UNODC and the United Nations Development Programme ,
on a joint border security initiative, initially focused on the Sahel and the Horn of
Africa. The Centre finalized the development of a document on good practices,
based on lessons learned, including at the regional workshops mentioned in my
second report. The document is intended to strengthen the border security and
management capacities of Member States to counter terrorist and organized crime
groups and stem the flow of foreign terrorist fighters. The Centre is developing
future programming to build the capacities of Member States, at their request, to
stem the flow.
68. With the aim of enhancing regional investigative cooperation, the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate has been assisting the ASEAN Association
of Heads of Police to establish a regional joint operations centre in Kuala Lumpur,
where all ASEAN police officers would work together on a daily basis. ASEAN

16/19

16-16787

S/2016/830

member States would benefit not only from joint investigations, but also from daily
information exchange and regional analysis on specific criminal trends .

E.

Countering recruitment and preventing/countering violent extremism
69. Following the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution 70/291
pertaining to the fifth review of the United Nations Global Counter -Terrorism
Strategy on the occasion of its tenth anniversary, and at my request, the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force has established an inter -agency working
group on preventing violent extremism to develop a coherent “All -of-United
Nations” approach in supporting the efforts of Member States to prevent violent
extremism, in particular through the development of national and regional plans of
action to prevent violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism. ASEAN
and the United Nations plan to organize a workshop early in November 2016 on the
Secretary-General’s Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism.
70. Since the adoption of resolution 2178 (2014), several United Nations entities,
including the Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, the
United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute, UNODC, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and
the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women,
have worked closely with international and regional organizations and civil society
organizations, including the Global Counterterrorism Forum, the European Union
Radicalisation Awareness Network, the Global Center on Cooperative Security, the
International Centre for Counter-Terrorism and, more recently, the “Prevention
Project — Organizing against Violent Extremism”, to provide further guidance and
assistance to Member States. Useful guidance in this area includes the following:
the guiding principles on foreign terrorist fighters, prepared by the Counter -Terrorism
Committee and published by the Security Council (see S/2015/939, annex II),
including in particular guiding principles 30-32; the Global Counterterrorism Forum
Hague-Marrakech Memorandum on Good Practices for a More Effective Response
to the Foreign Terrorist Fighter Phenomenon; the Global Counterterrorism Forum
Rome Memorandum on Good Practices for Rehabilitation and Reintegration of
Violent Extremist Offenders; and the Radicalisation Awareness Network Declaration
of Good Practices for Engagement with Foreign Fighters. 30 In July 2016, OHCHR
submitted a report on best practices and lessons learned on ho w protecting and
promoting human rights help to prevent and counter violent extremism
(A/HRC/33/29). Furthermore, the Human Rights Council convened a panel to discuss
the human rights dimensions of preventing and countering violent extremism (see
A/HRC/33/28).

__________________
30

16-16787

The Declaration is available at www.icct.nl/download/file/RAN-Declaration-Good-Practices-forEngagement-with-Foreign-Fighters.pdf.

17/19

S/2016/830

F.

Protecting human rights while countering terrorism
71. OHCHR has highlighted the importance of ensuring that States integrate
compliance with their obligations under international human rights law into their
efforts to stem the flow of foreign fighters by strengthening initiatives to address the
conditions conducive to terrorism; take measures to counter violent extremism,
combat impunity and ensure accountability for any gross violation of international
human rights law and serious violation of international humanitarian law; and
ensure that any measures that they adopt in their efforts to stem the flow of foreign
fighters and prevent the commission of criminal acts comply with their obligations
under international human rights law (see A/HRC/28/28). The Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism has examined the human rights challenges posed by efforts to
combat ISIL and expressed concern regarding the broad nature of some of the
clauses contained in resolution 2178 (2014) and the possibility that the standard
adopted for enforcement action could result in arbitrary enforcement action
(see A/HRC/29/51). The Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the
Syrian Arab Republic has continued its critically important work in investigating
alleged violations of international human rights law, with a focus on crimes
committed by ISIL (see, most recently, A/HRC/33/55 and A/HRC/32/CRP.2). The
Working Group on the use of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights and
impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to self-determination is engaged in an
ongoing study of foreign fighters, including through country visits, panels of public
experts and reports to the General Assembly and Human Rights Council (see
A/71/318).
72. The Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force Working Group on Protecting
and Promoting Human Rights and the Rule of Law while Countering Terrorism
continues to guide the provision, by the Task Force Office and OHCHR, of human
rights capacity-building training for law enforcement officials on human rights laws
and standards in fair trials, pretrial detention, interview practices, special
investigative techniques and the use of force in the context of preventing and
countering acts of terrorism. Modules are drafted in response to the specific human
rights needs identified by the Working Group in each context. In 2016, the project
was implemented in Iraq, Nigeria and Tunisia. It awaits confirmation from
Cameroon, Jordan and Mali for implementation in the fourth quarter of 2016. Under
the auspices of the Working Group, five basic human rights reference guides have
been published in English, French and Arabic on the following subjects: conformity
of national counter-terrorism legislation with international human rights law,
security infrastructure, the stopping and searching of persons in the context of
countering terrorism, detention in the context of countering terrorism, and the right
to a fair trial and due process in the context of countering te rrorism. The two lastmentioned guides are distributed to participants during training. The Working Group
also provides guidance on two continuing research projects with the aim of
providing specific guidance to United Nations entities and Member States on human
rights-compliant ways to curb the flow of foreign terrorist fighters and consider
gender aspects and the protection of women’s rights while countering and
preventing terrorism.

18/19

16-16787

S/2016/830

73. In the context of promoting and protecting human rights, including children’s
rights, while countering terrorism, UNODC has helped States to strengthen their
legal, policy and operational frameworks relating to children associated with violent
extremist groups, including terrorist groups, through two subregional workshops
(for Iraq, Jordan and Lebanon from 19 to 21 July 2016 and for Burkina Faso, Chad,
Mali, Mauritania, the Niger and Senegal from 1 to 3 June 2016). In September,
UNODC organized specialized training for Iraqi officers on preventing the forced
recruitment of women by terrorist organizations, including ISIL.

G.

Rehabilitation and reintegration strategies and mechanisms
74. The United Nations Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute has
enhanced its cooperation with Indonesia, Jordan, Kenya, Mali, Morocco, the
Philippines and Thailand in the design and implementation of rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes for violent extremist offenders and foreign terrorist
fighters. It deploys tailored capacity-building activities and strategy support on
the ground, focusing on the rehabilitation, reintegration and disengagement of
foreign terrorist fighters in the detention context, inside and outside prison settings
(e.g., a technical workshop held in Thailand from 12 to 14 September 2016 on the
creation of programmes for the management of security detainees). Other capacity building activities will be implemented by the end of 2016. These activities will
help Member States to meet their obligations under resolution 2178 (2014).

H.

United Nations bodies and field missions
75. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) has prepared
assessment reports on ISIL, which it shares with Member States to support their
efforts to counter the threat posed by the group. It also facilitates regular information sharing on battlefield-related assistance delivered by individual Member States in
efforts to combat ISIL. UNSMIL continues to support the efforts of the Presidency
Council in leading the Libyan transition and the establishment of the Government of
National Accord to curtail any further expansion of ISIL.
76. The Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict continues to engage with the Iraqi authorities to address some
of the pressing challenges faced by Iraq with regard to, among other things, the
protection of mass graves, the documentation and collection of evidence on sexual
violence crimes committed by ISIL and the overall issue of accountability and
justice for those crimes. Early in 2017, the Office, acting in collaboration with the
League of Arab States, Al-Azhar University and the United Nations Entity for
Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women regional office, will hold a
workshop with Muslim leaders and scholars aimed at sending a clear message
dissociating Islam from the use of sexual violence by violent extremist groups such
as ISIL and calling for care and support for survivors of sexual violence, their
families and communities.

16-16787

19/19
