S/2006/595

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 July 2006
Original: English

Letter dated 29 July 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Observer Group Lebanon of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), which serves alongside the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), and to my most recent report to the
Security Council on UNIFIL activities (S/2006/560).
The tragic event at patrol base Khiam of Observer Group Lebanon on 25 July
2006, in which four military observers were killed, and the incident on 23 July,
when a military observer at patrol base Ras was seriously injured, have called into
question whether United Nations peacekeeping personnel can be sufficiently
protected in their current positions. The deep concern about the safety and security
of United Nations personnel expressed by the Security Council in its presidential
statement (S/PRST/2006/34) also having been noted, it is the Secretariat’s
assessment that, in the current circumstances, the risks of continuing to staff the
remaining two patrol bases with unarmed military observers outweigh the merits
gained from their presence. Patrol bases Ras and Khiam have not been occupied by
United Nations personnel since 23 and 25 July, respectively.
In coordination with the Secretariat, the Force Commander of UNIFIL, Major
General Alain Pellegrini, yesterday relocated the military observers deployed at
patrol bases Hin and Mar to other positions within UNIFIL.
I have written to the Prime Minister of Israel, Ehud Olmert, stating that I
would have preferred that the Government of Israel and the United Nations carry out
a joint investigation into the events that led to the deaths of the military observers at
patrol base Khiam. I understand that the Government of Israel will carry out its own
investigation, and I have urged that this be comprehensive and that its results be
made public. I have asked in particular for information about what actions the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) took in response to the repeated communications from
UNTSO and UNIFIL on the recurring incidents of close firing in the hours before
the position was hit directly. I was disturbed to learn that the patrol base and its
surroundings have come under renewed firing by IDF in the days following the
incident of 25 July, which will undoubtedly have an effect on the investigation of
the site that the United Nations will need to undertake shortly.
In view of the ongoing hostilities in south Lebanon and their impact on
UNIFIL, General Pellegrini has been delegated full authority to decide on and make
preparations for additional relocations of personnel under his command should that,

06-44867 (E) 300706

*0644867*

S/2006/595

in his judgement, become necessary to better ensure the safety and security of
United Nations personnel.
The United Nations is committed to carrying out all mandates entrusted to it
by the Security Council. The Organization does not take lightly a decision to
relocate any of its peacekeeping personnel serving in south Lebanon, but was
compelled to do so at this time, as potential threats to the unarmed military
observers can no longer be mitigated by other means.
While I am gravely concerned about the safety and security of United Nations
personnel, I remain deeply troubled about the innocent civilians, both Israeli and
Lebanese, who are caught in the fighting and the deepening humanitarian
catastrophe in south Lebanon. I must strongly emphasize that under international
humanitarian law, United Nations peacekeepers not participating in an armed
conflict are entitled to the same protection as that accorded to civilians.
I therefore reiterate my call for an immediate cessation of hostilities and a
political dialogue with all parties to reach lasting peace and security.
I should be grateful if you would bring this matter urgently to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2

06-44867
