S/PV.7450

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7450th meeting

Wednesday, 27 May 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Linkevičius. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Omaish
Mrs. Adnin
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ybañez
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
The protection of journalists in conflict situations
Letter dated 1 May 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Lithuania to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/307)

15-15263 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1515263*

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
The protection of journalists in conflict situations
Letter dated 1 May 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of Lithuania
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/307)
The President: I would like to warmly welcome
the Deputy Secretary-General, ministers and other
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Albania, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Egypt,
Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Poland, Qatar, the Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Turkey and Ukraine to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedures, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Christophe
Deloire, Director-General of Reporters Without
Borders, and Ms. Mariane Pearl.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
2/31

27/05/2015

accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/307, which contains a letter dated
1 May 2015 from the Permanent Representative of
Lithuania to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Deputy SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. Jan Eliasson, and I give
him the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to address the
Security Council on the protection of journalists in
conflict situations. This issue is fundamentally about
the right to information, protection of civilians, respect
for human rights and not giving in to threats and
intimidation from those who advocate and practice
violence and intolerance.
In recent years, we have seen a deeply troubling rise
in the number of journalists killed in conflict situations.
Of the 593 cases of killings of journalists between 2006
and 2013, almost half — 273 — occurred in conflicts
zones. Journalists are also being increasingly targeted
and subjected to threats by criminal or terrorist groups,
with the blatant intention of silencing them. Recent
killings of journalists have been given extensive
and welcome attention around the world. We recall,
for instance, the brutal murders of Western media
representatives in Syria. Yet, we must not forget that
around 95 per cent of the killings of journalists in armed
conflict concern locally based journalists, with far less
media coverage. The Security Council and the Human
Rights Council have been presented with findings that
illustrate the extent of the problem from South Sudan to
Libya, from Syria to Somalia and beyond.
Against the background of this sobering reality, it
is not surprising that countries facing armed conflict
and a breakdown of the rule of law are ranked at the
bottom of the very important annual World Press
Freedom Index compiled by Reporters Without
Borders. Here, I want to commend Director-General
Deloire and Reporters Without Borders for their work.
We know that armed conflict not only endangers the
life and safety of journalists; it also limits the free flow
of information, eroding the rule of law and democracy.
15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We should recall that conflict can easily be exacerbated
in an environment that stifles freedom of expression.
Conflict and insecure environments must never be a
pretext for silencing journalists; on the contrary, it is
precisely in these situations where the voices of the
voiceless and reports from the front lines must be heard
loud and clear.
Ensuring the safety of journalists requires a
comprehensive and multifaceted approach. The
challenges for journalists reporting from an armed
conflict situation may not be the same as for those
who are engaged in other forms of reporting. Women
journalists may face challenges different from their
male colleagues. The security situation of foreign
correspondents may differ from those of locally based
journalists. Furthermore, corruption, intimidation,
reprisals and weak judicial systems, all of which
contribute to impunity, must be seriously tackled if we
are to deal with the roots of the problem. The same goes
for the basic need for a culture of respect for human
rights and the rule of law.
Let us also remember that the safety of journalists
is of concern in non-conflict zones as well. Ensuring
their protection and their work can be of the essence if
we are to prevent conflict and human rights violations
in threatening situations. As we know, threats and
attacks are committed by State and non-State actors
alike, often to silence journalists seeking information
or opinions on subjects perceived to be off-limits, such
as human rights violations, political repression or drug
trafficking, to name a few. The United Nations Plan
of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue
of Impunity aims to help tackle these challenges. The
Plan is being piloted and laid out in several countries,
including Iraq, Nepal, Pakistan and South Sudan.
Members of the Security Council have a critical
role in advancing this agenda. Let me briefly and in
closing point to five ways in which they can do so.
First, they can unequivocally and consistently
condemn the killing of journalists in conflict situations.
Secondly, they can continue to hold regular debates
on the protection of journalists. I encourage them to
continue to hear the views of journalists, affected
family members such as Ms. Pearl here today, civil
society representatives and relevant United Nations and
regional mandate-holders. Thirdly, they can encourage
Security Council-authorized missions to also look into
the safety of journalists and media workers as part of
protection of civilians mandates, and report back to

S/PV.7450

the Security Council on their findings. Fourthly, they
can encourage Security Council-authorized missions
to ensure that freedom of expression and the safety of
journalists are integral parts of human rights and justice
reforms. Fifthly and lastly, they can endorse and support
the United Nations Plan of Action. Occasions such
as the International Day to End Impunity for Crimes
against Journalists — which falls on 2 November every
year — can also be better utilized to draw attention to
these problems.
The United Nations system will continue to assist
the Security Council in all these efforts by bringing to
its attention situations of concern in this area in a timely
and proactive manner. It is our shared responsibility
to protect the voices that alert, warn and inform on
situations threatening international peace and security.
The President: I thank the Deputy SecretaryGeneral for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Deloire.
Mr. Deloire (spoke in French): Not everyone
knows the name of Raad Mohammed al-Azzawi. In the
autumn of 2014, that 36-year father was kidnapped in
Samarra, a town in the province of Salahedine in Iraq,
a few kilometres from the city of Tikrit. He worked as a
cameraman for a television channel. While he was held
hostage, the jihadist Islamic State group threatened
to behead him because he refused to cooperate. Raad
Mohammed al-Azzawi was murdered in public in
Samarra on 10 October 2014, alongside his brother and
two other civilians. This heinous murder has received
less coverage than others, but each time the blood
flows, be it that of James Foley, Kenji Goto or another
journalist, it is the same horror.
Raad Mohammed al-Azzawi was one of
66 journalists killed last year in the exercise or on
account of their duties. Another 25 have died since the
beginning of the year, including five in the Sudan, two
in Iraq, two in Yemen, two in Ukraine and one in Syria.
Beyond the human tragedy for the victims and their
families — tragedies that repulse the heart — there are
additional risks for those who suffer horrors, sometimes
in private, without witnesses. Let us not forget that
these are stories that have led to the establishment of
such legal protections as the Geneva Conventions.
On behalf of Reporters Without Borders, an
organization that champions and promotes press
freedom, I thank the Security Council for meeting
today on the essential topic of the protection of

15-152633/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

journalists. I welcome the excellent work carried out by
the Lithuanian presidency. This is a historic day for the
protection of journalists and, we hope, for the freedom
of the press as a whole.
The draft text on which the Council will vote and, I
hope, adopt refers to the right to freedom of expression
as provided for by article 19 of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. It is, I believe, a historic moment
in which the Security Council shall for the first time
link the right to freedom of expression to the need to
protect journalists, even if that may a priori obvious. It
is not a matter of protecting a corporation, much less of
guaranteeing the privileges for a category of civilians,
as if all the civilians were not of equal dignity. This is
about defending a right of all — the freedom of the press,
“the freedom that allows you to verify the existence
of all the other freedoms”, in the words of the famous
Burmese journalist Win Tin, who spent 19 years of his
life in detention. The statement that the work of free,
independent and impartial media constitutes one of the
essential foundations of a democratic society, and can
therefore contribute to the protection of civilians also
deserves to be welcomed.
As Council members know, resolution 1738 (2006)
was, unfortunately, not enough to solve the problem of
the insecurity of journalists. No matter how outstanding
it may be, it is not certain that a new resolution will
suffice, either. It is clear that the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council are
working assiduously to protect journalists by deepening
international law and adopting the Plan of Action on
the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
But in 10 years, more than 700 journalists have been
killed in the line of duty or because of their work. Each
time, we have tried to avoid reality. How many crimes
against journalists must there be before United Nations
resolutions are finally implemented?
Reporters Without Borders asks the the Council
to establish an effective monitoring mechanism on
implementation. We ask that the post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on the protection
of journalists be established, with the responsibility for
ensuring follow-up and monitoring paper of compliance
by Member States with the obligations imposed by
resolution 1738 (2006) and an eventual new resolution.
The mandate could be established along the lines of that
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict. The setting up of
such a mechanism will have the advantage of putting in

4/31

27/05/2015

place a permanent structure at the heart of the United
Nations system.
Appointed and mandated by the Secretary-General,
the Special Representative would have the task of
collecting all the relevant information, in particular
within the United Nations system, concerning violations
against the safety and security of journalists in armed
conflicts. The office would serve as an early-warning
mechanism for the Secretary-General and, through
him, for the Security Council. He would liaise with
the United Nations system on activities for preventing
attacks against journalists in armed conflicts and strive
to enhance the United Nations capacity to analyse and
manage all information relating to such crimes. And
he would undertake investigations, in a complementary
role, in situations in which no investigation was
opened by the Member State in which occurred an act
of violence against a journalist, a media professional
or associated personnel. The eventual possibility of
individual referrals to the Special Representative by
professional and amateur journalists victims of abuse
could be considered.
As the Deputy Secretary-General mentioned, today
more than 90 per cent of crimes against journalists
remain forever unpunished and even go unprosecuted.
Such a degree of impunity serves as encouragement to
those who commit crimes against journalists.
Reporters Without Borders expresses its satisfaction
at the inclusion of the draft resolution that will be voted
on today of an obligation to report on the safety of
journalists in the context of peacekeeping operations.
We believe that the United Nations can also expedite
genuine investigations. For example — unfortunately, a
tragic one — on 29 April 2015, the Libyan Government
in Tobruk announced the murder of seven journalists,
including four Libyans, two Tunisians and an Egyptian,
who had disappeared at the end of 2014. According to
the official announcement, that information was based
on statements by suspects recently arrested by the
authorities. Reporters Without Borders believes that
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Libya should establish an independent investigation to
shed light on the murder of those journalists.
We are very pleased that the new draft resolution
mentions the role of the International Criminal Court
in the prosecution and trial of the perpetrators of
war crimes. As said here during an Arria Formula
meeting by Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda, attacks against
journalists not only constitute a grave breach of the
15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocol 1,
but fall under war crimes under article 8 of the Rome
Statute, which established the Court. She also said that
the Court would not hesitate to investigate crimes in
the context of its current investigations. For Reporters
Without Borders, that gives hope for a decline in
impunity.
But elsewhere? In Syria and Iraq, in the area under
the control of the Islamic State, an information black
hole has formed. In the same way that in the physical
world light does not escape black holes, journalists
are no longer able to report on reports or to deliver
information in those areas. The conflict in Syria began
in 2011, and then spread to Iraq in the summer of 2014.
It has caused the deaths of more than 210,000 civilians.
Kidnapped, murdered and beheaded — journalists in
Syria and Iraq are deliberately targeted and attacked by
various parties to the conflict.
According to statistics compiled by Reporters
Without Borders, in Syria alone over the past four
years, at least 45 journalists were killed in the course or
because of carrying doing their jobs. Since the summer
of 2014 at least three journalists have been killed, 15 of
them since the beginning of the 2013. A large number
have been victims of kidnapping, arbitrary detention
and hostage-taking.
As Syria and Iraq are not States parties to Rome
Statute, it is urgent that the Security Council, acting
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
refer to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court the situations in Syria and Iraq where war crimes
have been committed against journalists. Member
States of the Security Council must show consistency
when it comes to its resolutions on protecting journalists
and launch a concrete process aimed at bringing
perpetrators of crimes against journalists to justice at
the international level.
The draft resolution that the Council is preparing
to adopt deals with journalists, media professionals
and associated personnel. In a welcome act, it mentions
freedom of information online and offline. But it
should explicitly extend the scope to all journalists
worthy of the name. Journalism cannot be defined by
a contractual relationship with a big media company.
It has to do with a social function of collecting
information methodically in accordance with the rules
of honesty and independence. Whehter ones performs
that function professionally or not is not important.

S/PV.7450

The United Nations Plan of Action on the Safety
of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, adopted under
the auspices of UNESCO in 2012, recognizes that
the protection of journalists should not be limited to
those officially recognized as such but also benefit
other people, including community media workers and
citizen journalists and others who use new media to
reach their audiences.
Technology opens up spaces of freedom, for
information and for expression in general; but there can
be manipulation just as much as probity. Unfortunately,
we are entering a new era of propaganda where
completely new ways of controlling information — and
therefore of controlling thoughts — are being put in
place. We are entering a period of information wars.
Thanks to new technologies, terrorist groups, like
all enemies of factual truths, can directly distribute
their content around the world. Everything gets through:
the barbarian propaganda film disguised as reportage,
including sometimes journalists taken hostage, with a
gun to their head, as well as truncated reality dressed
up as a description of actuality.
Humankind and society need a trusted third party
that makes collective and individual choices based on
the unrestricted pursuit of objective truth, in the words
of UNESCO’s Constitution. Of course, that assertion
cannot be accepted without an understanding that
this truth can take different shapes and sometimes
contradictory results, as no one is the holder of truth.
But if the search for the facts is conducted on the basis
of that dictum and is not sponsored by interested parties
and avoids seeing things through the prism of culture as
much as possible — that is journalism.
We are witnessing a sort of globalization of
threats. Responsibility for massacres such as the one
carried out at the offices of Charlie Hebdo are claimed,
rightly or wrongly, from thousands of kilometres away.
Murderous ideologies and propaganda machines are
aimed against all those who report on dangerous reality,
so as to intimidate into silence journalists and all those
who embody and are living the freedom of expression,
even on the other end of the world. That is the case in
times of war, but it is also the case in peacetime.
That the Security Council is about to adopt a draft
resolution on the protection of journalists in areas
of armed conflict is a positive sign. But let us not
forget that most journalists killed during or because
of carrying out their duties are in countries said to

15-152635/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

be at peace in which persons in the pay of regimes,
women and men of power, mafia linchpins and so on
are perpetrating the worst abuses. We should not forget
that half of the world’s population has no access to
free information, much less the right thereto, or are
deprived of independent information because those who
embody the freedom of information and persecuted and
prevented from doing their work.
One day the Security Council will have to take that
into account. One day the Council will have to assign
obligations to States above and beyond situations of
armed conflict. The Nobel Peace Price laureate in
economics Amartya Sen has defined development as a
process of expansion of substantial individual liberties.
The freedom of information is one of the freedoms that
favours the capabilities of an individual, in the sense of
his mastery of the health system, the education system
and the public debate — in a way, the sense of control
over his life. If we want development not to be just
about increasing wealth, but about improving all social,
economic and political possibilities for individuals,
then the freedom of information is a prerequisite.
Accordingly, the protection of journalism depends
upon this last condition.
As I speak here before the members of the Council,
more than 150 professional journalists and 170
non-professional journalists are in prison worldwide
as a means to prevent them from pursuing their
investigative work and reporting. They too must be
protected. As long as they are behind bars, millions if
not hundreds of millions of people are deprived of the
fruits of their investigative reporting.
It is the responsibility of the representatives of
States to strike the balance between individuals and
nations Accordingly, journalism’s role is to depict
the world as it is constituted by common aspirations
and divergent interests. In giving a voice to everyone
and portraying different angles, journalism gives us
the ability to understand the other. Without that, no
peace, worthy of the name, is possible, and it is the
responsibility of Member States to establish this peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Deloire for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Pearl.
Ms. Pearl: I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting
me to share my thoughts on the safety of civilians, and
particularly journalists.

6/31

27/05/2015

I believe the future depends on the depth and
intensity of the vow embraced by people today. I think
that this is very good news, as it is very difficult to stop
someone with the strong sense of justice. The will to
ensure that no one else, including future generations,
must endure the suffering that afflicts us depends upon
individuals. Journalists everywhere are those single
determined individuals who increasingly are bearing
the weight of our democracies on their own.
I am speaking at a troubled time for our profession,
a time that requires all of us to take a step back and
display more than one form of courage. To me,
courage — intellectual and moral — is the active
ingredient that will allow us to use our destinies to
inspire others and to defeat oppression. It was Mark
Twain who said, “It is curious that physical courage
should be so common in the world and moral courage
so rare”. I believe there is no greater courage than the
strength to live up to one’s values, no matter what the
circumstances. To stand up and speak takes courage; to
sit down and listen also takes courage. I therefore thank
the Council for doing this.
Somewhere during the wars, we journalists have
lost the old, unspoken agreement that we were a neutral
and fair profession. As a result, we are in danger. All
of us are forced to wonder what kind of journalism
exactly is worth dying for. Often, true acts of courage
are invisible to others. It is not recklessness; it is not a
search for fame or adrenaline. Rather, it is an intimate
process, the profound will to enlighten humankind, to
go beyond the obvious, to fight preconceived ideas, to
battle the corruption and the greed that are crippling
our societies.
Today, the confusion within our profession is
great. We are searching for economic models, and
we are trying to counter the competition of the
Internet. Some run after breaking news for the sake
of breaking the news. Others are walking on shaky
ground, blurring further the frontier between proper
journalism and entertainment news. The media itself
needs introspection, so I will not talk on behalf of the
media as a whole. Instead, I would like to concentrate
on those journalists who have the courage to embrace
the complexity of our world. The courage to honour
the truth, no matter what the circumstances are, no
matter how unpleasant, no matter how contrary it is to
what the majority thinks. Those individuals who truly
have the strength to empathize with others and the
determination to honour the core values of journalism,

15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

such as giving a voice to the voiceless, resisting power,
and letting those values that define our profession
become who we are.
That search for integrity is our lifeline; but it is not
only ours, it is also that of those here. For we are the ones
who ensure that the public and politicians alike have the
information they need to make informed choices: that
the world is aware of the atrocities carried out by Daesh
in Iraq and Syria, by Boko Haram in Nigeria and by
the drug cartels in Mexico and Central America. Let
us not forget that beyond the news are individual lives;
beyond the politics is a human society; and beyond
our differences is our common ground. That common
ground is what terrorists are seeking to destroy. They
want and they need to end dialogue, understanding and
bonding among people.
How do they operate? They create a narrative,
they use labels, and mostly they thrive on our
weaknesses. Wars and conflict cannot live without a
narrative, a justification that breeds on ignorance,
fear and frustration. They kill journalists, workers of
non-governmental organizations, Americans, Jews,
those whom they call infidels and so on, in the hope
of dispiriting all those who identify with their victims.
Labels do not matter to them. But we are dealing with a
group of militants who dehumanize themselves enough
to kill a journalist whom they knew to be innocent and
whom they held for an entire year.
How do we deal with this? How do we create a
counter narrative? I believe that in Islam the most
elaborate form of jihad is the battle an individual
fights with him or herself to become enlightened. I
and many journalists members may never hear about
do what we can with the tools journalism gives us to
destroy the base on which terrorists operate, that is,
hatred. Accordingly, we report on what hatred feeds
on — ignorance, prejudice, greed, corruption, human
rights abuse, brain washing and the act of simplifying
what cannot be simplified.
In my case, that translates into 13 years of a daily
struggle — with a little help from my friend here, who
is my son — to oppose hatred with empathy, violence
with compassion and ignorance with education. I
am not alone, but we have become targets. Insurgent
groups no longer use reporters to transmit news, but
instead kidnap them to make news. They treat us as
enemy combatants and spies. This is our everyday
reality. In many cases, the journalists taking this on
are freelancers. That means young journalists doing

S/PV.7450

the job that the mass media is increasingly reluctant
to do. Often, they have no insurance, little training or
equipment and no support. But they do have as much to
lose as anybody else in this Chamber.
Women are bringing the world more than half of
the news. A great majority of them are freelancers,
which means they also face the added threats of sexual
violence, cyberattacks on their integrity and harm to
their families and children.
But let us not fool ourselves. Daesh and the likes
are only the visible part of the iceberg. The worrying
truth is that the response from Governments around the
world is equally damaging and dangerous to journalists.
Nearly 60 per cent of journalists jailed around the
world are imprisoned on anti-State charges. Murder is
the ultimate source of censorship, and not only in the
case of Daesh. In 2014, impunity in journalism murder
cases reached a staggering 96 per cent — a figure
that Christophe Deloire just mentioned — and the
remaining 4 per cent obtained only partial justice. Mass
surveillance by some Security Council member States
puts journalists and their sources at risk, undermining
the trust and confidentiality vital to quality journalism.
Additionally, an increasing number of countries are
now using anti-terrorism laws to muzzle the press even
further.
Why do we journalists continue working in such
circumstances? Over the years, I have talked extensively
to my colleagues on this subject. Those are people
whom I am going to quote, and I am not quoting them
because of their nationalities or because they happen to
be women, but for rather for their bravery.
I remember meeting the excellent Russian journalist
Anna Politkovskaya when she was receiving an award
in New York. She said,
“I am exhausted. I have seen too much. I don’t want
to go back to Chechnya, but if I don’t who will?”
Her articles had freed the wrongfully imprisoned and
helped recover the abducted. She was murdered in front
of her home in 2006.
War correspondent Marie Colvin, killed in Syria in
2012, wrote,
“We go to remote war zones to report what is
happening. The public has a right to know what our
Governments and our armed forces are doing in our
name. Our mission is to speak truth to power. We
send home that first rough draft of history. We can

15-152637/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

and do make a difference in exposing the horrors
of war, and especially the atrocities that befall
civilians.”
My dear friend Lydia Cacho, who revealed a
pedophile network in Mexico, wrote:
“I will never forget the face of General Montaño,
who, with his colleague Agent Pérez, spent 20 hours
torturing me psychologically, physically and
sexually. It happened in a car that drove the 1,500
kilometres from Cancún to Puebla. They threatened
to kill me, throw me out to sea and more. But I
arrived at the prison alive because the media had
managed to reveal the identity of my persecutors.
Both of them were policemen.”
Freelance photojournalist Nicole Tung, talked
about Syria:
“Covering Syria means facing a multifaceted
set of problems, from bombardments to snipers to
kidnappings by the Government, Islamic extremists
and criminals. It is a place where journalists and
Syrian activists must operate in a conflict of
staggering destruction and desperation, and where
no side” — and this is what is worrisome — “believes
in the benefit of truth-telling any longer.”
The neutral space in which journalists can operate
as independent witnesses is shrinking. Governments
and terrorist groups alike can bypass these objective
witnesses and take their messages directly online and to
social media. The lack of objective reporting means that
extremists and Government propagandists are free to
control the dissemination of information — information
that is not based on facts and not investigated and
confirmed by professional reporters. This has enormous
implications when one needs to make informed
decisions.
Furthermore, Governments are using terrorism
charges as an excuse to clamp down on dissent and
criticism. Journalists are routinely targeted and killed
for their reporting on terrorist groups, while others are
censored or imprisoned by Governments seeking to
respond to the very same threat.
Already this year more than 25 journalists have been
killed, the majority of them murdered. Member States
have agreed to reduce impunity through resolutions on
the safety of journalists and the United Nations Plan
of Action on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of
Impunity. These rhetorical commitments are welcome,

8/31

27/05/2015

but we need to see more concerted efforts on the ground
to actually implement them.
Jailing and attacking journalists will not help
defeat terrorists; it will only make them stronger. The
Security Council must warn States that they should
not use national security as an excuse to jail, harass or
censor journalists. A statement or resolution outlining
the threats journalists face, not only by terrorists but by
the anti-terror movement as well, would be an important
indication of this commitment.
All that said, I am intensely conscious that in the
end it is the solidarity of ordinary people that will drive
humankind forward — ordinary people such as the
journalists I have just quoted, who have exemplified a
moral courage that I truly hope will inspire the ordinary
person in each of us.
The President: I thank Ms. Pearl for her statement
and for her presence at this meeting.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2015/375, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Albania, Angola, Australia,
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chad, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Palau, Poland, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, and the United States of America.
I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2222 (2015).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania.

15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Let me start by expressing my sincere appreciation
to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson and
Mr. Christophe Deloire for their briefings and valuable
insights and to Mariane Pearl for sharing her very
personal and deeply moving perspective with us today.
What we just heard reaffirms my conviction that this
debate on the protection of journalists in conflict
situations is very timely.
We rely more and more on real-time information
in our decision-making. It is especially important
in situations of armed conflict, where our ability to
mobilize international response and assistance depends
on knowing the facts as they happen. Journalists are
our eyes and ears on the ground. Sadly, our being
informed comes increasingly at the cost of their lives.
Since 1992, 1,129 journalists have been killed.
It is journalists and media workers who often
expose violations of international humanitarian law and
human rights by warring parties, abuses by military and
security forces, and the tyranny of repressive regimes.
By doing so, they serve as early warning mechanisms,
because, as we know so well, human rights abuses often
predict conflicts and humanitarian catastrophes to
come. The deliberate targeting of journalists and media
workers is often used as a tactic of intimidation and
revenge by parties to the conflict who do not want their
criminal actions exposed.
For reporters, being in the midst of action is part of
the job. They have to brave armed attacks, cross enemy
lines, move with the displaced or persecuted minorities.
They go to places others seek to escape. They constantly
push the limits of their own safety and security.

S/PV.7450

al-Bahri because he refused to pledge allegiance to the
terrorist group. In most cases, however, the deaths of
local journalists and media workers pass unnoticed by
the international community.
Syria continues to be the deadliest place for
journalists. At least 80 journalists have been killed in
Syria since the conflict there began in 2011. The second
and third places in the number of journalist deaths
are Iraq and now Ukraine, because of the ongoing
war against the country’s sovereignty sponsored and
supported by Russia.
Koichiro Matsuura, former Director-General of
UNESCO, once said:
“Every aggression against a journalist is an attack
on our most fundamental freedoms. Press freedom
and freedom of expression cannot be enjoyed
without basic security.”
I could not agree with that more.
Even if the legal framework for the protection of
journalists has greatly evolved over the last decade,
there is a need to reinforce existing international norms
related to the protection of journalists by clarifying,
reinforcing and amending existing the international
framework. There is also an urgent need to reinforce
the implementation of legal norms and provisions,
including the accountability gap. Fewer than 5 per cent
of the perpetrators of crimes against journalists have
been prosecuted. In the majority of cases, the killers
have never been found and no investigation has even
been initiated.

The spread of radical extremism and terrorism
adds another highly dangerous dimension to the
threats journalists and media workers are facing.
The beheadings of Daniel Pearl, James Foley, Steven
Sotloff, Kenji Goto and others are testimony to the rabid
brutality of terrorists who target journalists not only to
instil fear among those eager to expose their barbarity,
but also to make news, to advertise themselves, in fact.

It is the responsibility of all States to comply
with their obligations to end impunity. Strengthening
national legislation and tackling impunity for attacks
against journalists would be an important contribution
to their protection. The requirement to investigate,
prosecute and punish unlawful arrests and attacks
against journalists as well as the criminalization of any
such unlawful behaviour should be an integral part of
the fight against impunity.

Local journalists, especially women journalists,
as has been mentioned today, and freelancers, are
particularly exposed. According to the Committee for
the Protection of Journalists, roughly 90 per cent of
those killed in conflict situations are local journalists.
In September 2014, Daesh captured and beheaded
cameraman Raad al-Azzawi in the Tikrit area. Earlier
this month, Daesh killed a Mosul journalist Firas

Employer responsibility should also be strengthened,
including with regard to local freelance staff, in order to
improve the environment in which journalists operate
today. Media agencies should contribute to the common
goal of the protection of journalists by elaborating and
implementing more stringent and more inclusive safety
provisions for journalists and media workers covering
stories, in conflict areas in particular.

15-152639/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

It is not just traditional journalists who face threats.
The rapid evolution of information technologies allows
individuals to disseminate information freely and
directly by using the Internet and social media. Such
individuals, bloggers and independent reporters are
increasingly targeted and their safety concerns need to
be properly addressed.
Although we understand that dangers and threats
can never be completely prevented or eradicated,
and that journalists will still be targeted, not least
because of the influence that their stories and objective
reporting can have on the transformation of conflicts
and societies, this awareness cannot justify inaction.
Attacks on journalists are, like all attacks on civilians,
attacks, first and foremost, on humankind. They are
also attacks on the international community’s ability
to understand and respond effectively to conflicts that
threaten international peace and security. Truth need
not be the first casualty of war. Journalists need not
be and should not be casualties of conflict. It is for
this reason that Lithuania submitted a draft resolution
on the protection of journalists. We thank all Council
delegations for their cooperation and all the co-sponsors
supporting our initiative.
The media is essential for the maintenance of
international peace and security. It is our duty and
responsibility to protect those who risk their lives in
order to disclose and disseminate the truth. Today,
however, wars are fought not only by means of
equipment and weaponry, but also through deliberate
disinformation, propaganda and media restrictions.
As warfare becomes increasingly asymmetrical, and
targeted propaganda becomes just another weapon
of war, there is a clear need for more comprehensive
measures to ensure the independence of the free media.
To quote the French philosopher Helvétius:
“To limit the press is to insult a nation; to prohibit
reading of certain books is to declare the inhabitants
to be either fools or slaves.”
The fundamental freedoms of expression and
information, part and parcel of fundamental human
rights, are at the core of the freedom and prosperity
of our societies. By protecting journalists and media
workers, we help to protect our freedom.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.
10/31

27/05/2015

Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to express my appreciation for the briefings given
by Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson, Mr. Deloire on
behalf of Reporters Without Borders, and Ms. Pearl.
Their briefings were quite moving and we will have
to carefully examine their proposals. I would also like
to thank the Lithuanian presidency for organizing this
open debate and for supporting resolution 2222 (2015),
which we adopted today.
We are joined today in the Chamber by a sizeable
delegation from the Congress of Deputies of Spain
representing the various political forces of my country.
Their visit reflects their desire to learn about the work
of the Council, benefiting from our presence in this
body, and to support the important work of this organ.
Freedom of the press, as a clear expression of
freedom of expression and opinion, is the backbone of
a free society. Freedom of expression and opinion is
the oxygen that is essential to all democratic systems
worthy of that name. That right is clearly enshrined
in article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, which expresses its dual role and states that
it is essential for everyone to be able to express their
views without interference and to seek, receive and
impart information and ideas through any media and
regardless of frontiers.
The exercise of freedom of the press is fundamental,
not only by journalists. It is a difficult profession
as it must be guided by the need to provide truthful
information. In that undertaking, it is inevitable that
disagreements will arise with political authorities.
However this job is essential in order to be able to
know, to think and to shape opinions. Hence, the role of
journalists is particularly important in armed conflicts.
The independent press informs us about realities on
the ground. The development of new technologies has
significantly facilitated access to information and news
in real-time, has increased the number of information
sources and enhanced the role of the media.
Journalists are an important counterweight against
propaganda, which often tries to manipulate public
opinion. Abuses can occur, such as when radio stations
were used in the Great Lakes region two decades ago
to incite hatred. In some cases, journalists are the only
mode of access to truthful information: today we would
not know much about events taking place in Yemen or
Syria if it were not for the presence of reporters who
often take their commitment to their job to heroic
extremes. Very often, journalists are the only voices
15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

that the victims of abuses and attacks against civilians
have to rely on. Hence, they play an essential role to
ensure a response by the international community to
try to prevent an escalation of violence or, at least,
mitigate its consequences.
Furthermore, they are important to make sure that
crimes do not go unpunished and that perpetrators area
brought to justice. For example, the pictures taken and
preserved by the Spanish deportee Francisco Boix in
the Mauthausen concentration camp were critical in
establishing responsibility in the trials after the Second
World War. The media spurs Governments and civil
society to find peaceful solutions to conflicts. Indeed,
journalism has contributed to shaping the agenda of
the Security Council by bringing attention to notions
including the protection of civilians, children in armed
conflict, and women and peace and security. The
pressure to which journalists are subjected to in conflict
situations is the best reflection of the uncomfortable
yet irreplaceable role played by journalism such
circumstances. In Burundi, for example, independent
radio and television channels have not been able to
broadcast for many weeks. Such type of pressure occurs
in many parts of the world. Attacks against journalists
in Ukraine throughout last year, for example, are very
troubling.
The working conditions of journalists are
unfortunately increasingly difficult due to the threat
of terrorism. The pressure and intimidation by terrorist
groups is increasing. Abductions of journalists
increased by 30 per cent in 2014. In parts of Iraq and
Syria we are now talking of a news blackout because
there is no possible access by the media. The year
2015 had a painful and outrageous beginning with the
attack on Charlie Hebdo. Terrorists are increasing their
scope of action. The reason that terrorist groups have
chosen the press is clear: they abhor pluralism and try
to impose themselves using coercive means. Countries
such as Spain that have suffered terrorist attacks know
from experience that these groups are moved by a
totalitarian instinct. Jihadi terrorism uses the Internet
and social media as key tools to recruit combatants
and obtain financing. Groups such as Daesh use social
networks to publicize their activities and to terrorize.
In the medium- and long-term, the best way to combat
jihadist propoganda is through truthful information
about the real face of terrorism. The testimony of the
Yazidi girls that managed to escape Daesh in Iraq and
the Nigerian girls who were recently freed from the

S/PV.7450

inhumane imprisonment of Boko Haram are telling
examples.
We owe a great deal to the media. In contrast, our
tools to ensure their protection are very limited. Let
me just mention some measures that can be used to
improve the conditions in which they conduct their very
difficult work. It is necessary to publicly acknowledge
the work carried out by the media and to reiterate our
commitment to their protection. Open debates such as
today’s are an excellent opportunity to do this. The
work of the Security Council also offers opportunities
such as adopting draft resolutions and press statements
or even imposing sanctions.
States should actively promote the establishment
of a secure framework so that journalists can exercise
their profession free of coercion and intimidation.
That begins with the ratification and implementation
of the relevant international instruments in the area
of international humanitarian law and human rights,
including the 1977 Additional Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions, the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights, or mechanisms such as the Special
Rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the
right to freedom of opinion and expression, the Human
Rights Council and the Special Rapporteur of the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. It is
also essential to support the work Representative on
Freedom of the Media of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe.
It is essential that we take into account the views of
the media themselves as we identify activities to protect
their security. No one is better placed than professionals
of the press to contribute to this debate. Before coming
to New York, I had the opportunity to meet in Madrid
with professional associations of the Spanish press,
including Reporters Without Borders, and to hear their
views. I heard very interesting proposals, some of
which I would like to highlight here.
One was a proposal for the prosecution of crimes
against journalists as war crimes, pursuant to various
considerations. I have already mentioned the important
role of the media in armed conflict. Journalists, given
the specific nature of their work, are particularly
exposed to threats and dangers. The abduction and
execution of journalists are instruments of propaganda,
intimidation and terrorism used by terrorist groups
to influence public opinion. There is a high level of
impunity for crimes against journalists, as has been

15-1526311/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

highlighted in the briefings today, which calls for
enhanced cooperation between the Council and the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
It would also be useful — again I am conveying a
proposal by the media in Spain — to receive a report from
the Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection
of the right to freedom of opinion and expression on
the increasingly frequent and worrisome phenomenon
of the forced exile of numerous journalists. According
to Reporters Without Borders, in 2014 139 journalists
and 20 bloggers had to seek exile, almost twice the
number of the previous year. The main reason was the
threat of violence or imprisonment related to the issues
under their investigation. Only 5 per cent returned to
their countries of origin, and the remaining 95 per cent
remain vulnerable even in exile.
I would now like to refer briefly to Spain’s three
priorities of significant importance bearing on the
subject of today’s debate.
First, on gender equality, the communications
media are essential both to prevent violence against
women and to articulate their participation in peace
processes. The radio station Okapi in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a partner of the United Nations
with 14 million listeners, is an excellent example of
this. Last year, Spain awarded its most prestigious
award, the Princess of Asturias Award for Concordia,
to journalist Caddy Adzuba for defending human rights
and freedom of the press. We would point to such
concrete measures as the inclusion in the sanctions
committees the designation criteria related to the
violation of the rights of women, including the many
women journalists who champion them.
Second is the review of peacekeeping operations.
We believe that the role of the media should be given
priority attention in defining the terms of reference of
United Nations political missions and peacekeeping
operations. Resolution 2222 (2015), which we adopted
today, emphasizes the importance of that factor.
Third is the factor against terrorism. The
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
underscores the media’s important role in curbing the
spread of extremist ideologies. The review to take place
in 2016 will give us the opportunity to strengthen that
perspective. Moreover, for our part, during the meeting
of the Counter-Terrorism Committee in Madrid in
July, we will address the role of the media in a panel

12/31

27/05/2015

dedicated to the identification and prevention of the
recruitment of foreign fighters.
I should like to conclude with another proposal. The
United Nations has an extensive network of agencies
and institutions that could contribute to improving
the security of journalists, as reflected in the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity, approved by UNESCO in 2012. It
would be a good idea to assess its impact and to transmit
its findings to the relevant bodies of the United Nations
system. The tenth anniversary of resolution 1738 (2006)
in 2016 will be an excellent opportunity for that, and to
strengthen cooperation in this field between the United
Nations and regional organizations.
Finally, I should like to express my admiration and
gratitude to the professionals of the press, particularly
those who risk their lives in situations of conflict, for
their noble commitment to give voice to witnesses.
Their stories are critical to keeping our consciences
awake and helping us to respond to crimes and abuses.
On behalf of Spain, I pay tribute to them.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting and
for Lithuania’s consistent effort to integrate the issue of
press freedom and the threats to it across the work we
do at the Council., I would also like to thank our guest
briefers, Mr. Deloire and Ms. Pearl, for their powerful
words today and for the tremendous work they are doing
to advance this most critical cause. Ms. Pearl has been
a tremendous force for good in the world. As a mother
and former journalist, I am in awe of her strength. I
offer a special thanks to her son Adam for being present
today; he is the best reminder of why we need to do
more to protect journalists.
Nearly two years ago in July 2013, when the
Council last met to discuss the issue of the protection
of journalists (see S/PV.7003), the United States raised
the case of Mazen Darwish, the Head of the Syrian
Centre for Media and Freedom of Expression. Darwish
had been held incommunicado since February 2012,
when he was detained by regime officials along with
several colleagues. Today, he remains behind bars
along with two fellow staff members, Hani Zaitani and
Hussein Ghreir. On 13 May, earlier this month, their
trial was suspended for the twenty-fourth time, which
is little surprise, given that their only crime was to
report the truth about the Al-Assad regime’s atrocities.
Since the beginning of this month, the whereabouts of

15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the three men have been unknown. Mazen’s brave wife
Yara Bader, who has led the Centre since his arrest and
campaigned around the globe for his release, is with us
in the Chamber today. I thank Yara for all she is doing.
Darwish’s case exemplifies the first of three challenges
I want to highlight today with respect to the protection
of journalists.
How does the international community protect
journalists from parties that deliberately target them?
In the four plus years since the Syrian conflict began,
more than 80 journalists have been killed and at least
90 more abducted, according to the Committee to Protect
Journalists. Countless more have been threatened,
attacked, wounded, barrel-bombed or disappeared.
They have been targeted by both the Al-Assad regime
and violent extremist groups like Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), whose grotesque executions of
journalists alongside humanitarian aid workers, foreign
soldiers and people of different religions or political
beliefs seemed aimed both at using their victim’s
suffering as a recruiting tool and at dissuading other
journalists from covering the conflict.
Unfortunately, their tactics seem to be working, as
the videos of their executions are widely disseminated
on social media, while both international and national
coverage of the Syrian conflict itself has declined
dramatically. What the Al-Assad regime, ISIL and
other State and non-State actors like them that target
journalists have in common is that they do not want
people to see them for what they really are — whether
that is a regime willing to torture, bomb, gas and
starve its people in order to hold onto power or a group
masquerading as religious that routinely desecrates the
basic dignity of human beings. That is why the Mazen
Darwishes, James Foleys and Daniel Pearls of the world
are so dangerous to those groups and Governments.
Their reporting strips away the façade and shows us
what lies beneath.
That brings me to the second challenge. How do we
protect journalists, and more broadly, press freedoms
in situations in which violence is escalating and there
is a risk of mass atrocities? That is important, as we
know that a robust press can play a key role in helping
to prevent crises from metastasizing into full-blown
conflicts and mitigating the conditions in which grave
human rights violations tend to occur.
We are seeing that right now in Burundi. After
the ruling party’s announcement of the candidacy of

S/PV.7450

President Nkurunziza for what would be his third term,
despite the explicit two-term limit set by the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi,
there were large public protests. The Government
responded by shuttering the country’s most important
media outlets. Not long after members of the military
attempted to oust the current Nkurunziza Government,
the offices of at least four independent radio stations,
which have generally been critical of the Nkurunziza
Government, were attacked and their equipment
destroyed. Since the unlawful attempt to seize power
was quashed, several independent journalists report
being told that they are on a list of people to be arrested,
and many more reportedly have been threatened with
death, torture and disappearance, forcing them to
go into hiding. One Burundian journalist said in an
interview: “No journalist feels safe enough to look for
information”. That is right now, in Burundi.
Even in countries that are not experiencing conflicts
or at imminent risk of sliding into unrest, the erosion of
press freedoms is often a harbinger of the rolling back
of human rights that are critical to healthy democracies.
This is the third challenge that I would like to raise:
how do we — and by “we” I mean the United Nations,
bodies such as the Security Council and our individual
Member States — push back against the erosion of press
freedoms by Governments intent on silencing critical
voices and other key outlets of free expression. Look to
any region and you will see alarming warning signs of
how the crackdown on press freedom is coupled with a
broader crackdown on civil and political rights.
Take Ethiopia, where nine journalists, six of them
bloggers from the collective Zone 9, which covers
political and social news, have been imprisoned
since April 2014 under Ethiopia’s anti-terrorism
proclamation. After 20 administrative hearings, their
trial finally began on 30 March. If convicted under the
proclamation, they could face up to more than a dozen
years in prison.
Take Azerbaijan, where Khadija Ismayilova, a
contributor to Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty’s
(RFE/RL) Azerbaijani service, remains incarcerated
on charges widely viewed as politically motivated.
Ismayilova is known for her reporting on corruption.
After arresting her in December 2014 on charges
of inciting a man to commit suicide, authorities
raided RFE/RL’s Baku office, interrogated its staff,
confiscated reporting notes and sealed the newsroom.
New charges have been added to Ismayilova’s case as

15-1526313/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

she awaits her trial, including embezzlement, illegal
business and abuse of power.
It is worth noting that all around the world, for
every individual or group targeted through prosecution,
attacks and threats, there are countless more impacted:
people who, seeing the risks, either begin to self-censor,
go into hiding or flee the countries that so desperately
need their independent voices.

27/05/2015

Colombia’s commitment to protecting these individuals
and the country’s recognition of the crucial role that
these groups play.

First, we must condemn the Governments and
non-State actors that attack journalists as well as the
overly restrictive laws and regulations that undermine
their freedom. It is much easier to prevent these spaces
from closing than it is to fight to reopen them.

One of the journalists who has received protection
is Jineth Bedoya Lima. In 2000, when Bedoya was 26
years old, she was heading into one of the country’s
most dangerous prisons to report on paramilitary
groups when she was abducted, drugged and driven
to a hideout, where she was raped and beaten by three
men. As they were abusing her, one of her captors
told her, “We are sending a message to the press in
Colombia”. Later they left Bedoya bound, by a trash
dump. She fled the country soon after. Today Bedoya is
back in Colombia, reporting stories with the protection
of bodyguards from Colombia’s unit. She still feels
fear but perseveres, driven by a commitment to telling
the stories that otherwise would go untold, and that
includes her own.

Secondly, we must give journalists the tools
they need to protect themselves, particularly when
working in conflict zones and repressive societies.
The $100 million that the United States has invested in
training more than 10,000 at-risk journalists and human
rights defenders in digital safety and in providing them
with anti-censorship tools is one example. Another is
the training provided by civil-society groups such as the
Institute for War and Peace Reporting, whose director
in Iraq, Ammar Al-Shahbander, was killed by a car
bomb on 2 May, a devastating loss for his family, the
community of journalists he mentored and his nation.

In speaking out about her own experience,
Bedoya has helped make the serious and seriously
underreported problem of sexual assault in Colombia’s
long-running conflict more visible, and she has become
a leading advocate of accountability even as several of
her own attackers continue to roam free. Bedoya also
led a countrywide campaign to establish a national day
for the dignity of women victims of sexual violence,
which last year Colombia’s President, Manuel Santos
Calderón, agreed to establish. Colombia just honoured
the day for the first time two days ago, on Monday,
25 May.

Thirdly, we can ensure that the people who
attack journalists are actually held accountable for
their crimes. The failure to effectively investigate
and prosecute such crimes sends a clear message to
perpetrators that they can continue to commit them
without any consequences.

There are few greater living testaments to the value
of protecting journalists than Bedoya’s story. We must
not allow voices like hers to be silenced.

Given the critical importance of press freedoms in
advancing so many of the goals of the Council, let me
make four recommendations in closing as to how we
can meet these challenges.

Fourthly and finally, we can help create
programmes to protect journalists operating in conflict
zones, particularly those targeted for their work.
Colombia shows how this can be done. The national
protection unit established by the Government in
2011 is empowered to protect 19 vulnerable groups,
including journalists and human rights defenders. As
of last year, more than 80 journalists — and this is
extraordinary — were receiving protection measures
ranging from cell phones and transport subsidies to
bodyguards and armoured cars. The programme has
an annual budget of $160 million, which speaks to

14/31

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this debate, which is today more necessary than ever. I
would also like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his statement as well as Ms. Pearl and Mr. Deloire
for their important testimony, which allows us better
to understand the challenges that journalists encounter
on the ground and to identify concrete actions to better
protect them. We will never forget Daniel Pearl or any
one of the journalists who paid with their life for their
commitment to the freedom of information. Their
tragedy represents an obligation for all of us. I wish to
say to Mariane Pearl that her commitment is a source of
inspiration for all of us, and I wish to welcome her son,
who will celebrate his birthday tomorrow.

15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

I would also like to commend the tireless work
carried out for many years by Reporters Without
Borders to draw attention to the situation of journalists
under threat and to find concrete ways to improve the
situation.
On 7 January, in the heart of Paris, two terrorists
attacked the headquarters of Charlie Hebdo with heavy
weapons. They killed 12 people and wounded 11 others.
By attacking that newspaper, terrorists killed not
only individuals. When a journalist is killed, it is the
freedom of expression that is targeted. As emphasized
in resolution 2222 (2015), adopted by the Council today,
a free and independent press is one of the essential
foundations of our democratic societies. Even before
the murderous attack on Charlie Hebdo, journalists
everywhere have been the victims of violence and paid
with their lives for the freedom of expression.
In 2014, as has been noted, some 66 journalists, 11
assistants and 19 citizen journalists were killed. Over
350 of them were placed in detention. Thousands more
were the victims of harassment, arbitrary arrest and
freedom-destroying legislation. This trend continues in
2015; 25, including many local journalists, have already
lost their lives this year. Everywhere journalists are
subject to persecution by authoritarian regimes that
attempt to silence them. Thus some 100 journalists,
professionals and non-professionals both, have been
killed in Syria since the beginning of the conflict there,
including four French citizens. They paid with their
lives for their determination to show to the world the
reality of the indiscriminate repression affecting the
Syrian people. In addition to persecution by the regime,
there is also the barbarity of Daesh. This terrorist group
does not hesitate to use the media to show the execution
of journalists, staged in a macabre way that deeply
shocks the human conscience.
The terrorists attack journalists because they
represent everything that Daesh hates and tries to
eradicate: freedom, pluralism, culture and democracy.
In Iraq as in Syria, they are trying to create a black
hole from which information cannot escape and where
obscurantism and darkness reign supreme. These
terrorists should know that their barbaric actions will
only strengthen our collective determination to fight
them.
Everyone agrees today that the challenge of
protecting journalists is still far from having been
taken up. It is first and foremost the responsibility of

S/PV.7450

Governments to protect journalists and to allow them
to carry out their duties independently and without
hindrance. That necessarily involves the fight against
impunity for those who commit acts of violence. States
must systematically investigate, apprehend and try the
perpetrators. Currently, 90 per cent of the murders of
journalists go unpunished, which promotes further
acts of violence. That situation is unacceptable. The
International Criminal Court can also play a role.
According to the Geneva Conventions, journalists are
civilians. Their murder can therefore constitute a war
crime under the Rome Statute. The texts exist. They
need to be applied.
It is up to the international community, in particular
the Security Council, to consider this situation and
to act to protect journalists. We should recognize the
vulnerability of journalists in conflict zones and should
more methodically and systematically ensure that
peacekeeping operations guarantee their protection as
civilians at risk. Peacekeeping operations should also
report to the Council on human rights violations that
target journalists.
As Mr. Deloire reminded us, violence against
journalists is not confined to situations of armed
conflict. Most attacks take place in countries at peace,
most often when journalists are investigating cases of
corruption or organized crime. In that regard, the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity, developed under the auspices of
UNESCO in 2012, is an excellent initiative. It should
now be fully implemented by the United Nations system
as a whole, in cooperation with Member States and
civil society. It would also be important, as Mr. Deloire
has urged, to consider ways to improve the coherence,
effectiveness and visibility of United Nations efforts on
the issue of the protection of journalists.
The freedom to provide information lies at the
heart of every democracy. It is in the DNA of France
and is one of our highest priorities, both internally and
outside our borders. Every day, journalists, bloggers,
war reporters and associated staff help us better
understand the world and its changes. We can all see
that the first reflex of the enemies of freedom is to gag
the press, and that the first defenders of democracy
are the independent media. Freedom of expression
should be respected everywhere. It is our collective
responsibility, including here in the Security Council,
to work to ensure the full exercise of that freedom. Let
us make that our shared fight.

15-1526315/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like to welcome you, Sir, along with the other
ministers joining us today. I would also like to thank
the Lithuanian presidency for organizing today’s open
debate on the protection of journalists in situations
of armed conflict. I also thank Mr. Jan Eliasson,
Deputy Secretary-General; Mr. Christophe Deloire,
Director-General of Reporters Without Borders; and
Ms, Mariane Pearl, of the Daniel Pearl Foundation, for
their briefings.
The armed conflicts currently taking place around
the world expose the suffering of civilians, especially
that of women, children and vulnerable individuals.
The eyewitness accounts of journalists in situations
of armed conflict have become essential. Thanks to
their presence, we receive information in real time
about the numerous violations and abuses committed
against innocent civilians, which has often enabled the
international community to take important decisions.
Not only do the men and women of the press work
under difficult conditions, but they are increasingly the
target of deliberate attacks in conflict zones. They are
often abducted or kidnapped for ransom, if not tortured
or executed in the absence of any legal proceedings.
Women journalists and their female associates are not
spared and are even, at times, deliberately singled out.
When the terrorists of Daesh, Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, other Al-Qaida affiliates and other armed
groups make them a favoured target, our obligation
must be to offer immediate help by strengthening their
protection. The effective pursuit of the perpetrators of
such acts is a way to dissuade non-State actors who
do not consider themselves bound by international
instruments to protect journalists.
Journalists present in situations of armed conflict
enjoy the same protections as other civilians in the
application of international humanitarian law in
accordance with the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols. The adoption of resolution 1738
(2006), which demands the protection of journalists in
war zones, raised great hopes and was cause for rejoicing
within the profession, even if its implementation did
not meet expectations. Despite the obligations derived
from the Geneva Conventions and resolution 1738
(2006), attacks against journalists have not diminished.
According to the concept note (S/2015,303, annex)
provided by the Lithuanian presidency, in 2014 alone,
61 journalists were killed, 87 per cent of whom were
local, while 221 others were imprisoned. The problem

16/31

27/05/2015

of protecting journalists in situations of armed conflict
is therefore more closely tied to insufficient or absent
political will on the part of warring parties with
respect to their obligations, than to the lack of a legal
framework.
We hope that the resolution we have just adopted
(resolution 2222 (2015)) marks a new phase in the
commitment of States to fully assume their obligations
with respect to the protection of media professionals
in armed conflict and sends a strong message from the
Council that unjustified attacks on journalists around
the world will not go unpunished. In that light, it is
urgent to stress practical, effective measures that will
help prevent and reduce the attacks that currently target
men and women in the media. While recalling the
primary responsibility of warring parties, especially
States, to protect journalists, we would do well to
highlight the contribution of international, regional and
subregional organizations to bolstering compliance.
Raising awareness among those concerned and
providing technical assistance to developing countries
with respect to protection will also contribute to
promoting cooperation on the issue. In that regard, we
welcome the specific attention that UNESCO and the
Human Rights Council have devoted to the matter of
protecting journalists.
We commend the immensely important role of
journalists and associated staff in the protection of
civilians caught up in situations of armed conflict and
their contribution to establishing democratic societies.
We stress the fact that their training and rigorous
adherence to professional codes of ethics will help
some of them avoid the pitfalls of disinformation and
the calls to hatred that risk exacerbating conflicts. In
that regard, journalists should respect the principles
of impartiality and objectivity in the exercise of their
profession. We also remind those in charge of media
outlets to carefully weigh the risks before sending
journalists and associated staff into conflict areas, in
order to avoid subjecting them to the indiscriminate
terror that all too often targets them today.
In conclusion, allow me once again to honour the
memory of all those who have been unjustly executed
and to pay homage to those still in the hands of armed
groups and terrorists. We join with others in calling
for their immediate and unconditional release, and in
demanding that the perpetrators of those crimes be
pursued and brought to justice. Impunity for those who
kill journalists must be stopped.

15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. van Bohemen (New Zealand): Mr. President,
I would like to welcome you and the other Foreign
Ministers who are taking part in today’s debate, and
to thank Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson for
his briefing. I would like to commend the thoughtprovoking briefings we have had from Mr. Christophe
Deloire and Ms. Mariane Pearl, particularly Ms. Pearl’s
reflections on the changing nature of journalism, the
need for reflection on the balance between reportage
and entertainment, and her analysis of the threats
posed — by terrorist organizations, other non-State
actors and, sadly, Governments that are Members of our
Organization — to those who take on the demanding
challenge of reporting the news.
It has been almost nine years since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1738 (2006), on the protection
of journalists in armed conflict. The intervening years
have been particularly dangerous and bloody, as we
have heard today. More than 60 journalists have been
killed each year since the adoption of resolution 1738
(2006). Most, but not all, of those fatalities have been
conflict-related, and many more deaths go unreported.
Already this year 25 journalists have been killed. New
Zealand therefore welcomes the opportunity this debate
gives us to reflect on the protection of journalists in
armed conflict, and we commend Lithuania for taking
that initiative.
Today I wish to focus on four challenges to
protection. The first is tackling impunity. In nine out
of 10 cases, the perpetrators of attacks on journalists
are never prosecuted. That remains first and foremost
a national responsibility. While it may pose particular
challenges for fragile and conflict-affected States,
there are tools available to assist them with it, including
through regional organizations. States should be better
at asking for help. Today’s resolution 2222 (2015)
strengthens standards in that area.
Secondly, New Zealand welcomes the increased
monitoring by the United Nations of the protection
of journalists, including in the Secretary-General’s
thematic report on the protection of civilians
(S/2013/689) and in country-specific reports. Such
reports should reflect on the work of the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights and of
the various special rapporteurs and envoys who raise
concerns about attacks on journalists in connection to
their own mandates. That will provide more clarity, at
the national level and across the United Nations system,

S/PV.7450

for improving the implementation of resolution 1738
(2006) and now resolution 2222 (2015) as well.
Thirdly, we recognize the particular vulnerabilities
faced by local journalists, who represent a majority of
the victims. Local journalists often lack access to the
kind of equipment and resources that can help them to
keep safe. In that regard, we urge media organizations
to take responsibility for all their staff, regardless of
their national status. We also urge United Nations
personnel in the field to remain alert to the protection
challenges facing local journalists.
Finally, there is the transformative effect of
technology and the rapidly evolving media landscape.
Anyone with a pen and notepad, a smart phone and
a Twitter account can contribute to the discussion
through the Internet and social media. That has led to
the rise of citizen journalists, who are often the only
source of information in areas controlled by terrorists
and other non-State actors. The importance of such
changes cannot be ignored. Citizen journalists are often
exposed and at risk. That has been grimly demonstrated
in Syria, where credible reports indicate that at least
130 Internet and citizen journalists have been killed
since the start of the conflict.
Journalists remain a vital part of our work here
in the Council. We have been reminded graphically
today of many of the horrible incidents involving the
persecution of journalists in Syria and elsewhere.
We value the close relationship we have with the
representatives of the media who follow the work of the
Council both here and in conflicts abroad. The story of
what is happening on the ground and behind the scenes
must be told. The people of Burundi, Syria, South
Sudan, Ukraine, Yemen and elsewhere need a voice.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the opportunity for the Council
to once again address the issue of the protection of
journalists, which is such an important aspect of the
problem of the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
In the context of the various ongoing armed
conflicts, journalism remains one of the most dangerous
professions. Only last week we received the news of
another tragic death of a representative of the press,
the Iraqi television journalist Firas Al-Bahri, executed
by the Islamic State. Journalists who fall into the
category of civilians under international humanitarian
law are protected accordingly under the code for armed
conflict, and that is entirely proper.

15-1526317/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Against the backdrop of the growing role that the
media plays in the world’s political and social life,
issues related to journalists’ activities are increasingly
included on the agenda of various international
institutions and organizations, especially UNESCO,
the Human Rights Council, the General Assembly and
the Security Council. We view today’s resolution 2222
(2015) as a continuation of resolution 1738 (2006), the
Council’s foundational document on the subject. The
topic of protecting journalists’ safety should continue
to be seen as a priority in the work of those bodies,
while of course taking into account their mandate and
purview. At the same time, attempts to expand the
interpretation of the category to include practically
anyone and everyone who uses the Internet, even if
they are not involved in professional journalism, will
not improve its effectiveness. Blurring the concept of
what a journalist is will not help the situation.
Despite the measures that the international
community has taken, the situation regarding the
protection of journalists leaves much to be desired.
Their rights are sometimes grossly ignored and their
lives and health threatened. The number of journalists
killed increased in 2014. News of the deaths of or
injuries to journalists in Syria, Iraq and Libya and
other countries continues to reach us with alarming
regularity. Employees of the media working in hot spots
have become victims of intimidation, attacks, searches,
arbitrary detentions and expulsions. The kidnapping
of journalists by the Islamic State and related terrorist
organizations is extremely worrying. We all know
about cases in which the equipment that journalists
need in order to carry out their professional tasks has
been intentionally destroyed or confiscated.
We are particularly concerned about the situation
in Ukraine, where journalists, especially those
representing Russian media, are not only endangered
for doing their job, but are also forced to work in
conditions of open discrimination. Russian journalists
are periodically captured by members of the Ukrainian
special services. Some representatives of Russian and
foreign media have paid with their lives for their efforts
to work in a war zone and report the truth about what
is happening there. Unfortunately, such cases have not
only gone unpunished, they have not always come to
the attention of the relevant international entities and
human-rights organizations.
One of the aspects of modern armed conflict is
what is known as the information war. Winning it

18/31

27/05/2015

involves employing a wide-ranging arsenal of weapons,
which include, in particular, some States’ decisions to
ban broadcasts or impose sanctions on media they do
not like. We should also include in this type of warfare
the spread of incitements to intolerance and the rhetoric
of hatred. In that regard, it is important to recall the
responsibility that journalists have to society.
We agree with the provisions of the concept note
prepared for today’s meeting (S/2015/307, annex) on
the need to ensure the proper training of journalists
working in armed conflict situations and to minimize
the risks involved in such work. The growing number
of victims among journalists clearly points to the need
to step up efforts to ensure their protection in areas of
armed conflict. The main responsibility for ensuring
the protection of civilians, including journalists, lies
with the parties to the conflict.
We strongly condemn any acts of violence against
journalists and call on the authorities of all States on
whose territory armed conflict is unfolding to make
every possible effort to investigate and prosecute such
crimes, in particular those against media professionals,
and to bring to justice those responsible.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): On behalf of the Malaysian
delegation, I wish to thank Mr. Linkevičius, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania, and Lithuania for
convening this timely debate on the important issue
of the protection of civilians, particularly journalists,
in situations of armed conflict. We believe that his
presence here today demonstrates the great importance
he attaches to the issue, and we commend Lithuania’s
leadership in taking this agenda forward.
We are pleased to have co-sponsored and joined the
consensus on resolution 2222 (2015), which the Council
has just adopted.
My delegation thanks Mr. Jan Eliasson, Deputy
Secretary-General; Mr. Christophe Deloire from
Reporters Without Borders; and Ms. Mariane Pearl
of the Daniel Pearl Foundation for their respective
briefings, to which we have listened with much interest.
In our view, resolution 2222 (2015) makes a
positive contribution towards strengthening existing
international norms and standards on the protection of
civilians, particularly journalists operating in situations
of armed conflict. Malaysia take this opportunity
to honour those brave souls who have risked life and
limb — and in some cases have paid the ultimate
price — while pursuing their calling, that is, shedding
15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

light on the human dimension of conflicts, including
the underlying causes and the narratives of those caught
in circles of violence.
We underscore that in situations of armed conflict,
the responsibility to ensure the protection of civilians,
including journalists, rests on the parties to the conflict,
without regard to whether such conflict occurs at intraor inter-State level. Indeed, such responsibility on the
part of the parties to a conflict is clearly enshrined in the
applicable international instruments on international
human rights law, international humanitarian law
and international criminal law. We view with serious
concern the increasing trend of journalists being
deliberately targeted by parties to a conflict. The
statistics are all the more troubling as they seem to
indicate that journalists are being deliberately targeted,
particularly by non-State actors, including terrorist
groups and affiliated individuals.
Just over a week ago, on 20 May, reports emerged
about the abduction and subsequent execution of
journalist Feras Yasin by Daesh, in Mosul, Iraq. Scarcely
a month earlier, on 27 April and also in Mosul, the body
of Thaer Al-Ali, Editor-in-Chief of the newspaper Rai
al-Nas, was found. He, too, was abducted before being
executed, also by Daesh. Their crime? They shed light
on atrocities committed by the group.
All the more chilling are the recent and ongoing
atrocities committed by Daesh and its affiliates in
cynically manipulating their acts of the torture,
mutilation and murder of journalists — including James
Foley, Kenji Goto and Steven Sotloff — as propaganda
tools in pursuit of questionable political goals. Against
such developments, the international community and
the Council must stiffen their collective resolve towards
ensuring that no more journalists will suffer the fate of
those brave individuals.
The prevalence of a culture of impunity and
the absence of rule of law, good governance and the
attendant institutions of law and order are among the
key factors that negatively affect the safety and security
of civilians in conflict situations, including journalists.
We fully subscribe to the principle that where violations
and abuse of civilians occur, the perpetrators must be
held accountable, including through punitive action.
In that regard, we note with concern the SecretaryGeneral’s report (A/69/268), which, inter alia,
underscored the absence of accountability for attacks
against journalists. The figures cited are worrying.

S/PV.7450

In this year alone conflict situations around the world
have claimed the lives of at least 13 journalists. Since
1992, 377 journalists and media professionals have
lost their lives due to violent conflict or while on a
dangerous mission. Malaysia suffered its first casualty
some three years ago when Mr. Noramfaizul Mohd Nor,
a cameraman traveling with a humanitarian convoy in
Somalia, was killed in a crossfire incident.
Malaysia reaffirms that the role played by
journalists in situations of armed conflict is crucial and
indispensable. Taking a broader perspective, journalists
also play a positive role in contributing to the protection
of civilians, including by reporting on alleged atrocities
or documenting violence in the search for justice for
the victims. Bearing in mind the risks that these brave
individuals assume in extracting information from
situations of violence and conflict and ensuring that
such information reaches those in a position to address
the situation — including this Council — necessitates
a corresponding response to promote their continued
safety, security and well-being while operating in such
harsh conditions.
In the context of situations of violent and armed
conflict, journalists perform a critical role through
their exercise of the right to freedom of expression and
opinion. As we have all seen, many journalists have paid
a steep price, and many will continue to pay unless all
concerned parties take clear measures to ensure their
safety and security in such situations. My delegation
believes that the Council must continue to advocate for
the safety and protection of journalists in situations of
armed conflict. Malaysia remains fully seized of and
committed to that undertaking, alongside other Council
members.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): The
Jordanian delegation expresses its warmest gratitude
for the opportunity to discuss the very important topic
of the protection of journalists in conflict situations. We
thank the Deputy Secretary-General and Mr. Christophe
Deloire and Ms. Marianne Pearl.
Significant progress has been achieved in developing
legal criteria on the protection of journalists and media
professionals in armed conflict since the adoption of the
Hague conventions of 1899 and 1907, the 1949 Geneva
Conventions and their two Additional Protocols of 1977,
and General Assembly resolution 2677 (XXV) of 1970.
Those actions comprise decisive steps in ensuring the
protection of journalists in situations of armed conflict.

15-1526319/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

However, in spite of such efforts, we continue
to witness unprecedented increases in the number of
victims among international journalists and media
professionals. The year 2014 witnessed the deaths of
67 journalists and the abductions of 119, as well as the
exile of 139 journalists and the imprisonment of 221.
In 2015, 25 journalists have already been killed. Many
women journalists have been victims of the worst forms
of sexual and physical violence.
Such organized and methodical targeting of
journalists and other media professionals is a violation
of international humanitarian law. The reason for such
attacks is the very nature of journalists’ work and their
attempt to cover conflicts and wars, most of which are
no longer traditional conflicts and in which at least one
of the parties is a non-State actor. That has led to a
significant increase in the level of violations committed
against journalists and has strengthened impunity for
those responsible.
One of the most significant challenges the international
community faces is ensuring accountability and fighting
against impunity for those responsible for violence and
crimes against journalists and media professionals and
their headquarters during a conflict. We would like
to reiterate, in this context, the need for the United
Nations to help the States experiencing armed conflict
to establish and rebuild national legal institutions
and witness-protection programmes so that States
can prosecute those responsible for attacks against
civilians, including journalists. In certain conditions,
and to guarantee accountability and protection for
such individuals, the international community must
set up commissions to investigate, monitor and gather
information on crimes committed against journalists
and media professionals during armed conflict.
Jordan believes that the time has come to consider
once again a draft international convention on the
international protection of journalists and those in other
dangerous professions. Such a convention would include
provisions and mechanisms to protect journalists
and media outlets during armed conflict in order to
ensure that they are provided with the highest possible
protection. In the same vein, in terms of combating
violations and crimes against journalists and media
professionals, those responsible for such acts who have
enjoyed impunity must be prosecuted. That must be a
priority for the United Nations. Peacekeeping operations
should therefore also work with State institutions and
parties to the conflict to raise awareness among them of

20/31

27/05/2015

the legal protection that journalists benefit from during
armed conflict and the risks that such attacks pose
for them. More pressure needs to be exerted to ensure
greater protection for journalists and prosecution of
those responsible for attacks against them.
The goal of the journalists and media professionals
working in conflict zones is to have direct access to
events as they unfold in order to shed light on the
facts and communicate them in a frank, objective and
complete manner. We would like to reiterate what
has already been stated today, namely, the need for
media organizations to offer training programmes for
journalists and media professionals who are covering
events in conflict areas. It is essential to bolster their
ability to deal with the kind of dangerous situations that
they could face and to ensure their physical protection
in carrying out their job. Along the same lines, efforts
must be promoted to ensure the highest quality medical
service to journalists and media professionals who are
victims and to offer them the necessary psychological,
social and legal support when they are wounded in the
course of their work.
Finally, allow me to reiterate Jordan’s support for
the protection of civilians, including journalists and
media professionals in armed conflict. We pay tribute
to those who have paid the ultimate sacrifice in trying
to shed light on the facts during armed conflict and
thus promoting international peace and security.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I welcome
the adoption of resolution 2222 (2015) — the first in
nine years on this important issue — and congratulate
you, Sir, on the leadership Lithuania has shown in
moving the issue forward.
I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
for his insightful briefing and Director-General Deloire
and Ms. Pearl for their moving testimony today. I pay
tribute to them and their colleagues for their work in
truly difficult circumstances. I was particularly struck
by the individual stories of bravery that we heard
regarding the journalists with moral courage who gave
their lives in pursuit of their profession so that all of
us may have a better understanding of the truth than
the terrorist organizations or oppressive regimes would
like us to have.
The protection of journalists, both in conflict and in
peace, is an essential tenet of any functioning society.
The freedom of journalists to report unhindered and

15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

unharmed is a vital tool to help hold authority to
account. It is a building-block of an open society and
an effective democracy. Sadly, this year we have seen
25 journalists killed around the world, and we are not
even halfway through the year. To that number, we
can add countless more who have been intimidated,
injured, detained or kidnapped. The numbers keep
growing. Only last week, in South Sudan, Pow James
Raeth, a young talented radio journalist, was shot and
killed with his friend Yohanes Pal Kwek as they crossed
the street in Akobo. We offer our condolences to their
friends and family and to those of all the journalists
who have lost their lives this year.
We are also concerned by growing levels of
harassment of journalists. Recent reports of intimidation
and attacks on radio stations and newspapers in Burundi
are a worrying example. We call on the Government
there to promote an environment where journalists are
free to report on political developments without fear of
reprisal. The current media blackout will only serve to
increase uncertainty and tension in an already fragile
environment.
Today, journalists face new threats. The emergence
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and other
violent extremist non-State actors has created new
risks, both in conflict areas and in areas that were once
seen as bastions of journalistic freedom. This has not
been seen more clearly than in the brutal and senseless
murder of 10 employees of Charlie Hebdo in Paris
in January. Because of that single day of barbarism,
more journalists have now died in France than any
other country this year. Together with the high-profile
killings of Steven Sotloff, Kenji Goto, James Foley and
many others, it is clear that journalists have become
even greater targets for terror, whether they are in a
conflict area or not.
We must end impunity for those who target
journalists. In 90 per cent of cases of murdered
journalists, there are no convictions. That is not
acceptable. Those who commit such crimes must
be held to account, whoever they are. The failure of
States to do so only perpetuates the culture of impunity
and so precipitates further attacks. We welcome the
fact that today the Council unanimously adopted the
resolution urging Member States to conduct impartial,
independent and effective investigations to bring
perpetrators of crimes against journalists to justice.
As we implement resolution 2222 (2015), we must
update our concept of journalism for the twenty-first

S/PV.7450

century. In this world of Twitter and YouTube, there
have been great changes to the way in which people
receive news. We need to ensure that we also work
to protect bloggers and social media activists. In
Bangladesh, three secularist bloggers have already
been murdered this year. The latest, Ananta Bijoy Das,
was killed outside his home earlier this month. These
deaths have created a culture of fear that has closed
down the space for free speech in Bangladesh.
The United Kingdom is supporting countries to
keep that space open. In the Sudan, we have funded
75 community correspondents in Kassala, El Gezira
and Blue Nile states. They will help raise awareness
of social issues and ensure that communities have a
voice. In Tunisia, we are supporting the Government
and media institutions in strengthening the legal and
regulatory framework that protects media freedom.
We call on all Member States to support journalists in
whatever ways they can.
Resolution 2222 (2015) recognizes not only the
need to protect journalists, but also the contribution that
journalists can make to protecting others. Journalists
risk life and limb to bring focus to some of the world’s
most pressing problems, and bring them to the attention
of the world at large. Would we know the true horror of
the Syrian conflict without the bravery of journalists
willing to work in the region? They and so many others
give voice to those who have lost their own.
It is therefore in the interests of us all to protect
journalists and the work that they do. Through their
investigations and reporting, the media can bring to
light human rights violations. They can act as an early
warning mechanism for impending conflict, atrocities
or humanitarian disaster. Their insights from difficult
and inaccessible places have spurred the international
community to action on issues that otherwise might
have been missed. Protecting journalists so that they
can carry out this role in future is therefore a vital part
of the work of the Council. Through resolution 2222
(2015) today, I believe that we have taken an important
step towards recognizing that.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): My delegation
commends the Lithuanian presidency for holding
this open debate on the protection of journalists in
conflict situations. We welcome you, Sir, and thank
you for coming to New York to participate in this
important debate. We also thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson. We welcome the presence here
of Mr. Christophe Deloire and Ms. Mariane Pearl of the

15-1526321/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

27/05/2015

Daniel Pearl Foundation and thank them for briefing the
Council, and especially for sharing with us their very
insightful remarks, which are an important contribution
to our debate this morning.

also recognizes the right to freedom of information as
the basis of a plural society in which the fundamental
rights of citizens must be respected within the primacy
of the law.

While States bear the primary responsibility for
the protection of civilians, including journalists, as
highlighted in resolution 1738 (2006), the international
community has a subsidiary but very important
role to play in addressing this very serious problem.
Journalists face risks in conflict zones: abduction,
hostage-taking, harassment, intidimidation, forced
disappearance, arbitrary detention, torture and illegal
arrest, in clear violation of international humanitarian
law. According to Reporters Without Borders, in 2014
alone 69 journalists were killed in the discharge of
their honourable duties. This year, 25 have been killed,
13 of them in countries on the Security Council’s
agenda: five in South Sudan, two in Iraq, two in
Yemen, two in Ukraine, and one each in Syria and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Journalists often draw attention to and witness
grave violations of international humanitarian and
human rights law, especially by reporting on situations
that often amount to threats to international peace and
security. We value the United Nations Plan of Action
on the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity,
approved in 2012 by UNESCO, which has helped States
to develop specific legislative mechanisms regarding
the freedom of expression.

While the majority of victims are male journalists,
women are increasingly subject to violations of their
integrity while performing their duties in conflict
situations. Women journalists face additional risks
related to, among other things, gender-based prejudices,
sexual harassment and intimidation, and sexual
violence and abuse in detention. This implies that
there is a need for a gender-perspective approach when
considering measures to address the issue of violence
against journalists.
Nowadays, threats are not faced exclusively
by traditional journalists. Those engaged in social
media — bloggers and others using modern information
technologies to communicate, disseminate information
and express points of view — also frequently find
themselves in danger.
Angola, my country, attaches great importance
to the protection of civilians in conflict situations,
and particularly to the protection of journalists, in
accordance with the Geneva Conventions, including the
1949 Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment of
Prisoners of War and the Additional Protocols of 1977, in
particular article 79 of Additional Protocol I regarding
the protection of journalists in areas of armed conflict.
In Angola, the freedom of information and expression
is granted by the Constitution, which recognizes the
right of all citizens to express, disseminate and freely
share their thoughts, ideas and opinions by word, image
or other means of communication. The Constitution
22/31

Despite the increased attention given by the
international community and the States Members of
the United Nations, and the Security Council’s action
on the issue, including the adoption of resolution 1738
(2006), violence against journalists persists. The most
recent report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians (S/2013/689) highlights the fact that
accountability for the perpetrators of attacks against
journalists is virtually non-existent. This is a situation
that cannot prevail. Those responsible for violations and
attacks against journalists must be held accountable. We
believe that combating impunity is an important means
of ensuring greater safety and protection for journalists
in conflict zones. It is with dismay that we witness the
current trend of threats against journalists,including
the terror tactics of war used by some terrorist groups,
such as the recent beheading of journalists in Syria by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham.
To conclude, we reiterate the important role that
regional and subregional organizations can play in
ensuring the protection of journalists and associated
personnel in armed conflict, and the need to render
more effective the cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations. We are convinced
that journalists can play a very important role when
reporting events with objectivity and professionalism.
The Security Council should continue to pay more
attention to the protection of journalists, and the
Secretary-General could include more detailed
information on the situation of journalists in conflicts
zones, both in his reports on the protection of civilians
and in his country-specific reports.
With respect to our adoption today of resolution
2222 (2015), which Angola co-sponsored, we think that
the Council is pointing in the correct direction by acting
on an area that has not yet been sufficiently covered.
15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

For that, we again thank the Lithuanian presidency for
bringing it to the Council.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
warmly welcomes you, Mr. President, as well as
other ministers present here today. We are especially
indebted to the delegation of Lithuania for organizing
this important debate on the protection of journalists
in conflict situations and for the concept note provided
to guide our discussions (S/2015/307, annex). We thank
the Deputy Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Eliasson, for his
briefing. Mr. Christophe Deloire and Ms. Mariane Pearl
have inspired us with their remarkable testimonies, and
we are eternally grateful.
It is widely acknowledged that journalists play
a vital role in keeping the international community
informed about developments in situations of armed
conflict. They sometimes do this at great risk to their
lives. Journalists have been kidnapped, tortured and
killed while reporting wars, riots, demonstrations and
other civil disturbances. According to the Committee
to Protect Journalists, more than 1,129 journalists
have been killed since 1992. Many others have been
imprisoned or have disappeared. This underscores
the grave dangers that journalists face in the line of
duty and the need for the international community to
continue to pay attention to issues that pertain to their
protection.
Journalists in different and complex situations are
offered the same level of protection under international
humanitarian law as civilians. However, the reality
on the ground is vastly different. It is evident that
international norms have not been able to adequately
protect journalists working in situations of armed
conflicts. Clearly, then, much more needs to be done in
order to ensure that these norms are upheld in order to
grant journalists the protection that they deserve.
States bear the primary responsibility to protect
journalists in conflict situations, and they must take
decisive action in consonance with their obligations
under international humanitarian law. Lack of action
creates room for impunity on the part of offenders and
increases the risk to journalists working in conflict
zones. We do acknowledge, however, that conflicts
often occur in an atmosphere of lawlessness where
governance structures are weak and State authority is
absent. It is in this political and security vacuum that
terrorists, extremist groups and criminal networks
present a major challenge in the protection of civilians,
including journalists. These groups generally act with

S/PV.7450

total disregard for human rights and international
humanitarian law. This can be clearly seen in grave
crimes being committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and other terrorist
and extremist groups.
Nigeria acknowledges the importance that the
Security Council attaches to the protection of journalists
in conflict situations. The adoption of resolution 1738
(2006) was a milestone in the annals of the Council.
Resolution 2222 (2015), which the Council adopted this
morning, builds significantly on resolution 1738 (2006).
It provides a framework for the United Nations and the
international community to ensure the protection of
journalists in situations of violent conflict.
Of particular significance is the request in the
resolution that the Secretary-General include in his
reports the issue of the safety of journalists as a sub-item
of the protection of civilians in armed conflict. We
believe that this will raise the profile of this important
subject in the context of the Security Council’s
engagement with the United Nations Secretariat. It will
also allow the Council to closely monitor developments
in conflict situations on its agenda and to assess
the extent to which its resolutions pertaining to the
protection of journalists are being implemented.
As a country steadily but resolutely consolidating
its democratic institutions, Nigeria is committed to the
rule of law. Indeed, Nigeria respects and upholds the
rights of journalists to perform their duties without
hindrance. Our Constitution guarantees freedom of
expression, freedom of the press and freedom of thought.
On 27 May 2011, the Nigerian National Assembly passed
the Freedom of Information Bill, which the President
signed into law the following day. The act reinforces
the civil liberties enjoyed by journalists and promotes
transparency and accountability in governance.
At the multilateral level, Nigeria has demonstrated
its preparedness to collaborate with other States in
the promotion of media freedom in the age of social
media. This is especially exemplified by our role as
one of the six lead sponsors of the first-ever Human
Rights Council resolution on freedom of expression on
the Internet (resolution 20/8), adopted by consensus
on 5 July 2012 at the Council’s twentieth session. The
growing importance of the Internet as a means of
disseminating and receiving information underscored
our decision to work together with delegations of
Brazil, Sweden, Turkey, Tunisia and the United States

15-1526323/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

for the adoption of this landmark resolution. Today’s
resolution 2222 (2015) firmly builds on that scaffold.
The protection of journalists in conflict situations is
a challenge for the international community. It requires
a global effort, with all hands on deck. We encourage
all United Nations Member States to create conditions
suitable for journalists to carry out their essential work.
On our part, we assure the international community of
our firm and continuing commitment to engage with
all stakeholders in furtherance of the protection of
journalists.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the initiative of Lithuania to convene today’s
open debate on the protection of journalists in armed
conflict. We welcome Foreign Minister Linkevičius
as he comes to New York to preside over today’s
meeting. I wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Eliasson, for his briefing. China has listened
attentively to the statements of the representatives of
non-governmental organizations.
Journalists and media workers in armed conflicts
constitute a special group. Devoted to their professional
mandates and missions, they provide the public with
their first-hand information at risk to their lives in
armed conflicts. At the same time, they are defenceless
and vulnerable civilians, constantly faced with the
risks of being attacked, kidnapped and even deprived
of their lives. We pay tribute to these journalists
and media professionals who defy risks to their own
safety when they venture into the foreground of armed
conflict to provide coverage. In the past, numerous
innocent journalists and media professionals have
been attacked or even killed in armed conflicts. China
strongly condemns any and all atrocities committed
against journalists and media workers in armed
conflicts, particularly deliberate attacks on and murder
of journalists. We wish to extend our condolences to
fallen journalists, media workers and their families.
China calls upon the concerned parties to conflicts to
put a true end to deliberate attacks and other atrocities
against journalists and media workers. We support the
international community in taking effective actions
to protect journalists from being harmed in armed
conflicts. I wish now to make the following five points.
First, protecting journalists in armed conflict
is an important part of the protection of civilians.
Journalists not involved in hostilities and conflicts
should be protected under international humanitarian
law, just like other civilians. The relevant Security
24/31

27/05/2015

Council resolutions and presidential statements on the
protection of civilians have set forth the basic principles
and created an important framework for protecting
journalists from the harm of conflicts and as such they
should be effectively observed. The comprehensive
implementation of the aforementioned resolutions and
presidential statements by the international community
is an effective means for promoting the protection of
journalists in armed conflicts.
Secondly, parties to conflict should seriously
shoulder the important responsibility of protecting
journalists in armed conflicts. They should, in line with
their obligations under the Geneva Convention and other
international law, effectively fulfil their responsibilities
to protect journalists and prevent and stop atrocities
from occurring. On the other hand, journalists and
media workers should observe professional ethics and
practice fairness and objectivity in their coverage. They
should respect local cultural traditions and customs,
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of countries,
observe the laws and regulations of host countries and
refrain from becoming a party to conflicts. However,
under no circumstances is any party allowed to inflict
deliberate harm or atrocities upon journalists when they
lawfully perform their working duties, no one, by law,
is allowed to inflict deliberate harm or atrocities upon
them. At the same time, when journalists and media
workers enter areas of armed conflict, we hope they
adopt an elevated sense of self-protection so as to avoid
unnecessary casualties.
Thirdly, the international community should
coordinate its fight against attacks and atrocities against
journalists. The international community should,
on the basis of respect for the judicial sovereignty
of the countries concerned, step up its fight against
deliberate attacks and atrocities against journalists in
armed conflict, as these acts contravene international
humanitarian law. A zero-tolerance policy should
be adopted against deliberate attacks and atrocities
committed against journalists in armed conflict, and
perpetrators should meet with severe punishment. The
United Nations should also strengthen its cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, taking
advantage of their unique strengths so as to form
international synergies.
Fourthly, the proper handling of atrocities
committed against journalists by terrorist extremist
forces is one of the important priorities in protecting
journalists in armed conflicts. In recent years, there

15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

have been frequent instances of deliberate killings
and atrocities committed against journalists by some
terrorist and extremist forces. The international
community should attach the highest priority to this
problem by intensifying its fight against terrorism. At
the same time, it is essential to strengthen coordination
and cooperation in order to eliminate the fertile soil in
which terrorist activities are bred and from which they
are spread so as to eliminate the real threats faced by
journalists in their work.
Fifthly, the various United Nations agencies should
share out and coordinate their responsibilities and
jointly promote the protection of journalists in armed
conflict. China appreciates the efforts of UNESCO,
the Human Rights Council and other agencies to
safeguard and promote the lawful rights of journalists
and strengthen their protection in armed conflict. It is
hoped that the various United Nations agencies will
work according to their respective mandates to form
synergies in order to jointly create a safe environment
for protecting journalists in armed conflict.
The Security Council shoulders the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace
and security, working effectively in the fields of
peacekaing, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It has
made positive contributions to attaining the goal of
protecting civilians in armed conflict, in particular
journalists and media workers. China is ready to work
with the international community to push forward the
comprehensive implementation of relevant Security
Council resolutions and presidential statements and
contribute to realizing the goal of protecting journalists
and media professionals in armed conflicts.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and thank the Lithuanian delegation for convening
today’s debate and the concept note (S/2015/307, annex).
We also welcome the briefings by Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson, Director-General of Reporters
Without Borders Christophe Deloire, and Ms. Mariane
Pearl of the Daniel Pearl Foundation.
Today’s debate concerns a central component in the
protection of civilians in armed conflict and the need
for caution in the application of universal principles
and rights. Journalists and media workers require
special attention because of the growing dangers and
risks they face when they take on the responsibilities
of bringing critical information to the community and
of amplifying the voices of civil society. Resolution

S/PV.7450

2222 (2015) adopted today recognizes this concern
and stresses the importance of the work of journalists,
professionals of the media and associated personnel.
Accordingly, my delegation joined in co-sponsoring it.
The year 2014 was marked by the threat, kidnapping
and murder of journalists and the media workers in
practically all armed conflicts. These attacks must
not be understood solely as a violation of international
humanitarian law but as a direct attack on human rights
that seeks to curtail the right to freedom of expression
and the right of citizens to be informed. Impunity
for attacks on journalists and on the free exercise of
the profession is unacceptable. It limits access to
information, discourages work in conflict zones and
creates fear of journalistic research and expression,
all of which makes political and humanitarian crises
invisible in public discourse, hindering an early
response to conflict situations.
In addressing these scenarios and ensuring the
adequate protection of journalists and media workers,
we consider it important to increase international and
regional cooperation and coordination through the
exchange of best practices and technical assistance. In
this regard, the implementation of the UNESCO’s United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity is crucial to promoting a safe and
free environment for journalists and media workers,
particularly in conflict situations, in order to contribute
to international peace and security.
The right to freedom of expression, especially
freedom of the press, is essential if there is to be
an informed and active citizenry committed to the
defence of democracy and peace. Similarly, freedom of
expression and information facilitates the empowerment
of women and their inclusion in various processes and
in decision-making, thereby promoting equality.
Developing a catalogue of best practices and
lessons learned for disseminating and exchanging
experiences with other regions on a voluntary basis
is a way to improve the security environment for
journalists. On the other hand, in those scenarios
where there are peacekeeping operations and special
political missions, we call upon them to incorporate,
in their periodic reports, monitoring and reporting on
violations and abuses committed against them. The
Organization can transfer, through its operations,
missions and specialized agencies, capacities for
adequately protecting journalists in conflict zones.

15-1526325/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In conclusion, I reiterate our appreciation to the
Lithuanian presidency for bringing this issue back to
the Council for consideration, because in protecting
journalists and their role, we are promoting conditions
conducive to international peace and security, which is
priority task for the Council, and strengthening the rule
of law and democracy.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for
presiding over this open debate and for your presence
among us. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson; Mr. Christopher Deloire, DirectorGeneral of Reporters Without Borders; and Ms. Mariane
Pearl, representative of the Daniel Pearl Foundation.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
in the strongest possible terms acts violence against
journalists covering armed conflict, and calls for
full respect for the international humanitarian law
that protects them as civilians, in accordance with
the provisions of the Third Geneva Convention. In
recent years, particularly given the proliferation and
strengthening of terrorist groups in various regions of
the Middle East and Africa, we have witnessed how
the practice of journalism has become more dangerous,
claiming the lives of many and, in some cases, with a
brutality that has served to instil fear. We need only
recall the perversity of the beheadings committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham and its media
savvy to understand the danger facing humankind,
including journalists. This practice is a reality that we
regret and repudiate, and we call for those responsible
for such heinous acts to be brought to justice.
Journalists in armed conflicts incur significant
risks by denouncing the atrocities perpetrated by the
warring parties, which in many instances makes them
the military targets of non-State and State actors, in
violation of international humanitarian law. During the
51 days of the Israeli military aggression in the Gaza
Strip in 2014, 2,220 civilians were killed, of whom
17 were journalists — 16 Palestinians and an Italian
photographer.
Resolution 1738 (2006) helped to address this
issue in the framework of the protection of civilians,
including journalists. We believe that international
humanitarian law provides an appropriate platform
for the protection of professional journalists in armed
conflicts, in their civilian capacity. Our country will
continue to advocate tirelessly for the construction of
a democratic environment in journalism with a social
26/31

27/05/2015

service orientation, denouncing the manipulation of
information and emphasizing ethics and responsibility
in communications as essential foundations for
achieving world peace. In that regard, the protection of
journalists is our priority.
Venezuela reaffirms the position expressed on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement at its ministerial
meeting in Algeria in May 2014, in which it called
for the responsible use and treatment of information
by the media in accordance with codes of conduct
and professional ethics in all their forms. It should be
recalled that the world has lived through sad episodes
like that in Rwanda, where the irresponsible and
politically motivated use of the media fueled mass
hatred against other ethnic groups and the radio was
used as a tool to accelerate the genocide against the
Tutsi under fallacious and discriminatory arguments
that only amplified the logic of death.
In 1980, UNESCO published the report entitled
Many Voices One World, also known as the MacBride
report, which set out the basic elements for creating a
new world order of communication and information.
Its recommendations are now more relevant than ever.
They include adherence to ethical principles, the facts
and the transmission of truth above the interests of
the owners of the media, which are guided more by
economic and political interests than by respect for the
responsibility to report.
It should be noted that seven global corporations
control over 80 per cent of communications throughout
the world. This being so, the balanced distribution
of information is hindered beyond conflict zones
where the interests of the corporate media respond
to or coincide with those of major Powers involved
politically or militarily in the conflict. In recent
history, the corporate media have blatantly distorted
reality by making tendentious use of facts in order to
influence public opinion on behalf of the political and
military interests of certain countries. In the case of
Iraq, I recall the resort to the excuse of the existence of
weapons of mass destruction that proved in time to be
non-existent, and the role of such corporations to justify
the invasion of that country in 2003. Unfortunately, that
practice has not changed. Today, the same patterns of
misinformation are being trotted out in the treatment of
conflicts afflicting the Middle East and Africa.
I wish to draw a clear distinction between journalists
and the corporate media. We pay tribute to the honest
and dangerous work done by professional journalists
15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

who risk their lives in conflict situations for the right
and duty to report.
Finally, the work of journalists in conflict zones
is key to describing the evolution of events in which
civilian lives are subject to the actions of armed actors.
Journalists are called on to contribute with the truth
to the building of world of peace. Society requires
journalism to be practiced in a balanced and impartial
manner. We must protect and guarantee the physical
safety and lives of journalists so that they can play their
full roll in society.
The President: I remind speakers to kindly limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order
to ensure that we can complete our work expeditiously.
I also appeal to speakers to deliver their statements at a
moderate speed so that interpretation can be provided
properly.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Latvia.
Mr. Rinkēvičs (Latvia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for presiding over this very timely debate on the
protection of journalists in conflict situations. Let me
also thank Mr. Jan Eliasson, Mr. Christophe Deloire
and Ms. Mariane Pearl for their informative briefings
and tireless work on this very complex subject.
As early as 1946, at its very first session, the
General Assembly adopted resolution 59 (I), affirming
that freedom of information is the cornerstone of all the
freedoms to which the United Nations is committed. The
right of freedom of expression depends upon the safety
of journalists and media professionals. Furthermore,
the work done by journalists contributes to increased
accountability, transparency and the rule of law.
Dramatic changes in the media landscape, in
particular the introduction of new technologies, have
resulted in an unprecedented flow of information,
including from conflict settings. The independent
voices of journalists and reports from conflict zones
give the international community a unique insight
into realities on the ground. They serve as a catalyst
for rapid and effective response, and are therefore vital
to the survival of a conflict-affected society. In this
context, it is extremely important not only to safeguard
but to strengthen the ability of the media to provide
independent and reliable information.
Freedom of expression, both offline and online,
and strengthening the independence of media are long-

S/PV.7450

standing priorities of Latvia. We promote them as a
part of our presidency of the Council of the European
Union and in international organizations, including at
the Human Rights Council. At the beginning of May,
a conference to mark UNESCO World Press Freedom
Day took place in Riga. The resulting Riga declaration
underlines our commitment to promote a legal and
institutional environment that ensures the safety of
journalists, the urgent need to end impunity for crimes
against journalists and media workers, and the essential
contribution of journalists to the enjoyment of all human
rights and the pursuit of sustainable development.
The international community has addressed the
protection of journalists in conflict areas on numerous
occasions. In 2006, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1738 (2006), which calls for urgent action.
More recently, the Human Rights Council and UNESCO
have made the protection of journalists a top priority.
Latvia endorses those efforts, especially the United
Nations Plan of Action on the Safety of Journalists and
the Issue of Impunity, which is not only a statement of
ideals, but a tool for change. Unfortunately, today the
safety of journalists and the issue of impunity are once
again at the top of the international agenda.
Deliberate attempts to target journalists in conflict
zones continue to increase in scale and number. Even
though journalists working in conflict zones have
the status of civilians and enjoy a range of protection
guarantees, they continue to face manifold threats,
including assassination, harassment, intimidation and
kidnapping. Such attacks constitute a clear breach
of international humanitarian law. Threats posed by
terrorist and radical extremist groups against journalists
have also become a major challenge. Nor should we
ignore the fact that women journalists are particularly
vulnerable and require special attention. For all those
reasons, the adoption of the resolution 2222 (2015)
today, which addresses the new challenges to the safety
of journalists, is of particular importance and we praise
this achievement.
While there is clarity on what we would like to
achieve, there is uncertainty on how to accomplish it.
I believe that there are four elements that are essential.
First, there must be clear political will, which is at
the heart of any successful Government strategy.
Secondly, there must be a comprehensive, coherent
and action-oriented approach to the protection of all
civilians, including journalists, in conflict situations.
Thirdly, there must be a broad strategy for conflict

15-1526327/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

prevention that includes as its cornerstone the promotion
of freedom of expression and access to information and
media freedom. Such an approach calls for training
programmes for journalists and the active involvement
of civil society. And fourthly, there must be an enhanced
role for United Nations peacekeeping operations and
strengthened international and regional cooperation.
Now is the time when international organizations,
Governments, media and others should work together
to strengthen the means and mechanisms for protecting
journalists and holding accountable those who attack
them. If there is one message today’s meeting sends to
journalists in conflict zones, this is it. Only through
our common efforts will we ensure that no journalist in
the twenty-first century, offline or online, is attacked,
intimidated and/or sealed off from the rest of the world
by a new iron curtain.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First, I would like to
thank the Lithuanian presidency for convening this
high-level open debate on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, with a specific focus on the protection of
journalists. I also thank your delegation for submitting
a concept note (S/2015/307, annex) on the topic. We are
also grateful to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his briefing on the matter.
Under international humanitarian law, journalists
in armed conflict are classified as civilians, and as
such should be afforded the same protection. That norm
was recalled in resolution 1738 (2006), the presidential
statement of 12 February 2013 (S/PRST/2013/2) and
the Council’s resolution 2222 (2015), just adopted. It is
also widely recognized that the rule according to which
civilian journalists engaged in professional missions in
areas of armed conflict must be respected and protected
as long as they are not taking a direct part in hostilities,
constitutes a norm of customary international law
applicable in both international and non-international
armed conflicts.
Indeed, existing rules as well as other important
efforts undertaken at the international level, including
in particular by the Security Council, provide a solid
basis for protection. At the same time, there is a
significant gap between the normative standards and
their implementation. The current state of the protection
of civilians in situations of armed conflict, including
journalists, leaves little room for optimism. Attacks

28/31

27/05/2015

against journalists, media professionals and associated
personnel in armed conflicts continue, while impunity
for perpetrators remains widespread and represents the
biggest obstacle to ensuring the safety of journalists.
We pay tribute to journalists who under dangerous
circumstances bravely perform their duties to inform
the broader public about threats to international peace
and security. The increased brutality of armed conflicts
and the changing nature of warfare and terrorist and
separatist threats nowadays give rise to the need for
greater measures of protection for journalists at the
national and international levels. Apart from preventive
diplomacy efforts and the earliest peaceful settlement
of disputes and conflicts, the best deterrent, is,
undoubtedly, ensuring a speedy end to impunity and
holding to account those responsible for violations of
international humanitarian law. Such violations also
give rise to the right of victims to an effective remedy.
Moreover, as the Secretary-General notes in his most
recent report (S/2013/689), accountability should also
be understood more broadly as encompassing the
political, legal and moral responsibility of individuals
and institutions for past violations.
It is obvious that the problem cannot be addressed
effectively unless there is a willingness on the part of
States and the broader international community to take
all the necessary measures to ensure that the existing
norms and rules are fully respected and implemented
and that those responsible for violations of international
humanitarian law are brought to justice. Commitments
to protection efforts must be free of selectivity and
politically motivated approaches.
The war waged against Azerbaijan by neighbouring
Armenia claimed the lives of tens of thousands of
civilians, including a number of journalists who were
killed as a result of deliberate attacks when reporting
from the conflict zone. In its relevant resolutions, the
Security Council condemns the violations of international
humanitarian law committed during the conflict,
including attacks on civilians and the bombardment
of inhabited areas. However, the perpetrators of those
violations, among them the members of the political
and military leadership of Armenia, continue to enjoy
impunity, and such a situation represents a serious
challenge both to upholding individual rights and
freedoms and to ensuring sustainable peace, justice,
truth and reconciliation. Therefore, the international
community should play a more proactive role when

15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

national authorities fail to take the steps necessary to
ensure accountability.
It is important that the Security Council consistently
maintain its focus on the topic and systematically recall
its demand that all parties to armed conflict comply
fully with their obligations under international law
related to the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
including journalists, and that they take all the necessary
measures to prevent attacks against journalists and to
prosecute those responsible for such attacks.
In conclusion, I would like to briefly comment on
the remarks made by the delegation of the United States
with regard to Azerbaijan.
First, the reference to the ongoing criminal case
against Mr. Ismayilova has nothing in common with the
topic of today’s open debate, which is the protection of
journalists in situations of armed conflict.
Secondly, the remarks on the aforementioned
criminal case are irrelevant also in the view of the
mandate of the Security Council, an organ on which
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security lies.
Thirdly, the reference to individual criminal cases
continues interference into the responsibilities of the
law enforcement agencies. Attempts to politicize the
investigation of such cases represent a challenge to the
independence of the judiciary in a sovereign State.
Fourthly, it would be more appropriate, in the
context of the topic of today’s open debate, if the
delegation of the United States would recall the names
of other journalists from Azerbaijan, among them
Salatin Esgerova, Chingiz Mustafayev, Ali Mustafayev
and Osman Mirzoev, who were killed during Armenia’s
aggression against Azerbaijan while performing
their professional duties in the conflict zone. The
perpetrators of the crimes committed against those
journalists continue to enjoy impunity. We have not
noticed that the Government of the United States has
ever cared about those cases.
Finally, I would like once again to commend the
initiative of Lithuania in convening this high-level open
debate to review the implementation of resolution 1738
(2013) and lessons learned.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I thank you,
Madam President, for having convened this timely
debate. I am also grateful to Deputy SecretaryGeneral Jan Eliasson; Mr. Christophe Deloire, from

S/PV.7450

Reporters Without Borders; and Ms. Mariane Pearl,
from the Daniel Pearl Foundation, for their informative
presentations.
Brazil strongly condemns all deliberate attacks
against media professionals, regardless of their
motivation. As we know, international humanitarian
law enshrines the safeguard of both accredited war
correspondents, who are entitled to prisoner-of-war
status, and other journalists, who benefit from the
same comprehensive rights and protections granted to
civilians in situations of armed conflict.
By adopting resolution 1738 (2006), the Council
urged States and all other parties to an armed conflict
to prevent violations of international humanitarian
law against civilians, including journalists, media
professionals and associated personnel. In areas
controlled by non-State actors and terrorist groups, this
issue acquires a special dimension, as pointed out in
the concept note presented by Lithuania (S/2015/307,
annex). We should redouble our efforts to ensure
accountability for perpetrators of crimes against
journalists and to bring to justice those who broadcast
incitement to genocide, crimes against humanity and
other serious violations.
While the safety of all media professionals is a
matter of concern, there is a fundamental distinction to
be made between, on the one hand, threats to journalists
who report from armed conflicts and, on the other, acts
of violence against journalists in circumstances that do
not constitute armed conflicts.
When media professionals are endangered by
a situation that constitutes a threat to international
peace and security, the Council has a clear role to
play; conversely, other bodies of the United Nations
are responsible for promoting a secure environment
for journalists in times of peace. Positive examples of
the latter domain include the General Assembly, which
has proclaimed 2 November as the International Day
to End Impunity for Crimes against Journalists; the
Human Rights Council and its resolutions on the safety
of journalists; and UNESCO, which plays a key role
in implementing the United Nations Plan of Action on
the Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity.
The Security Council should respect these different
initiatives and observe the necessary discipline in this
regard.
The safety and security of journalists can also
be jeopardized by indiscriminate surveillance of

15-1526329/31

S/PV.7450

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

their professional communication. Media personnel
need to protect the privacy, integrity and anonymity
of their sources, particularly in conditions of armed
conflict. Besides violating fundamental human
rights, undermining the foundations of democracy
and challenging the sovereignty of States, secret
surveillance programmes also endanger those whose
very survival may depend on the confidentiality of their
identity or sources, such as investigative journalists
reporting from war-torn regions or areas controlled by
terrorist groups.
Let me recall the latest report (A/69/397) of the
Special Rapporteur on the promotion and protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism, Ben Emmerson. The document
underlines the fact that bulk access technology is
indiscriminately corrosive of online privacy and
therefore poses a direct and ongoing challenge to an
established norm of international law.
Brazil commends the Human Rights Council for
establishing the post of a Special Rapporteur on the
right to privacy, focusing on the challenges arising
from the digital age and new technologies. We were
honoured to facilitate and introduce Human Rights
Council resolution 28/16, which established the Special
Rapporteur on the right to privacy.
The first victim of war is truth, and it is always
important to distinguish journalism from propaganda. A
free, independent and pluralistic media is not only vital
to upholding democracy and promoting human rights;
it is also an indispensable instrument to disseminate
information and alert public opinion to the tragedy of
war and its humanitarian consequences. Accomplishing
this essential duty requires shielding journalists from
harassment and harm. Yet the assignments of media
professionals in armed conflicts are increasingly
perilous, as highlighted by the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the safety of journalism and
the issue of impunity (A/69/268), and far too many
journalists have been killed in the line of duty.
In conclusion, Brazil reiterates its commitment
to the vital endeavour of protecting all journalists
and media personnel in situations of armed conflict.
We all have a stake in the well-being of journalists,
who selflessly risk their lives in order to inform the
international community, including the Security
Council itself, about the complex realities of armed
conflict.

30/31

27/05/2015

Brazil fully endorses the initiatives of the Security
Council, within its Charter responsibilities and
in coherence with the efforts of other multilateral
bodies, to that end. Allow me to quote the SecretaryGeneral’s statement marking World Press Freedom
Day, celebrated on 3 May: “Let us honour the memory
of those who lost their lives, and intensify our efforts
to uphold the fundamental human right to freedom of
expression and press freedom”.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Madam President,
and once again congratulate Lithuania for its very
effective and impactful tenure in the Security Council.
I wish also to thank you for holding this important
debate on the protection of journalists in conflict
situations and thank the Deputy Secretary-General for
his valuable briefing and Mr. Christophe Deloire and
Ms. Mariane Pearl for their compelling testimonies,
each of which underscored the indispensable role that
journalists play in bearing witness to conflict and the
increasingly heavy price that is paid for conveying
information.
Sweden fully associates itself with the statement to
be made later by the observer of the European Union.
We remain deeply concerned by the high number
of acts of violence against journalists and other media
professionals. Freedom of expression is a fundamental
human right. It is an essential part of democracy and
helps shape our understanding of the world, but is not
to be taken for granted; it has to be fought for every day.
We all know that journalists in areas of armed
conflict are to be considered as civilians under
international humanitarian law and therefore respected
and protected as such. Resolution 1738 (2006) recalled
this fact and promised increased attention to the
issue of protecting journalists in armed conflict.
Unfortunately, the safety of journalists is becoming
increasingly threatened. Journalists who are reporting
from conflict areas, but also human rights defenders
and others promoting freedom of expression, including
new media, are ever more frequently falling victim to
attacks, persecution and abuse.
Syria provides a tragic illustration of, inter alia, the
perils associated with reporting from areas of conflict.
Swedish journalists were abducted but were recently
freed. However, we fully realize that others have been
less fortunate, and we are appalled by the number
of journalists who have lost their lives, including a

15-15263

27/05/2015

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Japanese journalist at the hands of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant earlier this year.
We, the international community, have an obligation
to react and to take further steps to prevent violence and
to promote a safe environment for journalists and other
media actors. I would like to highlight three points in
particular.
First, we must continue to demand and explore
ways to ensure that the protection awarded to
journalists under international law is fully respected
and upheld. We welcome the adoption once again by
the Third Committee of a draft resolution on the safety
of journalists and the issue of impunity, in November
2014, as well as the resolution on the protection of
journalists adopted by the Human Rights Council this
past September.
The Security Council, as well as the entire United
Nations peacebuilding architecture, can also play
important roles by including protection of journalists
as part of the support to rule-of-law institutions
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts, and by
reacting when violations are being committed.
Secondly, impunity must not be tolerated. It is
primarily the responsibility of Governments to protect
journalists, human rights defenders and others promoting
freedom of expression, including our new media, and

S/PV.7450

to allow them to carry out their work independently,
without undue interference and without fear of violence
or persecution. But protection alone is not enough and
States must ensure accountability when crimes have
been committed. The most serious deficiency is not a
lack of rules but a failure to implement existing ones
and to systematically investigate, prosecute and punish
violations.
Thirdly, preventive action is needed in order
to promote the safety of journalists and to fight
impunity. We also need to address the root causes of
violence against journalists. Well functioning and open
institutions are fundamental in that regard. In a way,
media freedom is a litmus test for any society and its
absence can serve as an early warning sign of emerging
conflict. The United Nations Plan of Action on the
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, with
its focus on national capacity-building, deserves to be
highlighted in that context. We of course encourage its
full implementation.
The President: There are still a number of
speakers remaining on my list for this meeting. Given
the lateness of the hour, I intend, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, to suspend the meeting
until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

15-1526331/31
