III,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

international community to develop, as appropriate,
effective measures to ensure the security of nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of
use of nuclear weapons from any quarter,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure the
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons can constitute a positive
contribution to the prevention of the spread of nuclear
weapons,
Recalling its resolution 3261 G (XXIX) of 9 December 1974,
Further recalling its resolution 31/189 C of 21 December 1976,
Bearing in mind paragraph 59 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the General
Assembly, 68 in which it requested the nuclear-weapon
States urgently to conclude, as appropriate, effective
arrangements to assure the non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of the
relevant provisions of the Final Document of the
Tenth Special Session,
Taking into consideration the views and proposals
submitted on this subject at its thirty-third session,
l. Urges that urgent efforts should be made to
conclude effective arrangements, as appropriate, to
assure the non-nuclear-weapon States against the use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons, including consideration of an international convention and of alternative ways and means of achieving this objective;
2. Takes note of the proposals submitted69 and
views expressed70 on this subject at its thirty-third
session and recommends that the Committee on Disarmament should consider them and submit a progress
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth
session;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda
of its thirty-fourth session an item entitled "Strengthening of the security of non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons".
84th plenary meeting
14 December 1978
33/73.

Declaration on the Preparation of Societies for Life in Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling that in the Charter the peoples of the
United Nations proclaimed their determination to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war and
that one of the fundamental purposes of the United
Nations is to maintain international peace and security,
Reaffirming that, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 95 (I) of 11 December 1946,
planning, preparation, initiation or waging of a war
68 /bid.
69 A/C.1/33/L.6,

annex, and A/C.1/33/L.15, annex (see
Official Records of _the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session,
Annexes, agenda item 128, document A/33/426, paras. 5
and 6); A/C.1/33/7, annex.
70 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, First Committee, 20th to 28th and 59th to 61st meetings (A/C.l/33/PV.20-28 and 59-61); and ibid., First Committee, Sessional Fascicle, corrigendum.

55

of aggression are crimes against peace and that, pursuant to the Declaration on Principles of International
Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, of 24 October 1970,71 and the Definition of Aggression of 14 December 1974,72 a war
of aggression constitutes a crime against the peace,
Reaffirming the right of individuals, States and all
mankind to life in peace,
A ware that, since wars begin in the minds of men,
it is in the minds of men that the defences of peace
must be constructed,
Recognizing that peace among nations is mankind's
paramount value, held in the highest esteem by all
principal political, social and religious movements,
Guided by the lofty goal of preparing societies for
and creating conditions of their common existence
and co-operation in peace, equality, mutual confidence
and understanding,
Recognizing the essential role of Governments, as
well as governmental and non-governmental organizations, both national and international, the mass media,
educational processes and teaching methods, in promoting the ideals of peace and understanding among
nations,

Convinced that, in the era of modern scientific and
technological progress, mankind's resources, energy
and creative talents should be directed to the peaceful
economic, social and cultural development of all
countries, should promote the implementation of the
new international economic order and should serve
the raising of the living standards of all nations,
Stressing with utmost concern that the arms race,
in particular in the nuclear field, and the development
of new types and systems of weapons, based on
modern scientific principles and achievements, threaten
world peace,
Recalling that, in the Final Document of the Tenth
Special Session of the General Assembly, 73 the States
Members of the United Nations solemnly reaffirmed
their determination to make further collective efforts
aimed at strengthening peace and international security
~nd eliminating_ !he threat of war, and agreed that,
m order to fac1htate the process of disarmament, it
was necessary to take measures and pursue policies
to strengthen international peace and security and
to build confidence among States,
Reaffirming the principles contained in the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, of 14 December 1960 74 the
Declaration on the Strengthening of Intern~tional
Security, of 16 December 197075 and the Declaration
on the Deepening and Consolidation of International
Detente, of 19 December 1977,76
Recalling the Declaration on the Promotion among
Youth of the Ideals of Peace, Mutual Respect and
Understanding between Peoples, of 7 December
1965, 77
71 Resolution

2625 (XXV), annex.
(XXIX), annex.
n Resolution S-10/2.
H Resolution 1514 (XV).
7 :; Resolution 2734 (XXV).
7B Resolution 32/155.
77 Resolution 2037 (XX).
7 2 Resolution 3314

56

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Further recalling the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, of 10 December 1948, 78 as well as
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, of 16 December 1966,79 and bearing in mind
that the latter states, inter alia, that any propaganda
for war shall be prohibited by law,
I
Solemnly invites all States to guide themselves in
their activities by the recognition of the supreme
importance and necessity of establishing, maintaining
and strengthening a just and durable peace for present
and future generations and, in particular, to observe
the following principles:
1. Every nation and every human being, regardless of race, conscience, language or sex, has the
inherent right to life in peace. Respect for that
right, as well as for the other human rights, is in
the common interest of all mankind and an indispensable condition of advancement of all nations,
large and small, in all fields.
2. A war of aggression, its planning, preparation or initiation are crimes against peace and are
prohibited by international law.
3. In accordance with the purposes and principles of the United Nations, States have the duty
to refrain from propaganda for wars of aggression.
4. Every State, acting in the spirit of friendship
and good-neighbourly relations, has the duty to
promote all-round, mutually advantageous and
equitable political, economic, social and cultural
co-operation with other States, notwithstanding their
socio-economic systems, with a view to securing
their common existence and co-operation in peace,
in conditions of mutual understanding of and
respect for the identity and diversity of all peoples,
and the duty to take up actions conducive to the
furtherance of the ideals of peace, humanism and
freedom.
5. Every State has the duty to respect the right
of all peoples to self-determination, independence,
equality, sovereignty, the territorial integrity of
States and the inviolability of their frontiers, including the right to determine the road of their
development, without interference or intervention
in their internal affairs.
6. A basic instrument of the maintenance of
peace is the elimination of the threat inherent in
the arms race, as well as efforts towards general
and complete disarmament, under effective international control, including partial measures with
that end in view, in accordance with the principles
agreed upon within the United Nations and relevant
international agreements.
7. Every State has the duty to discourage all
manifestations and practices of colonialism, as well
as racism, racial discrimination and apartheid, as
contrary to the right of peoples to self-determination and to other human rights and fundamental
freedoms.
8. Every State has the duty to discourage advocacy of hatred and prejudice against other peoples as contrary to the principles of peaceful coexistence and friendly co-operation.
78 Resolution 217 A

(III).
(XXI), annex.

79 Resolution 2200 A

II
Calls upon all States, in order to implement the
above principles:
(a) To act perseveringly and consistently, with
due regard for the constitutional rights and the role
of the family, the institutions and the organizations
concerned:
( i) To ensure that their policies relevant to the
implementation of the present Declaration,
including educational processes and teaching
methods as well as media information activities, incorporate contents compatible with
the task of the preparation for life in peace
of entire societies and, in particular, the
young generations;
(ii) Therefore, to discourage and eliminate incitement to racial hatred, national or other discrimination, injustice or advocacy of violence
and war;
(b) To develop various forms of bilateral and
multilateral co-operation, also in international, governmental and non-governmental organizations, with a
view to enhancing preparation of societies to live in
peace and, in particular, exchanging experiences on
projects pursued with that end in view;
III
1. Recommends that the governmental and nongovernmental organizations concerned should initiate
appropriate action towards the implementation of the
present Declaration;
2. States that a full implementation of the principles enshrined in the present Declaration calls for
concerted action on the part of Governments, the
1:Jnited Nations and the specialized agencies, in particular the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, as well as other interested international and national organizations, both governmental and non-governmental;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to follow the
progress made in the implementation of the present
Declaration and to submit periodic reports thereon to
the General Assembly, the first such report to be
submitted not later than at its thirty-sixth session.
85th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
33/74.

Non-interference in the internal affairs
of States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 31/91 of 14 December 1976
and 32/153 of 19 December 1977 on non-interference
in the internal affairs of States,
Ta~i'!g note of the reports of the Secretary-Genera[, 8 0
co~tammg the views of Member States on ways by
which greater respect for the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of States can be assured,
1. Urges all States to abide by the provisions of
resolutions 31/91 and 32/153, in which the General
Assembly denounced any form of interference in the
internal or external affairs of States and called upon
so A/32/164 and Add.I, A/32/165 and Add.I
A/33/216 and Add.I.

and 2,
