130

(;eneral Assembl)--Thirty-eighth Session

countries, as well as $76 million in agricultura! inputs for
the rehabilitation of agriculture and animal husbandry;
6. Recognizes the role of the international community,
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the llnited
Nations, the World Food Programmc, the World Food
Council, the Intemational Fund for Agricultura! Development and the World Bank in mobilizing food aid and agricultura! assistance for Africa, and requests existing and
new donar countries to increasc the rcsources required to
meet African needs for food aid and agricultura! dcvelopment;
7. Urges ali the countrics of Africa to continuc to
accord priority to food and agriculture, in accordancc with
their national development plans and programmes, and to
continue to implement measurcs to raisc substantially
their food and agricultura! production in kecping with thc
Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa,
and in this context reaffirms thc important role that
national food strategies. plans and programmes could play
in this proccss;
8. Urges the intemational community to supplcment,
through increased financia! and technical assistancc, on a
priority and long-term basis, the national efforts of African
countries to achieve the goals and objectives set forth in
the Lagos Plan of Action relevant to food and agriculture, 58 taking into account the recommendations of thc
African Ministers for Food and Agriculture at the Twelfth
FAO Regional Conferencc for Africa, 59 in particular the
following objectives:
(a) Significant improvement in their food situation and
laying of the foundations for the attainment of selfsufficiency in cereals, livestock and fish;
(b) Significant progress towards attaining a 50 per cent
reduction in post-harvest losses, through, inter afia, thc
construction of storage facilities;
(e) Improved transport infrastructure to facilitate food
distribution at the nationaL subregional and regional
levels;
(d) Support of indigenous research efforts through
expanded and more effective agricultura! research, with
special emphasis on animal husbandry, improvcd seeds
and an adequate supply of fertilizers, pcsticides and other
chemicals suitable to African conditions;
9, Further urges all relevant organs, organizations and
bodies ofthe United Nations system to expand their training programmes for the building up of national capabilities
for the preparation, execution, monitoring and evaluation
of agricultura! sector projects;
10. Calls upan the intemational communitv to continue to support efforts undertaken by African cÓuntries at
the national, subregional and regional levels to increasc
food production through, inter afia, the provision, on a
priority and long-term basis, of additional financia! and
technical assistance to Africa by organizations of the
United Nations system, such as the Intemational Fund for
Agricultura! Development, the United Nations Development Programme and other organizations involved in the
financing of agriculture development, and through an
increase in lending by the World Bank to the agricultura!
sector in Africa;
11. Recognizes that an intemational vear for the
mobilization of financia! and technological 'resources for
food and agriculture in Africa would be a uscful mechanism for focusing intemational attention on the problem
58NS-ll/14, annex L chap. r

s9 See Food and Agriculturc Organirntion of the l ln,tcd Nathlns, Re¡wrl ,1/

the Twe/fih FAO Regional C'onferencc fi>r ,-Jfnca, .1/gicrs, :! ] Se¡,leml>,•r2 October 1982 (ARC/82/REP).

and could acceleratc the process that would lead to a significant improvement of food and agricultura! production
in Africa;
l 2. Notes that the report of the Secretary-General on
the state oftechnology for food and agriculture in Africa 56
was incomplete in ccrtain rcspccts and that data are still
bcing gathcred, and requests that an updated report he
submitted to the General Assembly at its fortieth session,
through the Economic and Social Council;
l 3. Requests thc Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session, through the
Economic and Social C'ouncil at its second regular session
of l 984, a progress rcport on the implementation of the
prcst'nt resolution.
102nd p/enar_v meeting
19 Decemher I 983

38/160. Co-operation between the United Nations
and the Southern African Development Coordination Conference
The General Assembly,
RccallinR its resolution 3 7/248 of 2 I Dccember 1982,
by which it, intcr afia, requcsted the Secretary-General to

take appropriate mcasures to promote co-operation
between the organs, organizations and bodies of thc
United Nations system and the Southern African Development Co-ordination C'onference,
1/aving considcred the rcport of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Southem African Devclopment Co-ordination ConferL'ncc, 6º
Noting that sorne progress has been made by sorne
organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system in formulating co-operation programmes with the
C'onference,
Noting that somc organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system are exploring ways and means
of forging co-operation links with the Conference,
1. We/comcs thc report ofthe Secretary-General on the
progrcss made in the implementation of General Assembly resolution 37/248; 61
2. Commends the organs, organizations and bodies of
the United Nations system that have already established
contacts with the Southem African Development Coordination Confcrence, in response to resolution 37/248,
and urges them to intensify positively such contacts in
order to accelerate the achievement of the objectives
envisaged in that resolution;
3. Appea/s to ali organs, organizations and bodies of
the Unitcd Nations system that have notas yet done so to
consult constructively with the secretariat of the Confercncc to ensure full implementation of resolution 37 /248;
4. Rcquests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the Executive Sccretary of the Conference, to take appropriate measurcs to promote and harmonize contacts
bctween the United Nations and the Conference;
5. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session a report
on the implcmentation of the present resolution.
!02nd plcnar_¡• meetinJ;
l 9 December 1983
óO A'38,4'1_1_
61 //lid .. S<.'C"I

11\.
