TWENTY-SECOND

YEAR

rd
MEETING: 9 JUNE 1967
8,
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (SIAgenda/ 1353) . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . .
Adoption of theagenda

,.....................................

Page

1

1

Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and
Denmark addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/7902) . . . . . .
Complaint of the representative of the United Arab Republic in a letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and security in the Middle East
and endangering international peace and security” (5/7907) . , . . . . . . . . . . .
Letter,dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/7910) . . . , , . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . , . . . . .

S/PV. 1353

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of fhe Officia1 Records of the Security Council, The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN HUNDRED AND FIFTY-THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Friday, 9 June 1967, at 7.15 p.m.
President: Mr. Hans R. TABOR (Denmark).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Creat
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l353)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/7902).
3. Complaint of the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “Israel aggressive
policy, .its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international peace and security” (S/7907).
4. Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/79 10).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 23 May 1967 from the Permanent Representatives of Canada and Denmark addressed ta the President
of the Security Council (S/7902)
Complaint of ‘the representative of the United Arab
Republic in a letter to the President of the Security
Council dated 27 May 1967 entitled: “lsrael aggressive
policy, its repeated aggression threatening peace and
security in the Middle East and endangering international
peace and security” (S/7907)

consent of the Council, invite the representatives of Israel,
the United Arab Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait,
Tunisia and Libya ta take the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber in order to participate
without vote in the discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael (Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic), Mr. G. J.
Tomeh (Syria), Mr. M. H. El-Farra (Jordan), Mr. S.
Chammas (Lebanon), Mr. K. Khalaf (Iraq), Mr. A. II:
Benhima (Morocco), Mr. J. M. Baroody (Saudi Arabia),
Mr, S. Al-Shaheen (Kuwait), Mr. M. Mestiri (Tunisia) and
Mr. W. El Bouri (Libya) took the places reservedfor them.
2. The PRESIDENT:
Two of the parties directly concerned have asked whether it would be possible for them to
be seated at the Council table, since it is very difficult for
them to participate in the Council debate when they are
not seated at the Council table. 1 would therefore put it to
the members of the Council whether we could not seat the
three countries directly involved, that is, the United Arab
Republic, the Syrian Arab Republic and .Isracl, at the
Council table. If there is no objection, 1 shah now invite the
representatives of those three. countries to take places at the
Council table. As there is no objection, 1 shall take it that it
is SOdecided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. G. Rafael-(Israel),
Mr. M. A. El Kony (United Arab Republic) and Mr., G. J.
Tomeh (Syria) took places at the Council table,
3. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, while 1 share
the view which you have just expressed regarding the
seating at this table of representatives who are directly
concerned with the question we are discussing, 1 think that
it would also be in order to seethe representative of Jordan
at this table. 1 therefore suggest to you that the representative of Jordan should be given the opportunity of taking a
place at the table.
4. The PRESIDENT:
1 have no objection. Does the
Council agree that we should also seat the representative ,of
Jordan at the Council table? As there is no objection, 1
shall take it that it is SOdecided.

Letter dated 29 May 1967 from the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/7910).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M, H. El-Farra
(Jordan) took a place at the Council table.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
previouslj, taken by the Council, 1 shall now, with the

5. The PRESIDENT: The Council Will now continue its
consideration of the three items on its agenda.

6. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, we are
obliged to speak on a point of order.

the Council, as 1 did the other day to the representative of
the Soviet Union.

7. In accordance with a commendable tradition in this
Council, we are guided by elementary principles of punctuality and punctiliousness in our meetings. It is regrettable
that there has been a very considerable delay , of nearly one
hour, starting our meeting today. 1 know that the President,
as is often said, is in the hands of the Council. 1 am sure
that you had adequate grounds to justify such a long delay
in opening a meeting of the Council circumstances when
even a single minute? delay is intolerable. 1 would like to
,rriake some inquiries about the reasons for such a long delay
in opening the Council’s meeting. The President of the
Security Council wasin the hands of which members of the
Security Council? In any case, no one provided us with any
information on this delay, and 1 think that other members
of the Council as well were kept in ignorance of the reasons
for .the delay.

lits) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, may 1 thank

14, Mr. FEDORENKO

(Union of Soviet Socialist Repub-

you for your explanation. The picture has now been
clarified and 1 should like to point out, with your
indulgence, that we have a President of the Security
Council who is at the disposa1 not of one or more members
of the Security Council, but of ail the members, and if
someone needs to do something, then delegations should
consult one another and’ not impose their own Will and
delay the beginning of a meeting on such an exceptional
situation for a whole hour merely because someone wished
to telephone Washington.
15. We have heard the voice of America enough already,
and 1 hope the President will have a voice of his own,
16. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): I should
like to make it very clear to my distinguished friend and
colleague, Ambassador Fedorenko, that 1 am rather proud
to be the voice of America.

8. The PRESIDENT: In reply to the representative of the
Soviet Union 1 would say that first 1 had consultations on
one particular matter on which 1 also consulted the
representative of the Soviet Union. 1 was Iater asked by one
of the -members of the Council whether he could have a
little delay, because he wanted to talk with the head of his
Government .

17. With reference to convening the meeting, 1 sat here
this morning while at the request of the Soviet representative many consultations took place. 1 was very anxious that
the meeting should start, SOthat the Council could adopt a
cesse-fire resolution. I was here, and my deputy washere,
at 6.30 p.m. for the convening of the meeting, Consultations were taking place, 1 made my telephone cal1 at
7.20 p.m.; it took exactly three minutes.

9. 1 have on earlier occasions, in accordance with the
courtesy that 1 thought 1 owed to the members of the
CounciI, granted such delays to other members, including
the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republits, and 1 have done SOwithout informing any member of
the reason why 1 had granted the delays.

18. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
consideration of tbe three items on its agenda. Our last
meeting was adjourned at 4.30 p.m. to await confirmation
that orders had been issued for the cessation of hostilities
and that fighting had actually stopped. Accordingly, 1 shall
cal1 first upon the Secretary-General to give the Council the
information currently available to him on this important
point,

10. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (transhted from Russian): Mr. President, may 1 say
with ail due respect that 1 cannot see any satisfactory
grounds for such an inordinate delay. And 1 do not think
that your statement tbat you consulted the Soviet representative is very well founded, since it was not you who
consulted me but 1 who went to you to protest that a
meeting of the Security Council was being delayed at the
very time when figbting, was in progress, people were being
killed atid cities were being destroyed. Was that not reason
enough for me to protest?

19. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, immediately after the adjournment of the Security Council
meeting this afternoon, 1 sent table communications to the
Foreign Ministers of Israel and Syria. The text of the table
is as follows:

11. Further, would you be kind enough to tell us which
member of the Security Council it was who was contacting
his capital and was therefore responsible for delaying the
meeting of the Security Council?

“Your Excellency,
“The Security Council decided at 1525 hours to ask me
to seek immediate confirmation that orders bave been
issued for the cessation of hostilities and that fighting has
actually stopped. Since 1 am required to report back to
the Security Council on these points within two hours 1
shall be grateful for your immediate reply.
“U Thant”

12. The PRE!SIDENT: It is correct that the consultation
that 1 had with the representative of the Soviet Union was
held at his initiative, since he wanted to talk to me ta
protest against the fact that we had not yet started the
meeting. However, after 1 had received that protest, we
proceeded to discuss another question, on which 1 consulted with the representative of the Soviet Union.

20. At 5.30 p+m. today 1 received a telephone message
from Ambassador Daoudy of the Syrian Arab RepubIic.
This oral message was later confirmed by a written
communication’ from the Permanent Mission of the Syrian

13. 1 .received the request for a short delay from the
representative of the United States. As 1 have said, granting
such a delay is a courtesy that 1 extend to ail members of

1 Subsequmtly circulatedasdocument ~/7983.

2

Arab Republic to the United Nations; the text of the
communication reads as follows:

23. At 7.03 p.m. today, 1 received a cabled message from
the Foreign Minister of the Syrian Arab Republic, through
United Nations channels. This table was dispatched from
Damascus at 1023 hours Greenwich Mean Time today; the
message reads as follows:

“With reference to the message which you have
addressed to the Foreign Ministry of Syria, 1 have the
honour to confirm the telephone conversation which
Ambassador Daoudy had with you at 5.30 p.m. today.

“Syria already complied with Security Council demand
for immediate cesse-fire but Israelis are at this moment
attacking the villages of Al-Yaquteh and Al-Ouyun from
the air..
“Ibrahim MAKHOUS

“ 1. Israel forces are still firing at the civilian population
in Banias, which is located inside Syrian territory near the
northern sector of the armistice line.
“2. Israel aircraft are still flying in Syrian skies.

‘Minister for Fore@z Affairs,
Syrian Arab Republic”

“3. Israel helicopters are dropping paratroopers behind
Syrian lines in order to carry out sabotage activities.

24. Mr. President, that is the end of my report.

“4. A huge number of tanks and armoured cars are
taking positions inside Syrian territory for further
offensive.

25. The PRESIDENT: 1 thank the Secretary-General for
his report. 1 now give the floor to the representative of the
United Arab Republic.

“1 wish to confirm that orders have been given to the
Syrian Armed Forces to stop military operations forthwith in accordance with Security Council resolution
235 (1967) of 9 June 1967.

26. Mr. EL KONY (United Arab Republic): The Council
has been meeting ail of today to examine the acts of
aggression brutally committed by Israel against the Syrian
Arab Republic. It adopted a resolution this morning fixing
a time limit of two hours for the parties to cesse fire. While
the representative of Syria announced the acceptance of his
Government of that cesse-fire call, the other party has
tried, using one set of words or anot&er, to refrain from
specifically stating its acceptance. The Council was supposed to be reconvened by 6.30 p.m. to ascertain whether
or not Israel had respected the order which the Cour&l
adopted this morning.

“(Signed) George J. TOMEH
“Permanent Representative of Syria
to the United Nations”

21,. At 6.5 p.m. today, 1 received a persona1 oral message
the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United
Nations, Ambassador Rafael; the message wasas follows:
from

“1 am instructed by my Government to confirm that
the Government of Israel has accepted the cesse-fire
resolution f23.5 (1967)J adopted by the Security Council
today. Orders for the cessation of hostilities have been
issued to the armed forces. 1 wish to assure the
Secretary-General that on our part a11 fighting has
stopped except for measures of self-defence when we are
still being attacked.”

27. The Israel representative stated clearly that neither
one hour, two hours, nor even five hours, would suit him
for giving his answer. Now we know the reasons for a11
these manoeuvres. Only a few hours ago, and during the last
meeting of the Security Council, many parts of the United
Arab Republic, notably Cairo, came under heavy bombing.
This is taking place following the communication of our
acceptance of the cesse-fire call, as prescribed by the
Security Council in its two resolutions [233 11967) and
234 /1967j
adopted on the 6th and 7th of this month,
that is to say, after only a few hours.

22. At 6.50 p.m. today, 1 received the following second
written communication’
from the Permanent Mission of
the Syrian Arab Republic; the text of the communication
reads as follows:
“Further to my letter No. S/41 of today, 1 wish to draw
to your attention that at 6.15 p.m. local New York time,
1 received a telephone cal1 from Damascus informing me
that:

28. This also is taking place following our compliance with
the cesse-fire cal]. And it is taking place at points far away
from the front, in fact at points which are very heavily
populated.

“1. Israel Air Force has bombarded the Villages of
Al-Yaquteh and Al-Ouyun near the town of Fiq inside
Syrian territory.

29. I shall, with your permission, Mr. President, recount
the air raids that have taken place only today. Caire was
bombed for one hour beginning at 8 p.m. local time.
Anshase had two air raids. IsmaiIia had one air raid at 10.40
p.m. local time. The Suez Canal area in general had no less
than eight air raids from 12.35 until8 p.m.

“2. At the moment of the telephone conversation with
Damascus, namely, at 6.15 p.m. New York time, Israel
military aircraft were still overflying Syrian territory.
“3. Israel tanks and armoured cars are still being
massed inside Syrian territory for further attack.

30. Between Ismailia and the Delta Road, two civilian
buses have been strafed, resulting in twelve kilIed and thirty
wounded, a11civilians, including women and children. One
Israel plane was shot down over Ismailia.

“(Signed) George J. TOMEH
“Permanent Represen tative of Syria
to the United Nations”
3

31. With your permission, Mr. President, 1 am also going
to quote from a United Press International news dispatch:

39. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Morocco. As there are no more places ait
the Security Council table, as a result of the invitations
extended earlier this evening, the representative of Jordarr
has very kindly indicated his willingness to withdraw
temporarily from 1~s place at the Council table while tht:
representative of Morocco makes his intervention. 1 appreci.
ate the gesture of the representative of Jordan and 1 invite
the representative of Morocco to take a place at the Council
table and make his statement.

“Air raid sirens screamed when Nasser finished his
address and within minutes the boom of anti-aircraft guns
shook buildings in Cairo.”
32. This is but a new example of the ruthlessness of the
Israelis and their utter disregard and violation of the
Council’s resolutions. This gives further ample proof to the
Council of the evil intentions of Israel. These actions,
treacherous as they are, make it incumbent upon the
Security Council to discharge its responsibilities and to take
the necessary measures which should compel the aggressor
to abide by the resolutions of the Council.

40. Mr. BENHIMA (Morocco) (translated frorn Frenchl: l
thank you, Mr. President, for having given me the floor and
1 also thank my colleague, the representative of Jordan, for
his courtesy in giving me his Seat SOthat 1 could make this
brief statement.

33. If, by their intention of continuing air raids on the
United Arab Republic, and Cairo in particular, the Israelis
and their associates are still entertaining certain dreams of
intimidation, we tell them to forget about these dreams.

41. In the second statement he made in the Council, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Israel, referring to tbe
resolution which the Council had just adopted and which
called upon a11the parties concerned in the conflict to ceasr:
immediately all military activities, said-and 1 shall try to
quote his words from memory-“We
have heard the
representative of Iraq, we have heard the representative 0.F
the United Arab Republic, we have heard the representative
of Syria, but not one of them told the Council that hi;s
Government has accepted the cesse-fire.” Yesterday
morning, the representative of the United Arab Republic
sent to you, Mr. President, a very clear letter in which hi;s
Government informed you that it accepted the Security
Council resolution and that consequently it accepted the
cesse-fire, This morning, the Syrian representative did
likewise.

34. No action will affect the unity of the people of the
United Arab Republic in their resolve to stand fïrm behind
their leader.
35. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

1 now cal1 on the representative of

36. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): Since the Council adjourned, 1
have again been in telephone communication
with my
Government. 1 am instructed to confirm that the Government of Israel has accepted the cesse-fire resolution
adopted by the Security Council today. Orders for the
cessation of hostilities have been issued to the armed forces.
1 must also inform the Security Council that at this very
moment extremely heavy artillery fire is being directed
from Syrian positions against the Israel villages of Ma¶agan,
Haon, and Gadot. This shelling is an extension of the
shelling which 1 reported to the President this morning and
has been going on with increased violence throughout the
day. Very heavy damage has been inflicted and there are
many casualties. The places which have been under heavy
attack are: Susita, B’nei-Tsefat, Cesher Amir, Gonen,
Lahavot HaBashan, Shamir and She’ar Yashuv.

42. Mr. Eban left New York yesterday for London on his
way to Tel-Aviv, no doubt to report to his Government on
the debate in the Council. 1 am afraid that he acted
somewhat cavalierly in leaving the Council in the middle of
the debate, at a time when his presence would have been
extremely valuable precisely because new and important
events were taking place which the Council wished to know
about and about which he himself seemed to wish to obtain
some information.
43. This morning 1 received direct instructions from my
Sovereign to lodge a protest with the Secretary-General,
and with you, Mr. President, against the fact that, despite
the announcement by Jordan, the United Arab Republic
and Syria that they had accepted the cesse-fire, the Israel
land and air forces are continuing to bomb the northern
zone of the Canal and Syria. These operations are being
conducted on such a scale that they cari hardly be described
as the concluding phase of military operations or ascribed
to extremely remote units which have not yet received the
necessary orders from their Governments to take appropriate steps to put the cesse-fire into effect.

37. In some of these villages nearly every building and
structure has been destroyed. In spite of this continuing
aggression against villages and civilian populations, 1 wish to
repeat that orders have been given to the Israel armed
forces for the cessation of hostilities. 1 cari assure the
Council that on our part a11fighting has stopped, except for
measures of self-defence in places where we are still being
attacked.
38. This morning the Syrian representative stated that
Damascus had been bombed by Israel aircraft. That
statement is false and without any foundation. The
representative of the United Arab Republic has just stated
that Cairo and other localities in Egypt have today been
bombed by Israel aircraft. This is a malicious fabrication. 1
categorically deny it. The spreading of irresponsible and
false charges of this kind only aggravates the already tense
situation in the Middle East.

44. On the contrary, these are very intensive aerial attack,s
and are being carried out with very large forces. Some
people may perhaps be criticized for not having known, or
realized, or evaluated the full range of armaments in Israel’,s
possession. The surprise achieved by the Israel Air Force
and the number of aircraft that have been bombing Syria
throughout the day may well raise doubts about the fait11
4

we were inclined to place in the denial of foreign assistance.
With a11due allowance, this attack against Syria today calls
to mind the attacks of the nazi air force on Rotterdam or
the two-day raids on Poland.

a clear mind its search for a way of extending the decisions
which have been taken here yesterday and this morning. Or
does Israel, showing once and for ail its hatred for the Arab
world now wish to prove to everyone that, since it was
given a free hand to crush the Arab world, it cari oblige this
honourable assembly to be a witness while it consummates
its crime with impunity?

45. We have heard the Israel Minister of Defence say that,
even if the Arab world extended from the Arabian Culf to
the Atlantic, they would be ready’ to attack Algiers, Tunis
and Casablanca and to occupy these territories. Of course,
the Israel Government has very highly deueloped information media and information services which find many
echoes abroad; a statement made is denied some time later,
SO that
we are confronted with a denial, although the
statement was made.

50. We strongly urge the Council to try to take a bold
decision. It has appealed to the opposing countries to stop
the fighting. From the Arab side, you have learned of a
series of decisions; on the Israel side, we see that the war
goes on. Does the Security Council think this is a situation
consonant with its decisions, or does it wish to demonstrate
to thirteen Members of this Organization and to a11those
who have shown their support for the United Nations and
placed their confidence in it, that the Council cari be
confronted with a fait accompli at the outset and that the
aggressor cari then continue to act with impunity without
any reaction from the Council?

46. Th.is attack on Cairo, after the cesse-fïre had been
accepted by the Government, is not merely a manifestation
of the Israel Government’s stubborn determination to
continue its aggression and to achieve certain military,
psychological and political objectives, Only yesterday we
heard Mr. Eban say that the Council must now turn its
attention to the next phase; in other words, he considered
that the military objective had been a11but attained and
that a different approach should now be envisaged, SOthat
he cari sit down at the negotiating table as the undisputed
victor with ail the trump cards in his hand.

5 1. It is this responsibility which, With ail due respect, we
ask the Council to assume with the utmost gravity, because
the course of events may perhaps surprise us, just as it did
at the outset, and we cannot tel1 whether this war, not held
in check at the point where it was suspended, may not
break out elsewhere.

47. This obstinacy in continuing the hostilities on the
scale and with the forces 1 have just mentioned is perhaps
an indication that those who are preparing for possible
negotiations wish to ensure that on one side of the table
there Will be the completely vanquished, with an arrogant
Power on the other. 1 am not asking you, Mr. President, to
take the place of those who Will have to settle this problem
if they feel they must assume the responsibility for doing
SO. But, at the risk of repeating myself, 1 should like to say
once again that if the Council had taken a firm decision to
condemn the aggression at the outset of the crisis, we
would certainly not be faced today with the continuance of
military activity in ail its forms; this, after the cesse-fire, is
a systematic violation of the Security Council resolution
and of the decisions taken this morning after Governments
parties to the conflict had informed the President of the
Security Council that they had accepted the Council’s cal.l
for a cesse-fire.

52. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (translated from Russian): ML President, the Security
Council has been convened for an emergency meeting at the
request of the representative’of the United Arab Republic
and at the instance of the Soiriet delegation in connexion
with a further treacherous attack by Israel on the United
Arab Republic, and particularly in connexion witli the
bombing Of Cairo, the capital of the United Arab Republic;
as well as lsmailia and other inhabited localities. Israel is
continuing its aggressive acts against Syria as well, in
violation of the decisions which the Council has adopted
today.
53. FrOm the statements by the representatives of the’
United Arab Republic and Morocco, and also from the
information which we have just heard from the Secret@‘General, it is abundantly clear that the armed for+ of’,
Israel are ‘continuing their crimiLa1 aggression against the .,
Arab States.

48. Mr. Abba Eban probably felt that there was no reason
for him to remain here and that the assuranceof irnpunity
which he took away with him would enable Mr. Dayan and
Mr. Rabin to continue until the Arab people was brought to
its knees. 1 consider that President Nasse?s announced
decision to resign in order to enable other leaders of his
country to take new decisions is the act of a responsible
statesman who showed great courage in addressing his
people in the speech you have heard. Perhaps the Tel-Aviv
Government .thought that, at a time when the Egyptian
National Assembly was calling for President Nasser’s retum
to the Presidency of the Republic, the Egyptian people and
the people of Cairo ought be machine-gunned and cruhed
for having taken that decision with regard to a heroic
leader.

54. It is quite obvious that Israel is thus defying the
Security Council’s resolutions calling for an imm@iate
cesse-fire in the, Near East. The new aftacks have been made
in spite of the decisions taken by the Couricil on 6 and
7 June [resolutions 233 (1967) ad.234 (1967)] atid also
in spite of the demands made by the Council today for an
immediate
cessation of Israel’s aggresiion [resolution
235 (1967)].
55. 1s it not treachery that the bombing of Cairo was
taking place at the very moment when here, in the Security
Council, the representative of Israej, was .making hypocritical statements, trying to delude $h.e members of the
Councîl and attempting to distract attention from: the
criminal acts of Israel’s .aggressive forces in the Near East?

49. These are the aspects of the problem that we are
asking the Council to consider if it wishes to continue with
5

56. The speaker from Tel-Aviv was distressed by the
comparisons which have been made in the Council to
characterize some of Tel-Aviv’s actions.

“On 9 June, in spite of the fact that the Syrian
Government has announced a cesse-fire, Israel forces are
undertalcing a new offensive on the Syrian border and
barbarously bombing Syrian cities.

57. Israel’s leaders are repeating the tragic experience of
fascist aggression not only in their methods of accusing the
victims of aggression and in their attempts to blame them
for the crime which has been committed, but also in their
“blitzkrieg” tactics. It is fully justifiable and right to say
again-now that those who are at present directing the act of
aggression by Israel should be put in the dock before an
international tribunal such as that which, twenty years ago,
condemned the crimes of the main culprits in the war
against peace and humanity.

“In their struggle against imperialism for freedom,
independence, the integrity of their territory and the
inalienable sovereign right to settle independently a11
questions relating to their domestic life and foreign
policy, the peoples of the Arab countries are fighting for
a just cause. The peoples of the socialist countries are
entirely on their side.
“The peoples of the United Arab Republic and a
number of other Arab countries have during the past
years won some great historic victories in the conquest of
national independence and freedom. Important social
reforms have been undertaken in the interest of the
working masses.

58, Indeed, there is no limit to the arrogance, hypocrisy
and adventurism of Israel’s present leaders. In the course of
today alone they have committed crimes against peace and
humanity, for which they deserve to be severely punished,
The Soviet delegation believes thaf the Security Council cari
no longer overlook these acts by Israel, which is violating all
principles and rules of international law, trampling upon
the Charter of our Organization and deriding and sabotaging Security Council resolutions designed to restore and
maintain peace.

“We are confident that these gains Will be preserved and
that the progressive régimes Will be consolidated, in spite
of the difficulties facing the Arab peoples.
“In this difficult hour for the States of the Arab East,
the socialist countries wish to declare their complete and
whole-hearted solidarity with the just struggle of the Arab
States, and to affirm that they Will assist them in repelling
aggression and defending their national independence and
territorial integrity.

59. The Soviet delegation proposes that the Security
Council should without delay-at once, in fact-take resolute, energetic and effective measures to ensure Israel’s
compliance with the Security Council’s decisions. The
Security Council must categorically condemn Israel’s disregard of its decisions; it must demand the immediate
cessation of military activities by Israel and warn Tel-Aviv
that failure by Israel to comply with the mandatory
decisions of the Security Council will have the most serious
consequences for the State of Israel, and that the Security
Council Will be compelled to use the powers vested in it by
the Charter of the United Nations for dealing with casesof
this kind.

“The States participating in the meeting insist that
Israel should forthwith cesse military activities against
neighbouring Arab States and withdraw its troops from
their territory behind the armistice Line.
“The United Nations has a duty to condemn the
aggressor. If the Security Council does not take appropriate measures, any States which have failed to discharge
their duty as members of the Security Council Will bear a
heavy responsibility.

60. The Soviet delegation believes that it should draw the
attention of members of the Council to the following
statement issued by the Governments of the People’s
Republic of Bulgaria, the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic,
the German Democratic Republic, the Hungarian People’s
Republic, the Polish People’s Republic, the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and the Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia on 10 June 1967 (Moscow time):

“Today, as never before, there is a need for decisive and
concerted action by a11 peace-ioving and progressive
forces-by all who treasure the cause of freedom and the
independence of peoples.
“If the Government of Israel does not cesse its
agression and withdraw its forces behind the armistice
Iine, the socialist states which have signed this statement
will take a11nccessary steps to help the peoples of the
Arab countries deliver a decisive rebuff to the aggressor,
defend their lawful rights, extinguish the hotbed of war in
the Near East and restore peace in this area.

“The participants in the meeting have considered the
situation that bas arisen in the Near East in consequence
of Israel’s aggression, which is the result of a conspiracy
by certain imperialist forces, pa-rticularly the United
States of America, against the Arab States. The participants have exchanged views on measures required to put
an end to the aggression and avert the dangerous
consequences which it might have for world peace.

“The just struggle of the Arab peoples Will triumph.”
61. The PRESIDENT:

“The participants in the meeting believe that they must
draw the appropriate conclusions from the fact that Israel
has not complied with the Security Council’s decision and
bas net ceased military activities against the Arab States.
The occupation of the territory of Arab States by Israel’s
forces could be used to re-establîsh foreign colonial rule.

1 call on the representative of Syria.

62. Could we have silence in the Chamber, please?
63. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): Mr. President, 1 thank you again
for asking the rather disturbing audience in the galleries to
keep silent. We know when they become silent and when
6

they become noisy. That has already become quite apparent to us here.

This action is a measure of full defence which took place
only after the premeditated, massive Israel attack on Sytia
today.

64. Wben we started the discussion today at the beginning
of a rather trying and long meeting that went on for four
hours, one point should have become clear and it is this:
tbat the meeting wasdelayed for two hours only because of
the tactics and manoeuvres indulged in by the Israel
representative in order to prolong the meeting and in order
consequently to give the Israel forces inside Syria enough
tinte to achieve their aims and pur-poses-1 must add, their
aggressiveaims and their aggressivepurposes.

70. 1 have here a United Press International news dispatch
dated today and originating from Jerusalem. With the
permission of the President, 1 should like to read it; it says:
“A United Nations report said Israel forces had driven
fifteen miles inside Syria to the town of Kuneitra, only
forty miles south of Damascus on the main highway
leading to the capital. A well-informed Israel military
source in Jerusalem said tbey believe the Israelis have
reached Damascus outskirts.”

65. It would be cumbersome now to recall all the details
of those discussions, but he submitted one argument after
the other-making his acceptance or the acceptance of his
authorities conditional, stressing the words “mutual acceptance” that occurred in resolution 235 (1967), and SO
on. One after the other, those arguments were exploded
until finally we deemed it sufficient to describe his
arguments as “casuistry”; “sophistry” was not enough;
“mockery” wasthe last Word-but it wasnot strong enough
becausethe real description is beyond that.

The report goes on to say:
“Israel forces greeted the fall of Nasser with no surprise
and made it clear that the drive on Damascus was aimed
at overthrowing the left-wing Socialist Ba’ath Party which
Israel blames for starting the entire Middle East crisis.
Israel radio appeals called on Syrians to rise up against the
Syrian Government.”

66. 1 shah proceed to the specific points. The SecretaryGeneral read out the two letters that 1 had addressed to him
[puas. 20 and 22 above] on behalf of my authorities and
he also read out to us what was communicated to him by
the Israel representative [pura. 21 above]. One point which
is a cardinal and crucial one in the Israel answer is worth
considering and it is this: that they Will stop firing except
for measures of self-defence.

This is the real aim of the massive attack perpetrated by the
Israelis on Syria.
71. 1 have just received another telephone caIl from
Damascus, the content of which has just been communicated to me; it is as follows:
“Columns of tanks and armoured cars from the Israel
army have right now entered Syrian territory near the
town of Masaba.”

67. Tbrougb you, Mr. President, 1 sbould like to put the
following questions, which are based on the points contained in my two letters to the Secretary-General. We say
that Israel tanks and armoured cars are still massed inside
Syrian territory for further offensive action and attacks. Is
that a measure of self-defence? We say that Israel aircraft
are up to this moment still flying over Syrian skies. Are
these measures of self-defence? We say that Israel helicopters are dropping paratroopers behind Syrian lines inside
Syria to carry out sabotage activities. Are these measures of
self-defence?

72. Putting aside for the moment the interpretation of
why the attack is being perpetrated, there are still all these
points which 1 have mentioned: the overflight by the Israel
Air Force of Syrian towns and cities-and by the way,
Damascus was bombarded and what the Israel representative said is a complete falsehood-the massing of armoured
cars, and what 1 have just stated about columns of
armoured cars and tanks entering Syrian territory.
73. What is the reason for a11that? Are these measures of
self-defence? The purpose is clear. It is a Jerusalem source
which states that the aim is to overthrow the Syrian régime
which is SOheartily disliked by the Israel authorities.

68. It is sufficient for the members of the Council to
review one by one the points that 1 mentioned in my letter
ta discover that those are not measures of self-defence, that
they are measures of clear-tut aggression. The Israel army is
inside Syrian territory. It is of course meeting with very
stiff resistance. But the fact remains that Israel attacked;
the mere fact that Israel forces are inside our territory and
that the Israel Air Force is overflying Syrian territory is
clear-tut and tangible proof that Israel is attacking and
continuing to attack. The sentence which says that they
will not fire except as a measure of self-defence is a very
false and misleading statement that should not be accepted
by this august and respectable body.

74. We have said time and again, and 1 have no hesitation
in repeating it now, that Israel is acting on behalf of
imperialist Powers whose interests in the area cannot be
safe unless and until this staunch régime of Syria, that has
been fighting vested imperialist interests, is overthrown. But
we are not afraid to defend ourselves against overwhelming
forces, which certainIy are not the forces of Israel alone,
equipped with ihe latest models of armaments which have
corne to them from countries already too well known.

69. The Israel representative mentioned a number of
villages and settlements which are being attacked, which,
according to bis allegations, are being fired upon from the
Syrian side. This action is taking place inside the dem.%
tarized zone& It is not taking place inside Israel territory.

75. But we feel that it is an honour, an honour because we
are fighting a battle of the Third World, of the liberation
movements in Asia and Africa. The United Arab Republic
fought its battle. Jordan alone-where 15,000 civilians and
soldiers have been mass-slaughtered by the war criminals of
7

of any planes in the sky and no bombs were dropped on
Cairo up to 11.30 p.m.”

Israél-is an example of the fact that we are fighting for the
Third World.

1 think that takes tare of that.

76. TO conclude, 1 wish once again to emphasize to the
Council the giavity of the situation. If this war escalates, if
Israel aggression is not stopped and stopped immediately, if
their lies, falgehoods and hypocrisies are not exposed, there
is a danger not only to Syria, not only to the Arab world,
not only to the Middle East: the IsraeIis and they alone Will
be responsible for the escalation of the war. 1 think that we
have spoken enough about the facts. The facts are in the
hands of the Council, and it is for the Council now to take
the right decision by shopping the aggressor and condemning his aggression.
77. The PRESIDENT:
representative of Israel.

1 now give the floor

83. The representative of Morocco attributed to my
Foreign Minister a certain inaccuracy in reporting the
position of the Arab Governments in respect to the
cesse-fire resolution. If 1 understood him correctly, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs stated, after the United Arab
Republic had announced its acceptance of the resolution:
“Since the cesse-fire resolution was adopted by the
Security Council last night, the representative of Syria has
spoken, the representative of Iraq has spoken, the
representatîve of the United Arab Republic has spoken. 1
have heard and studied every word that they have said. 1
cannot find in any of those speeches one single sentence
saying that ‘We, Syria, we, Iraq, we, the United Arab
Republic, welcome and accept the cesse-fire resolution.’ ”

to the

78. Nr. RAFAEL (Israel): The Council has been presented
with a motley collection of falsehoods and fabrications. 1
shall try to deal with them one by one.
:
79. The representative of Morocco attributed a statement
to the Israel Minister of Defence, General Dayan, to the
effect, if 1 understood him cofrectly, that Israel intended to
occupy the territory from Tunisia to any extent of the
Arab world. 1 challenge the representative of Morocco to
bring here and now proof of that statement and to produce
it to the Council. There wzis no such statement. There
cannot be such a statement. He should not corne here and
make wild allegations. Let him bring his proof.
%“‘, :c
80. The representative of Morocco bas again referred to
alleged bombings of Cairo and other localities in Egypt. 1
bave denied these statements as malicious fabrications. 1
have noMr before me a ‘number of news agency dispatches
and 1 ‘shall read ‘some of them. The following is from the
Agence France-Presse, Cairo:

[135Oth meeting,para. 46.1

That statement was made on Wednesday, 7 June 1967, at
the 1350th meeting of the Council which started at 2.20
p.m., and is reproduced in the Verbatim record of that
meeting.
84. The next day, Thursday, 8 June 1967, the SecretaryGeneral informed the Council:
“1 have just received the following communication from
the Permanent Mission of the United Arab Republic to
the United Nations. It is dated 8 June 1967.” [1351st
meeting,para. 31.1

That communication goes on to state that Egypt had
decided to accept the cesse-fire resolutions on the condition that the other party cesses fire. The SecretaryGeneral’s statement is reproduced in the Verbatim record of
the 1351st meeting of the Council. 1 mention this fact not
out of pettiness, but merely to show the inaccuracy of the
statements made here by Arab representatives.

“The air-raids at Cairo stopped at 6.15 pm. Were they
Israel raids on Cairo or sharn raids by Egyptian aircraft?
No one ,in Cairo cari yet say. The aircraft had their
navigation lights, on; the sirens,sounded; anti-aircraft guns
were firing. Air-raids on Port Said are also reported.“2

85. The representative of Syria has made wild allegations
of massacresin Jordan. 1 deny that categorically. Me has no
proof of what he says. He wants to inflame passions. There
will soon be the opportunity to ascertain the falsehood of
his statements.

81. 1 have ,a dispatch from United Press International
which says:
“UP1 correspondents reported that Egyptian antiair’craft batteries had been firing, but the correspondents
said ,they could hear no bombs falling in the capital.”

86. However, more interesting was the admission of the
representative of Syria that Syrian forces have been shelling
and are shelling villages in Israel. That shelling started
yesterday afternoon, continued all through the night and îs
still continuing right now at this moment. I have informed
the Council of the very heavy damage to life and property
whîch those artillery botibardments have caused to the
villages and the civilian population in Israel.

82. I-have befbre me a report from the Associated Press
whîch, 1 think, is a most revealing one and perhaps provides
a solution to that riddle of alleged Israel bombings. It reads
as follows:
“Police and soldiers fired grenades into the air Friday
night to drive back demonstrating mobs marching on
downtown Cairo and a furious anti-aircraft barrage lit up
the sky. The Egyptian Ministry of Information said that
an air raid was in progress. However, there were no signs

87. 1 want to repeat again that no Israel aircraft has
bombed or is bombing Damascus. I also want to deny
categorically that any Israel forces arc advancing towards
Damascus. The Israel operations which were begun today
were intended, as 1 stated in the Council this afternoon
(1352nd meeting] and as 1 infomled the President of the

2 Quoted in French by the speaker.
8

SeCurity Council in the early hours of the morning, to
silence those Syrian gun positions which were shelling Israel
villages. That is what the Israel forces have undertaken.

one against another government, or against civilians, or
territory, under control of another government:
Yecond, we are dismayed at the hurried withdrawal of
the United Nations Emergency Force from Gaza and
Sinai after more than ten years of steadfast and effective
service in keeping the peace . . . . We continue to regard
the presence of the United Nations in the area as a matter
of fundamental importance and shall support its continuance with a11possible vigour.

88. 1 repeat again that orders have been issued to the Israel
forces to cessehostilities and to act only in self-defence.
89. Mr. President, 1 should like to refer to something more
grave. I thought that in my previous intervention I might
have impressed, or perhaps influenced, the representative of
the Soviet Union to think again of what he has said about
Israel and his infamous comparison of Israel with Hitler
Germany. 1 only wish to say now to the representative of
the Soviet Union that 1 still remember when one of his
illustrious predecessors defended at the United Nations,
with less venom though with similar violence, the charges of
his Government that Israel was involved in a doctors’
conspiracy to poison Soviet leaders. 1 also remember very
well when only a short while later the Soviet Government
decided to withdraw those monstrous charges. I cherish the
hope that also in the present case the Soviet Government
Will withdraw those false charges which it now advances
against the Government of Israel.

“Third, we deplore the recent build-up of military
forces and believe it a matter of urgent importance to
reduce troop concentrations. The status of sensitive areas,
as the Secretary-General emphasized in his report to the
Security Council, such as the Gaza Strip and Gulf of
Aqaba, is a particularly important aspect of the situation.”
Nothing could have been more specific than the statement
of the President of the United States dealing with this
particular situation,
95. And then the President of the United States stated the
policy of our Government, which has been a constant
policy for twenty years. He stated it in explicit terms, and
his statement was not matched by statements by other
Governments which might have assured the‘ avoidance of
this conflict. He said:
<’
“TO the leaders of all the nations of the Near East, 1
wish to say what three Presidents have said before-that
the United States is firmly committed to the support of
the political independence and territorial integrity of ail
the nations of the area.

90. We have heard now the rnost infamous threats from
the Soviet representative, threats to extinguish Israel. They
remind me of the language which preceded the events
which led up to the trials of Nürnberg.
91. Mr. GOLDBERG (United States of America): 1 should
like to make this statement on the full authority of my
Government.
92. The Security Council, with the full support of the
United States, has adopted three resolutions calling for and
demanding an unconditional cesse-fire between Israel and
the Arab States. The United States deems it of the gravest
import that the Security Council’s resolutions shall be
complied with in letter and spirit by Israel and the Arab
countries involved. There has bcen too much bloodshed and
loss of life, and it is imperative that this war corne to an end
and that a11 Governments involved in this conflict should
retum to the urgent task of restoring peace to the Middle
East.

“The United States strongly opposes aggression by
anyone in the area, in any form, overt .or clandestine. This
has been the policy of the United States led by four
Presidents-President Truman, President Eisenhowever,
President Kennedy, and myself-as well as the policy of
both of our political parties.
“The United States has consistently sought, tq have
good relations with a11 the States of the Near East.
Regrettably, this has not always been possible, but we are
convinced that our differences with individual States of
the area and their differences with each other must be
worked out peacefully and in accordance with accepted
international practice.”

93. The policy of my Government with respect to this
situation was prophetically stated by the President of the
United States on 23 May 1967. It remains the policy of our
Government, as 1 indicated when 1 offered our draft
resolution for the consideration of the Council yesterday. 1
said:

96. Those words were not heeded at the time and our
efforts to obtain general recognition of their import were
not heeded in this Council. They were frustrated by certain
members of the Council. But in presenting a draft resolution to the Security Council just yesterday, 1 pointed out
that it was essential to our seaxchfor peace in the area that
our “objective must be a decision by the warring Powers to
live in peace and to establish normal relations, as contemplated and pledged by the United Nations Charter” /1351st
meeting, para. 211. And 1 said: “Our purpose is to provide
for movement towards the final settlement of ail outstanding questions between the parties which the United
Nations envisaged nearly twenty years ago”. [Zbicl.]

“Speaking for the United States, let me add that our
view on a11 these many problems has been stated many
times and has not changed.” /1351st meeting, para. 23.1
94. It is perhaps necessary ta recall what the President Of
the United States stated on 23 May 1967. He stated:
“The Government of the United States is deeply
concerned, in particular, with three potentially explosive
aspects of the present confrontation.
“First, we regret that the General Armistice Agreements
have failed to prevent warlike acts from the territory of
9

106. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Syria, to whom 1 now give the floor.

97. We have had a long debate. There have been charges
and counter-charges, and statements by the parties. And
what is the situation in which the Security Council finds
itself? Due to the fact that there is no effective United
Nations machinery in the area, due to the fact that its
effectiveness has been impaired by what we all know has
occurred, no one here, exercising the quasi-judicial character of the Cou&, cari at this point resolve the conflicting
statements which have been made.

107. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): 1 shall confine my reply to the
remarks that were made by the Israel representative in
answerto the points which 1 raised.
1Oii. First of all, he said that according to my own
admission Syrian forces had been shelling villages inside
Israel. That is not true. 1 did not say that. I stick by the
statement which 1 made this morning, namely, that we
accepted the cesse-fire and cabled the Secretary-General,
and that he received our answer at 0036 hours last night.
The Syrisn forces had abided by the cesse-fire for ont:
complete hour when a barrage of fire started, first in the
demilitarized zone and then on a very large scale along tht:
line of demarcation between Syria and Israel.

98. What is imperatively required here are two things
which every fair-minded person must recognize. The firstif it cari be done in this Council and if obstructionism Will
cesse-is an impartial investigation by the Secretary-General
of the allegations which have been made concerning the
violation of the cesse-fire orders which all parties that have
expressed themselves here-Israel, the United Arab Republit, Jordan and Syria-have alleged; an investigation with
adequate machinery to ascertain the state of compliance in
the area. Obviously, any group called upon to decide on the
conflicting charges and the conflicting statements which
have been made would need this in order to make such a
decision.

109. The Israel representative said that the Israel operations against Syria, which were begun today, were to
silence the Syrian guns. But the operations wlsich 1 have
described and which go much beyond “silencing Syrian
guns and Syrian positions”, how do they agree with bis
statement?

99. The second thing which we imperatively need is
adequate machinery for the Secretary-General to implement the cesse-fire resolutions which have been ordered by
this Council.

110. Third, the Israel representative did answer two
questions. One, he reaffirmed that Israel aircraft did not
bombard Damascus. But he did not deny that Israel aircrafit
were overflying the skies of Damascus.

100. Today, both of those requirewents are lacking.
Today, both are imperatively required, if we are to do the
job that the Council has to do, and if we are to do it, not
on the basis of accepting one party’s version as against the
version of another, but on the basis of impartial, objective
facts established by the most impartial agency we have: the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.

111. In my two letters to the Secretary-General, 1 raisedl
other questions and other points; 1 must read them again
“1. Israel Air Force has bombarded the villages of AlYaquteh and Al-Ouyun near the town of Fiq inside Syrian
territory.” (Para. 22 above.]

101. My country would support those two proposals. My
country has been willing to support them throughout this
debate, SOthat all that we do cari be aone in the interests of
maintaining peace in the area.
102. Therefore, 1 make these proposals to the Council SO
that it cari act-not on the basis of one-sided adlerence to a
point of view, but on the basis of establisher’ facts that
satisfy fair-minded men, and also on the basis of what must
really be done in a situation as complicated as this.
103. The Secretary-General is lacking the tools to do the
job of implementing a cesse-fire resolution, and therefore
we Will have what we have had in some other situations;
that is, charges and counter-charges, allegations of violations of the cesse-fïre, which we, sitting in New York,
thousands of miles from the scene are unable to resolve.

112. At the moment of the telephone conversation that
took place between me and Damascus, at 6.15 New York:
time, Israel military aimraft was still overflying Lyrian
territory. That he did not answer- He also did not answer
the following point: that Israel forces are still firing at the
civilian population in Banias, which is located inside Syrian
territory, near the northern sector of the armistice line- He
did not deny the fact that huge armoured columns had
already penctrated deep into Syrian rerritory and are
massing for an offensive.
113. Now, in the variety of answers that he gave, he triedl
to elude all these questions and all these facts- He also did
not deny the United Press International
report from
Jerusalem stating that the Israel radio is appealing to the
Syrians to rise up against the Syrian Government.

104. Finally, 1 say this: Debate here, accusations here, Will
not solve the problem. What will solve the problem is, first,
ascertainment of the facts; and second, action on the
ground by United Nations machinery to make sure that the
cesse-fire is properly implemented. Those are the two ways
in which we must proceed.

114. We are still, through you, Mr. President, awaiting an
answer. There is aIso the fact which 1 specifically mentioned; namely, that huge amounts of Israel tanks have
entered through the village of Massadeh. 1 am sure that the
representative of the United Kingdom, to my left, who
knows
Syria SOwell, knows that very place. I am referring
to a specific place from which Israel tanks are penetrating
into S~rian territory. Will the Israel representative answcr
us whether this is correct or not?

105. That is the view of my Government and I convey it
to the members of the Council.

115. Now, as long as we are on this point, 1 would not wish
to finish my reply without referring to the intervention
10

made by the representative of the United States about the
lack and non-existence of United Netions machinery. But
between Syria and Israel there is the Israel-Syrian Mixed
Armistice Commission which is supposed to exist and to
function. Could not facts be ascertained through that
machinery? Equally, between Jordan and Israel there is a
Mjxed Armistice Commission. Therefore, if I understood
the intervention of Mr. Goldberg, doubt is to be thrown on
everything that we have reported to the Council today.
116. Why is it that 1 called you at 5.30 this morning,Mr.
President, and woke you up from your sleep? Was I going
through a phantasmagoric dream, or was I in communication with Damascus, whîch told me of all these facts that
1 related to YOU? And you were kind and gracious enough
to cal1 an urgent meeting of the Security Council. Surely,
we are not in a dreatn. These are facts. 1 am stating that the
Israel forces, in the manner that 1 described specifically and
in detail, bave entered Syrian territory. The Israel representative did net, deny that, in spite of a11the phrases and
sentences that we have heard from him.
117. But, Mr. President, 1 feel it my duty again to impress
upon you and upon the Council that the situation is very
grave and should be dealt with with the gravity and
seriousness that it deserves.
118. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Jordan, to whom 1 now give the floor.
119, Mr. EL-FARRA (Jordan): 1 should like at the very
outset to express my thanks to my friend and colleague,
Mr. Fedorenko, through whosc effort 1 am now particip?.ting in a debate of direct interest to my Government.
120. 1 have listened with interest to the statement just
made by Judge Goldberg of the United States. 1 was
astonished to hear Judge Goldberg speak about impartial
investigation of cesse-Gre orders by the Secretary-General,
with adequate machinery. 1 was astonished because 1 was
hoping-apparently
against hope-that Judge Goldberg
would proceed to bring first issues first. I was hoping that
Judge Goldberg would ask the Council to establish the facts
about the aggression: Who committed the act of aggression
now being considered by the Council? Who invaded land
and occupied towns and villages, destroyed buildings and
killed inhabitants?
121. That 1 thought was the first issue for the Council. If
there is an intention to divert the whole question into an
inquiry about who violated the cesse-fire resolution
adopted by the Council, I am afraid this would be a very
unfortunate thitig for the Security Council, the organ
created to maintain peace, to help in creating an atmosphere of peace, to condemn the aggressor and invoke a
Chapter embodied in the great Charter of the United
Nations.
122. I was hoping that Judge Goldberg, a learned J&e, a
man of Iaw, would be able to corne here as the representa-

tive of a great Member of the United Nations, a responsible
Member-and 1 would quote him when 1 say “the greater
the Power, the greater the responsibility”[134Znd meeting,
para. 13/, those were bis words-and deal with the crux of

the problem. But Judge Goldberg did not corne to the crux
of the problem: the act of war committed against my
Government, against my people, against innocent ,civilians
of Jordan.
123. There is another question. 1 keep hbaring a statement, repeated time and again, that the United States
Government is committed to protect the territorial integrity of all nations. 1 keep hearing the words “ail nations”.
But when Jordan wasinvaded, when almost half of the area
of Jordan was conquered, when thousands were killed, 1 did
not hear anything about this commitment other than a
speech in the Council repeating the very same statement:
we are committed to ail members of the Middle East, to a11
nations in the Middle East.
124. 1 hate to say this. We are a country friendly to the
United States. We have to be careful about the sensitivity of
a great Power, because we are a small Member. We have to
be careful about choosing our tenns, because we need the
support of a11great Powers. But what is going on cannot be
defined or described with sweetwords.
125. We are the victims of a crime, a war crime. We would
expect the small Members to have.the support of the great
Powers; we would expect this because they are great, they
are big, they Can afford to play an objective role, a role not
dictated by power politics in an election year, a role
dictated, rather, by the great values of the great Powers, by
the great values of the American people, by the great
heritage of the American people, by the great traditions of
the American people.
126. 1 regret to say this, but SOfar we have heard nothing
concerning effective measures, first condemning the ag
gressor; second, calling for an irnmediate withdrawal; and
third, invoking Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
127. The PRESIDENT: Before 1 give the floor to the next
speaker on my list, the representative of Israel, 1 would ask
the audience to kindly maintain silence; 1 now cal1 on him.
128. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): The Syrian representative in
his tale of the events has omitted to mention one fact,
perhaps of minor importance to him, but decisive for the
whole story. Did Syria declare war on Israel or did it not?
‘Il~s is the question. 1 cxpect him to give a clear and
unequivocal answer to this question.
129. It was Syria that started the war against Israel. Much
has been said about aggression and aggressors.1 have an
article before me, published by a very distinguished and
learned jurist, René Cas&, and it reminds me of a number
of very important facts in connection with positions taken
by various Governments on the question of aggression.With
your permission, Mr. President, 1 will read certain extracts
from this article in French; the article was published in Le
Monde on 3 June 1967; it says:
“On 3 January 1952, in the Sixtlt Committee of the
General Assembly of the United Nations, the Soviet
delegation submitted . . . six definitions, four of which
referred to armed aggression. In the two others, a State
was defined as an attacker State if ‘it instituted a naval

135. But now the question arises, who attacked? In ail
honesty and fairness, 1 ask you, Mr. President, and a11of the
members of the Council, who attacked the United Arab
&-public? In their own confession of guilt, they said: “We
attacked because we knew of their intention to attack.”
There was no attack started by either the United Arab
Republic or the Syrian Arab Republic.

blockade of the toasts or ports of another State’ or if ‘it
supported armed bands, which, organized in its own
territory, invaded the territory of another State or
refused, on being requested by the invaded State, to take
any action within its power to deny such bands any aid or
protection’.
“But on 3 October 1957, the delegation of the Soviet
Union stated, inter alia, that a State shall be declared to
have committed an act of economic aggression which
‘first . . . takes against another State measures of economic pressure violating its sovereignty and economic
independence and threatening the bases of its economic
life’.

136. The situation in which we now find ourselves is in
full harmony and in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations, which states:
“Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the
inherent right of individual or collective self-defence if an
armed attack occurs against a Member of the United
Nations, until the Security Council has taken measures
necessary to maintain international peace and security.
Measures taken by Members in the exercise of this right
of self-defence shall be immediately reported to the
Security Council and shall not in any way affect the
authority and responsibility of the Security Council
under the present Charter to take at any time such action
as it deems necessary in order to maintain or restore
international peace and security.”

“On 14 October 1957 the Syrian delegation gave a
mixed type of definition of aggression consisting of a
general definition and an enumeration which did not fail
to include blockade or ‘the toleration of the use by . . .
armed bands of its territory as a base of operations or as a
point of departure for incursions into the territory of
another State’.“3
130. There have been acts committed against Israel
through many long years, and the blockade was again
introduced and imposed by Egypt in the Gulf of Aqaba on
22 May 1967. Ciearly, this was an act of aggression as
defined by the Soviet Union and the Syrian delegation
themselves.
131. The PRESIDENT:
tive of Syria.

137. Therefore, what has taken place between the United
Arab Republic and the Syrian Arab Republic is in full
conformity with the Charter, There is a Mutual Defence
Pact between the two countries, and the Syrian Arab
Republic was attacked, as 1 have said time and again, on
7 April. Israel threatened to attack Syria when the time was
proper. At Syria’s call, the Mutual Defence Pact was
completed; there was at no time any declaration of war
started by Syria against Israel but there was the application
of a Mutual Defence Pact in accordance with Article 51 of
the Charter.

1 give the floor to the representa-

132. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): The Israel representative has
posed a question: Did Syria declare war against Israel? Did
Syria start a war against Israel, or did it not? 1 shall answer
that question.

138. The representative of Israel quoted Cassin, who is a
great authority on the question of aggression, and he
brought in the views of the Syrian delegation on that
particular subject. 1 will not be misled by the diversionary
tactics of the representative of Israel. The issue in the
Council now is not the academic one of a definition of
aggression; the issue, 1 repeat, is an actual aggression
committed by Israel air and ground forces against Syria,
forces which have alrcady penetrated Syria.

133. The answer is: No, Syria did not declare war on
Israel. Syria, and every other Arab State since the Middle
East crisis arose, came to this Council. They are on record
as having said: “We Will not attack Israel. We shall respond
only if we are attacked.”
134. When the historians of this crisis study this period,
they Will find that, unfortunately, the Arab States were
deliberately misled, that they were led to believe that Israel
was not going to attack. 1 shall mention one such instance.
One evening during the crisis- do not recall the exact date,
but it was between 5 and 6 o’clock, when the SecretaryGeneral was giving a farewell party to the Ambassador of
Tunisia-Under-Secretary Ralph Bunche told me officially,
on behalf of the Secretary-General, that he had been told
by the Israel representative that they were not going to
attack either the United Arab Republic or Syria. He further
requested me to convey that information to my Government, as he also requested the representative of the United
Arab Republic. Of course, we could not but believe the
distinguished Under-Secretary, and we conveyed the information. As the news cornes out, we learn-in fact, it is no
secret-that representatives of Western Powers in our
capitals impressed upon our authorities that Israel was not
going to attack either the United Arab Republic or Syria,

139. Therefore, the second point that he used in his, SO to
speak, answer to me is completely irrelevant. Blockades,
waterways, free passage, innocent passage are not being
discussed now; what is being discussed, at my request, in an
emergency meeting of the Security Council is the attack
that was started early this morning by Israel against Syria.
That is the issue, not the theoretical definition of aggression. 1 will not be misled by the representative of Israel
and indulge in these theoretical diversions, although at
another time 1 would not hesitate at ail to do SO.
140. To bring the Council back again to the heart of the
problem we are discussing, which is the Israel attack on
Syria, to what 1 have said SO far, to the two letters
addressed this afternoon to the Secretary-General, and to
what I said about the massive march of Israel tanks and
armoured columns into Syria, 1 want to state further that

3 Quoted in French by the speaker.

2

Israel tanks are advancing without a stop in large numbers
in the same area which 1 mentioned before, namely,
Massadeh. This is a clear-tut violation of the cesse-fire
which, hypocritically , the Israel representative said Israel
had accepted and had issued orders to cessefire.

information from the area. We have, as the Council
members are fully aware, only one source of information:
that is, General Odd Bull, Chief of Staff of UNTSO. Of
course, he has been reporting to me regularly but some
pieces of information are confirmed and some pieces of
information are not confirmed. SO, for the purpose of
imparting correct information to the Council 1 have to use
my own judgement whether a particular piece of information is confirmed or unconfirmed. As soon as confirmed
information is available, 1 will make it a point to subrnit it
to the Council as soon as possible, I have also been told by
General Odd Bull that he finds it very difficult to establish
direct contact with the observers in the area because of the
unsettled situation.

141. The Syrian army is not attac,king Israel; the Syrian
army is not advancing against Israel. What we are doing
inside our own territory is fighting and resisting the march
and the onslaught of the huge Israel machinery against
Syria.
142. Furthermore, 1 want to affirm once more that as we
are here discussing the question of the aggression of Israel
against Syria, Israel’s Air Force at this very moment is still
overflying Syrian territory, and 1 would again express the
hope that the Security Council will treat this problem with
the gravity it deserves and not be misled into lengthy
discussions, as we were this morning and this afternoon,
about subjects that are extraneous to the particular dangers
we are now facing.

151. Mr. KEITA (Mali) (translated from French): In my
delegation’s opinion, no one around this table is unaware of
the quarter from which aggression came and why it began.
However, the Council has still not corne to any decision
about Israel’s responsibility for starting this aggrcssion. The
Council’s decision to call for a cesse-fïre has not SO far
prevented the aggressor from continuing bis invasion. Are
we to believe that we have to wait until the invader has
settled down comfortably and established control over the
lands he has conquered SO that he cari dictate his laws to
the occupied countries? If SO, my delegation cannot but
interpret the Council’s attitude as tacit support of the
aggressor.

143. The PRESIDENT: 1 cal1 on the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on a point of order.
144. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (translated front Russian): During the Council’s
meeting very alarming information is still being received to
the effect that Israel’s aggression in Syria is continuing and
that armed hordes are committing more and more crimes
on Syrian soil. Would you not consider it possible,
Mr. President, to ask the Secretary-General to give us any
information he may have at tlie present stage?

152. You Will recall, Mr. President, that as early as
Monday morning during our consultations, 1 told you that,
in my delegation’s view, if an appeal for peace wasto mean
anything, it must be accompanied by a request for the
withdrawal of the troops to their original bases. Unfortunately, that suggestion was not taken up, and we now have
to face the consequences.

145. The PRESIDENT: The question has been raised by
the representative of the Soviet Union that the Council
should hear whether the Secretary-General has further
information to submit to the Council now. 1 give the floor
to the Secretary-General.

153. At present, despite Israei’s agreement to put an end
to the war, the bombing continues and innocent victims are
paying with their lîves.

146. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Since my last report
to the Council, 1 have had no confirmed information
regarding the situation referred to by the representative of
the Soviet Union. Therefore, 1 am sorry but 1 have no
further report to submit to the Council.

154. 1 must repeat that, after condemning the act of
aggression by Israel, the Council should effectively demand
a cesse-fire and the withdrawal of the troops to their
original bases. If Israel’s military successesgo to its head
and encourage it to continue its military activities, 1 feel
bound to say that this bodes no good for the peace of the
region.

147. The PRESIDENT: 1 thank the Secretary-General, and
I now cal1 on the representative of the Soviet Union on a
point of order.

155. Mr. TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): After almost a full day of deliberations, despite

148. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, we should
like to ask for one more clarification in this connexion, It is
well known that our Organization has certain facilities on
Syrian territory. Perhaps the distinguished SecretaryGeneral would consider it possible to make additional
inquiries to discover whether there are any reports from his
representatives there.
149. The PRESIDENT: 1 would ask the Secretary-General
whether he would like to reply to the question raised by
the representative of the Soviet Union.

the efforts made by its members to contribute to the
achievement of an effective cesse-fire between Syria and
Israel and between Israel and the other Arab States, the
Security Council is now faced with the dangerous situation
resulting from the continuing Israel aggression against Syria
and the other Arab States. At least, this is the situation as it
appears to us at present, not only from the contradictory
information provided by the news agencies but also from
the information
we have been given by the Israel
representative hîmself.

150. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
As 1 have just reported to the Council, 1 have no further confirmed

156. A few moments ago, instead of telling us that the
cesse-fïre was in effect throughout the region and that the
13

one country, the United States of America, which, according to a11the information we have received, is behind
the aggression.

Israel Government and its forces had stopped making war
on the hrab countries, the Israel representative sought to
establish who had declared war and who had not, and how
that question could be decided according to one newspaper
or another-as if that technical question mattered at this
stage. These are of course only pretexts for continuing what
has been begun.

163. The other day we quoted a United States reporter on
board one of the warships of the Sixth Fleet deployed off
Crete to show that that fleet wasready to întervene on the
orders of the United States Government. We know where
the United States Government’s sympathies lie, despite the
smile on the face of one representative. We know which
side they are on.

1.57. The Secretary-General has given us some items of
information and he has just stated that he would only give
the Council information that he could verify, information
whose authenticity cari be more or less verified. And we
have been informed that Israel columns are on Syrian
territory and its aircraft in Syrian airspace.

164. Just now the United States representative made a
long statement on behalf of his Government and its highest
circles. He spoke in dispassionate language devoid of any
partiality as between the aggressor and the victim. His
words were clearly indicative of a troubled conscience
because they were unclear, and even of a guilty conscience
which sensesthe condemnation of world public opinion.

158. The Israel representative said: “We have stopped
firing, except in self-defence.” But where is this “selfdefence” talcing place? Over Damascus, over Cairo, on the
territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, in other words in
places where neither the Israel Air Force nor the Israel
armed forces have any right to be under the cesse-fire
arrangement. That is the crux of the question. The right of
self-defence is being exercised on someone else’s territory,
despite the cesse-fire. What kind of reasoning is this when,
even at the very moment when the cesse-fire was proclaimed, Israel forces were on the territory of another
country? The advance is merely being continued.

165. Instead of statements, however, we would have
preferred-and peace would certainly benefit by-a more
helpful attitude on his part with respect to the cesse-fire: in
other words, we would have preferred him to advise Israel,
using every possible influence at his command, to cesse
firing and to put an end to this aggression which threatens
to have, and might well have, either now or in .the near
future, fatal consequences for the States of the region
where the conflict is taking place and very serious consequences for the peace of the whole world.

159. It is obvious that Israel, taking advantage of its
treacherous attack on the United Arab Republic by which
it has succeeded in damaging part of that country’s air
force, is now trying ta turn that treacherous attack to
account by continuing the bombing and by endangering
whatever is left, whatever else cari be found in the United
Arab Republic. As the representative of the United Arab
Republic stated just now, Israel now seeks to be able to
intervene, in everything that takes place in that country.

166. We have heard the Permanent Representative of the
United States speak several times. In the past he has made
statements to the effect that his Government intended to
respect and even safeguard the territorial integrity and
political independence of a11the countries in the region.
But now, when Israel is conducting a brutal act of
aggression against the Arab countries, when its troops are
invading and devastating the territories of the United Arab
Republic, Jordan, and Syria, we may legitimately ask
ourselves what steps the United States Government proposes to take with a view to giving effect to its earlier
pronouncements. At a11events, we see no sign of them in
the draft resolution which the United States delegation has
submitted to the Security Council. On the contrary, it is
clear from the wording used at the beginning of that draft
resolution [S/7952/Rev. 11 -which Mr. Goldberg told us
about only a few minutes ago and which he presented as
something that would make it possible to provide a remedy
for a11the harm that has been done in the Middle East-and
towards the end, where it deals with the second stage, that
the United States is steadfastly determined to give a bonus
to the aggressor.

160. We have also heard a statement by tbe Moroccan
representative on this subject. How and when is an attempt
being made to intervene in the skies over Cairo? We havc of
course seen some news agency telegrams which bave been
read out and which try to persuade us that nothing has
happened and that there has been .Ro intervention by the
Israel Air Force.
161, The entry of Israel forces into Syria after the Syrian
Government had accepted the cesse-fire is a very serious
and dangerous move because the cease”fire was the crux of
the Security Council’s decisions. The Israel forces began
their attack against Syria at that very moment, not from
their own territory, but in Syria. This is something which
may have dangerous consequences in the future. If in the
face of this situation the Security Council does not take the
initiative and condemn this new and treacherous act of
aggression, which violates a11 the decisions made by the
Council on the question today, yesterday and the day
before, in the course of discussions which are still taking
place, the result may be a grave’and serious threat to the
peace not only of the region but of the world.

167. If the Security Council wishes to stay in session to
listen to the statements of the Permanent Representative of
Israel on academic questions, we shall certainly never be
able to finish this meeting or to help to bring about a
cesse-fire and an end of the aggression by Israel.
168. It is time for the Security Council to find out what
the situation is in the area, because it bas now become
dangerous. Then-and we think that the Council should
already be directing its attention towards this aspect of the

162. The Israel attack and aggression has certainly been
instigated and supported by certain imperialist circles from
a11over the world, and in particular by the irnperialists of
14

matter-we must trY to ensure that the aggressor wiI1 be
condemned and that he Will be branded as such before the
whole world, as the Malian representative said only a few
moments ago. The act of aggression by Israel, and a11other
military action constituting a flagrant violation of the
resolutions we have just adopted, must be brought to an
cnd immediately. The Council must also decide that the
Israel troops which bave invaded the territory of the Arab
countries must be withdrawn. The Council must decide on
the immediate withdrawal of Israel forces because, if they
are not withdrawn, they Will constitute a danger for the
future because of a11the military operations which could be
conducted.

the proceedings of the fourth session of the Committee on
the Question of Defining Aggression. For more than ten
years the Committee has been engaged in fruitless meetings
and is still unablc to draft a definition of aggression, owing
entirely to sabotage and violent opposition by the Western
representatives. Thirdly, the Security Council is at present
concerned not with some kind of academic research on
definitions or terminology-let
us leave that for another
occasion-but with a perfectly obvious fact, namely direct
and undisguised aggression by Israel against the neighbouring Arab States.
174. And in this connexion we should like to try once
again to obtain an answer from the representative of
Israel-who has obviously not yet thought up a form of
words to reply to our question-about Tel-Aviv’s intentions
regarding the withdrawal of its troops from the occupied
territories of Arab countries. We do not wish to abuse your
kindness, Mr. President, but we cannot refrain from asking
you once again when and how you would consider it
possible to use the means at your disposa1 to enable the
Security Council finally to obtain a direct answer to this
question.

169. Lastly, we must certainly consider doing what the
representative of India suggested this morning: we must
give new life and activity to the United Nations machinery
on the spot and to the Mixed Armistice Commissions. But
the first thing the Council must now do is to establish
whether the Israel aggression has been brought to an end; if
not, the Council should immediately consider other
measures to put an end to it.
170. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (Wanslated jkom Ruwàn): Mr. President, we should
like to make some remarks about the recurrent, or
never-ending, statements by the representative of Tel-Aviv.
The Israel representative’s speeches are simply astonishing.
He has rejected everything absolutely, he has flatly denied
and refuted everything; and in SO doing he has resorted,
quite unfastidiously, to hypocrisy, cynicism and demagogy.
And if for a single moment one were to believe this wild
imagination of bis, Israel’s aggression against the Arab
countries would grotesquely assume the appearance of an
ail-embracing act of virtue, an uncommonly lavish dispensation of benefits to the entire world.

17.5. We have aIso heard yet another statement by the
representative of the United States. It wasimpossible not to
notice how deeply distressed the judge wasat the departure
of the United Nations Emergency Force from the territory
of the United Arab Republic, which has now exercised its
legal rights as a sovereign State and rid itself of foreign
troops-once and for ail, we hope. But everything points to
the fact that our distinguished colleague from the United
States still cannot get over the withdrawal of military
contingents belonging to NATO countries, which are not of
course interested in peace or the welfare of the Arab
countries, but in their own selfish strategic purposes in the
Near East. It looks as if people in Washington are still
dreaming about the past and the opportunities they mlssed.
It is time to abandon these wretched illusions, however
much pleasure they may give to representatives of Western
countries.

171. Corne to your senses,distinguished Ambassador. You
are not in the realms above the clouds but in the dock in
the Security Council, which is condemning Israel for
perpetrating a monstrous act of aggression.

176. From the statement by the representative of the
United States of America, it also appears that he feels
obliged to delay by every possible means a solution of the
most important problems involved in putting an end to the
aggression, namely the withdrawal of Israel’s aggressive
forces behind the armistice lines and the condemnation of
aggression. It is not by accident that he has entirely evaded
the question of the withdrawal of Israei’s forces. There is a
remarkable similarity in the approach adopted by the
representatives of Tel-Aviv and Washington.

172, The reprcsentative of Israel has gone SOfar as to hold
the Arabs in Cairo up to ridicule, practically saying that
they are dropping bombs on themselves because the Israel
Air Force has not been bombing them intensively enough
or at the right tirne. With regard to the unbridled
imagination of the Ambassador of Israel, we should like to
ask whether by chance he has ever happened ta drop bombs
on his own head. And, if he never has, then he might try his
own
recipe on himself. It is not altogether impossible that
this rather effective remedy might help him to sober UP
from the intoxication of aggression and warlike enthusiasm.

177. We decisively reject this kind of approach. The
Security Council must take immediate steps to condemn
the aggressor and ensure that Jsrael’s forces withdraw
immediately and unconditionally behind the armistice lines.
And one is bound to agree wlth the representative of India,
Mr. Parthasarathi, that the aggressormust not be allowed to
Count on the possibility that his criminal aggression Will
have favourable results and that he will advance his own
interests by means of this adventure. The only fruits of
aggression are bitter ones-severe punishment and harsh
penalties for violating the sovereign rights of other peoples.

173. In order to justify aggression the representative of
Israel bas suddenly indulged in an academic discourse and
started quoting from an article by Professor Cassin.
Somebody once said about a certain priest that, in order to
play dirty tricks on other people, he even leamed arithmetic. In the first place, it is well known that Cas& is a
supporter of the Zionist point of view. Secondly, it is
precisely the Western Powers, and particularly the United
States of America, which are irreconcilably opposed to
drafting a definition of aggression, asis perfectly clear from
15

178. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Syria, to whom 1 now give the floor.

186. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Syria, to whom 1 now give the floor.

179. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): 1 want to thank you, Mr. President, and assure you at the outset that it is not without a
great sense of hesitation that 1 bave again asked for the
floor, But in each of my interventions, 1 did draw the
attention of the Council, timc and again, to the gravity of
the situation, one manifestation of which is the massing of
large numbers of tanks which have already penetrated
Syrian territory. This is undoubtedly an aggression and will
lead to a larger aggression.

187. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): 1just want to emphasize what 1
bave already said, and respectfully to request the Security
CounciI, in its turn, to request the Secretary-General to
contact the United Nations machinery on the spot, tonight-and this is possible; it cari be done by telephone; we
have contacted our capital quite a few times today-and to
inform the Council tomorrow morning. Again I repeat, on
instructions from my Government, that we are ready to
give the United Nations military observers and investigators
all the facilities required.

180. We say that these tanks that entered through
Massadeh are advancing on the way to Damascus. Can we
let them continue their advance to Damascus without
trying to stop them? The Security CounciI, in accordance
with the resolutions SOfar adopted, must seeto it that this
aggression, the advance of Israel tanks and armoured
col~mns
on Damascus, should be stopped, and stopped
immediately,

188. The PRESIDENT:
representative of Israel.

189. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): 1 second the motion made by
the Syrian representative,
190. The PRESIDENT: May 1 draw the attention of Council
members to the fact that motions cannot be made by
countries participating in the debate but not members of the
Council.

“81. The question has been raised about the use of United
d Nations machinery. 1 am empowered by the Syrian authorities to state categorically here that we are ready to facilitate
the carrying out of any investigation in order to give the
Security Council the facts by which it cari judge the
situation. The United Nations military observers cari go to
this region which 1 mentioned, Massadeh, and the Secretary-General cari by telephone contact the Chief military
observer in the area and charge him with this task, namely,
to go to the area and to see and verify the advance of the
Israel column, and to report to the Security Council.
182. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

1 now give the floor to the

191. A proposa1 has been made by the representative of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics tbat we should ask the
Secretary-General to use the machinery and try to get
information from the area. 1 submit that a suggestion was
made by the representative of Syria-not a motion-for our
discussion: that we should ask the Secretary-General to
contact the United Nations people on the spot and report
tomorrow morning to the Council on developments.
192. 1 should like to hear Ihe views of the members. Would
there be any objection to asking the Secretary-General to
supply us with a11the information he cari possibly get from
the area through United Nations representatives? If there is
no objection to that, there then cornes the question as to
what timing we should fix. We have had one suggestion that
we should try to have the information within half an hour.
The representative of Syria has suggested that we should try
to get it for tomorrow morning. 1 am in the hands of the
Council.

1 cal1 on the representative of

183. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): Mr. President, 1 shall be very
brief. 1 wish to assure the Council and the representative of
Syria that no armoured columns of Israel are advancing
towards Damascus. Again 1 repeat, orders have been issued
to the armed forces of Israel to cesse hostilities.
184, 1 find myself in singular agreement with the representative of Syria in stating that Israel Will facilitate the
investigation which the Secretary-General may wish to
institute to find out the facts about the latest events.

193. 1 cal1 on the representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic.
194. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): 1 must state that 1wasnot aware,
perhaps because 1 did not follow the translation closely, that
the representative of the Soviet Union had asked that this
information be transmitted, through the Secretary-General,
in half an hour. Of course, 1welcome that.

185 Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (translated jbom Russian): Mr. President, we feel that
we must draw the Security Council’s attention once again
to the fact that there has not been any change for the
better in the situation regarding the halting of the advance
by Israel’s aggressiveforces into Syrian territory. According
to the information being received, Israel’s troops are
continuing to press on into the interior of Syria. We have
just heard some additional news from the representative of
Syria, Ambassador Tomeh. May we once again request the
Secretary-General through you, Mr. President, to take
energetic steps to use the machinery available and pay all
possible attention to the information emanating from this
machinery, and to report to the Security Council witbout
delay, perhaps in half an hour’s time.

195. The PRESIDENT: 1 take it that the representative of
Syria lias withdrawn his suggestion. Therefore, there is only
one suggestion before the Council. Before expressing any
opinion on that suggestion, 1 should like to ask the
Secretary-General whether he deems it technically possible
to provide the Council with the information requested by
the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republits within the time-limit suggested.
196. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Mr. President, with
reference to the request of the representative of the Soviet
16

Union, 1 have the following observations to make. First of
ah, as 1 indicated earlier in my short intervention, I received
a report from General Odd Bull, Chief of Staff of UNTSO,
that he had lest contact with his observers in several areas
because of the unsettled conditions there.

every reason to support the Secretary-General in his
request, and to demand that Israel should immediately
re-establish normal conditions for the work of the United
Nations observers. This is the first point.
203. Secondly we are in favour of the idea expressed by
the representative of Syria, Ambassador Tomeh, that the
Secretary-General should immediately instruct the Chief of
Staff of the United Nations military observers to visit a11
the areas mentioned by the distinguished representative of
Syria, and should inform the Security Council of the actual
situation without delay. We support this idea, and therefore
propose that action should be taken accordingly.

197. Secondly, in order to facilitate the collection of
information, the essential condition is that the parties
concerned must give all possible co-operation to the
observers. SO far, to my knowledge, the necessary cooperation has not been forthcoming. Therefore, 1 would
request the parties primarily concerned to render a11
possible co-operation and assistanceto the United Nations
observers in the discharge of their responsibilities.

204. The PRESIDENT:
sentative of Israel.

198. Thirdly, 1 should like to report to the Council that
since General Odd Bull and his staff have had ta leave
Government House, they have no wireless communication
facilities for the purpose of contacting the observers. They
have had to use mostly commercial services, commercial
communications, which of course are very defective for the
purpose of prompt reporting. Therefore, 1 should like to
take this opportunity of appealing to the Government of
Israel, through its representative, to restore the use of
Government House to General Odd Bull SO that he Will be
in a position to reach the observers promptly for the
purpose of reporting officially to me in order that 1 may be
in a position to report accurately to the members of the
Council.

205. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): 1 would not prolong this
debate were it not for the statement just now made by the
representative of the Soviet Union. 1 recommend to the
representative of the Soviet Union that he read the
Secretary-General’s report to the Council, in the record of
the 1347th meeting, where he Will get a clear account of
the events which led to the breakdown of United Nations
communications in Government House. The SecretaryGeneral stated:
“After hostilities began on the morning of 5 June, the
Chief of Staff of UNTSO drew the attention of Israel and
Jordan ta the inviolability of the Government House area
and asked them to ensure that this inviolability would be
fully respected. Bath sides gave him the required assurance, However, at 1330 hours local time today,
approximately
one company of Jordanian soldiers
occupied the garden of Government House. General Bull
in person protested to the Commander and asked him to
withdraw his troops. He also protested in the strongest
terms to the senior Jordanian delegate to the IsraelJordan Mixed Armistice Commission against the violation
of United Nations premises by Jordanian soldiers, whose
withdrawal within half an hour he demanded, He also
informed the Israel authorities of these developments and
requested them to ensure that Israel soldiers would not
enter the Government House area. By then an exchange
of fire had already begun between the Jordanian soldiers
in the Government House garden and Israel soldiers
near.by. General Bull later informed me by an emergency
message that Jordanian troops had not withdrawn and
were demanding to enter Government House itself and
had demanded that no telephone calls be made from
Government Hou’se. Firing was continuing and mortar
shells were now ianding within the Gavernment House
compound. United Nations Headquarters lost radio con
tact with UNTSO headquarters in Jerusalem at 0852
hours New York time, at which time Jordanian troops
occupied
Government House.” (1347th meeting
para. 20.1.

199. Fourthly, one very essential element for the performance of their functions by the observers is to get
freedom of movement. 1 think this is a must if the Security
Council is to expect prompt and effective and accurate
reporting from the United Nations observers on the spot.
Therefore, 1 should also like to take this opportunity of
requesting the parties primarily concerned to render a11
possible assistance to the United Nations observers to
achieve complete freedom of movement for them.

7.

1 give the floor to the repre-

200. If those conditions are obtained, 1 am sure we Will
get the required information as soon as possible. But 1 do
not think it is practical to expect an accurate report in the
course of thirty minutes; that is physically impossible. 1
have no idea how long it Will take. But if those conditions
are met, 1 am sure the reporting will be prompt. 1 cari assure
the members of the Council that as soon as 1 receive the
necessary report which is relevant to the matter under
discussion, 1 shall see to it that the Council members get
that report as promptly as possible.
201. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (translated from Russian): Mr. President, we have
listened with great attention to the statement just made by
the Secretary-General, U Thant. In this connexion we
should Iike to refer to one circumstance-namely
the
deliberate seizure by Israel’s troops of the headquarters of
the United Nations observers, SOas to deprive the headquarters of the possibility of reliable communications with
observers in the field.

206. This was the report made by General Bull. Conse
quently, Israel soldiers drove out Jordanian soldiers from
that area, and at the risk of their lives they rescued General
Bull and bis staff and brought him and his party to Israel
territory, where the Israel Government provided him with
facilities to establish communications with United Nations
Headquarters.

202. In my view we cannot overlook this circumstance,
and we must condemn acts of this kind by Israel. This is an
attack on the United Nations presence as well. We have
7

and his military advisers here, not quotations from old
records. It was certainly not by chance that means of
communication were interrupted. If we have to wait a few
hours until these communications are restored, armoured
columns may be at the gates of some of the world’s most
ancient cities.

207. The PRESIDENT: The represcntative of the Soviet
Union is asking to speak. 1 would inquire of him whether it
is on a point of order, because the next speaker on my list
is the representative of Bulgaria.
208. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (tinnslated froc Russifzn): Mr. President, 1 have net
the slightest intention of disputing anyone’s rights, which
are determined by the order in which names are entered on
the list of speakers. 1 am speaking on a point’of order.

215. That is why 1 think the Council must immediately
take the necessary mezisuresto ensure that communications
are restored and that General Bull or some other member of
the United Nations military staff on the spot Will be able to
ascertain the facts and communicate them to the Secretary-General.

209. What 1 wish to say is that the past and recollections
are the last things which concern us here, and that we are
not especially grateful to the reader of documents who has
here recalled some pages of the past. We are interested in
the present. In whose hands is the United Nations headquarters at the present moment? Please do not depict your
soldiery in this area as angels with wings. This is not the
place for that. Do not forget yourself. Do not be carried
away by this picture you are painting, but answer the
request by the Secretary-General who has clearly said that
Israel’s forces are interfering there. What purposes are these
recollections of yours meant to serve? Why are you
side-stepping the issue?

216. 1 am well aware of the difficulties, but 1 should like
to have an answer and to know-given the co-operation
which the Israel representative Will presumably hasten to
promise to the United Nations-how soon it Will be possible
to receive information about what is happening in the area.
We could then decide how to proceed here and whether the
Council should meet tomorrow, or suspend the meeting to
await information.
217, The PRESIDENT:
sentative of Syria.

210. 1 felt that 1 had to draw attention to this position
taken by the representative of Israel, who is still trying to
obscure the situation.

218. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): 1 listened with great attention
to what the Secretary-General said about the proposa1 to
contact the United Nations machinery on the spot to
ascertain the facts. In this connexion, 1 wish to support
most strongly what was stated in this respect by the Soviet
representative, and to assure the Secretary-General, on
behalf of the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic, that
we Will give General Odd Bull and his assistants in the
United Nations machinery all possible facilities at our
disposal SOthat they cari go into the areas specified in my
letters to tlie Secretary-General [paras. 20 and 22 above]
and establish the facts and convey them to the Secretary
General for the information of the Security Council.

211. The PRESIDENT:
1 find it a little difficult to see
what the point of order was. This wasrather the exercise of
the Soviet representative’s right of reply, which should have
occurred in proper order, SO that the representative of
Bulgaria should have had the right to speak first. 1 now cal1
on the representative of Bulgaria.
212.

1 give the floor to the repre-

Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
Before coming to the point on which 1 wished to
speak, 1 should like to say that 1 too wished to make the
comment that the Israel representative’s recording apparatus seems to be running a few days late. Only a moment
ago, the Secretary-General made a perfectly clear statemetit
in which he said that the United Nations communications
facilities were now in the hands of the Israel Government.
He asked, if 1 am not mistaken, for these communications
to be restored and for Government House to be returned to
UNTSO. That is what 1 myself wanted to say. The Israel
representative cited passages from past records from which
one cari seek to prove a great many things and tried to put
the blame on the Jordanian troops.

French):

213. The present situation is undoubtedly grave. The
Secretary-General has just told us that he is without means
of communication
and that the Israel Government must
co-operate with the United Nations if we are to receive any
information. Instead of a promise that the United Nations
communications facilities Will be restored forthwith, a11we
have heard is a quotation from the records, as the Soviet
Union has pointed out.

219. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): For some little
time past 1 have felt that we are not making any effective
progress in the Council. We greatly hope that the action we
took this morning Will have its effect, and we know that the
important question is not what we say here tonight, but
what is happening in the hîlls of Syria and the approaches
to Israel. 1 should be anxious, we should ail be anxious, I
am sure, to stay here through the night if necessary if we
thought we could do any good. 1 should even be happy to
listen to any given number of speeches from the representative of the Soviet Union. 1 cari think of no pleasanter
way of spending the night. But 1 would respectfully suggest
that we are dealing at the moment with rumour; we are
asked to form judgements on the basis of hearsay. It does
US no good and it does not advance our purpose to listen to
accusations and counter-accusations. We have the assurance
from both parties, freely given, and we are glad to note it,
that both parties Will give the Secretary-General every
possible assistance.

214. What 1 should have liked to have heard from the
Israel representative is a statement that his Government Will
co-operate in restoring communications between United
Nations personnel on the spot and the Secretary-General

220. The Secretary-General has pointed out a way which
would facilitate communications with bis officers on the
spot. 1 am sure we a11 give full hacking to the recommendations he has put to us. It is essential that the
18

arganjzation of the United Nations on the spot should be
strong, indeed, reinforced, and that, in particular, it should
have freedom of movement and freedom of communication. 1 am sure that what the Secretary-General said to us
just now carries the urgent support of every member ofthe
Council.

227. Having said this, and having taken note of this
statement by the Secretary-General, 1 would find it
reasonable that a proposal should be made, perhaps by you,
Mr. President, reiterating the substance of the SecretaryGeneral’s suggestion and calling upon both parties to
restore to General Bull forthwith the facilities he previously
enjoyed and to grant full freedom of movement and action
to the observerson the territories of both parties, SOthat
they cari provide General Bull with the facts on which he
could base his report on the events taking place on either
side Of the armistice line. As soon as this proposa1 has been
drafted, it would be desirable that we should adopt it
unanimously and that the Secretariat should take action
within the next few hours.

221. 1 do not believe it is profitable for us, in view of what
the Secretary-General has said and in view of the known
facts of the situation, to spend time wondering when we
may be called together again. We are a11always ready to be
calied at any hour of the day or night, and we are proud of
this, and we should be proud.
222. 1 think that the right decision, if I may so suggest,is
at this stage to leave it to the Secretary-General to do
everything he possibly cari to get us as full a report as soon
as he cari. He would then no doubt report to you,
Mr. President, and you would then, as usual, communicate
promptly to us.

228. Lord CARADON (United Kingdom): 1 merely wish
to say that it is clear that we are very near an agreement.
We have representatives of three Permanent Members at
least who seem to be agreed on the course we should
foIlow. The idea came from the representative of the Soviet
Union, the enthusiasm from the representative of the
United Kingdom and the precision from the representative
of France. 1 would have thought that on that basis we
might proceed and be ready to return when the SecretaryGeneral notifies the President that he has information that
we should know about.

223. 1 would hope, therefore, we would agree to cal1 on
the two parties to give every assistance and ask the
Secretary-General to make every gffort to get as full a
report as soon as possible; and that we could now adjourn
and meet again as soon as a further report is available, or,
indeed, whenever there is any other development which
requires our presence. This is the suggestion which I
respectfully put forward to you, Mr. President.

229. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (translated jkom Russian): 1 cannot refrain from
expressingmy admiration at the ready wit and British sense
of humour displayed to us by our distinguished colleague
from the United Kingdom. He has, of course, expressed a
very attractive idea about the way in which we could while
away the @ht. But 1 have some doubts. He has obviously
forgotten my proletarian origin, which, 1 fear, is not very
suitable for such exalted society-that k, the company of a
British lord, even a socialist one.

224. The PRESIDENT: 1 have Iistened to the suggestion
made by the representative of the United Kingdom, but
before proceeding with our debate 1 would draw the
attention of the members of the Council to the fact that
the representative of the Soviet Union has, if 1 have
understood him correctly, formally moved, first, that we
request the Government of Israel to restore normal working
conditions for the staff of UNTSO in Government House in
Jerusalem and, secondly, that we request the SecretaryGeneral to instruct the Chief of UNTSO to send observers
to certain locations mentioned by the representative of
Syria. The representative of Bulgaria has supported this
motion, and 1 should like to learn the opinion of other
members of the Council on this forma1 motion made by the
Soviet representative. I hope 1 have correctly stated what
the Soviet representative moved.

230. Mr. President, 1 should like once more to clarify what
we said in connexion with the request made by the
Secretary-General to the representative of Israel here in
regard to Government House. Before me 1 have document
,Y/7930 dated 5 June 1967; it contains, in paragraph 13, the
following text of a letter from the Secretary-General to
Levi Eshkol, Prime Minister of Israel:
“Whatever the circumstances leading to the Israel
occupation of Government House and its grounds, its
continued occupation by Israel troops is a most serious
breach of the undertaking to respect its inviolability.

225. Mr. TINE (France) (translated j?om French): What 1
have to say does not differ greatly from what the United
Kingdom representative has just proposed. My delegation’s
views are based on one ail-important factor: the time
factor. We must realize that investigations by the United
Nations observers will be most effective after daybreak,
which will take place very shortly in that part of the world;
consequently, everything must be done to make their work
effective in the next few hours, and also to restore to them
the freedom of communication which they now apparently
lack.

“I therefore request the Government of Israel to restore
the grounds and buildings of the Government House
compound urgently to exclusive United Nations control.
men this has been done 1 propose to seek a forma1
undertaking from both sides to respect the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization’s occupation of
Government House in the future.”

226. The Secretary-General has told us in bis last statement that the task of the observers Will be macle much
easier if the parties upon whom this depends will grant to
the observers, and above all to General Bull, the communications facilities which are being denied to them, and the
freedom of movement which they must have.

231. It was precisely because of this, Mr. President, that

we spoke on a point of order, and in regard to the Israel
representative’s behaviour at this table. Such is the actual
state of affaîrs and we should like once again to support the
Secretary-General’s legitimate request in this respect.
19

tomorrow at 10.30 a.m.; but 1 should like to ask’ the
Secretary-General how much time it Will take for us to
receive the necessary information.

232. The PRESIDENT:
1 have listened carefully to the
appeal made to the President by the representative of
France as to whether the President could find a formula
which could command unanimity in the Council. Basing
myself on the statement made by the Secretary-General and
on the motion made by the representative of the Soviet
Union, 1 wonder whether it would not be possible to agree
on something along the following lines: that we request the
parties concerned to extend a11 possible co-operation to
United Nations observers in the discharge of their responsibilities; that we request the Government of Israel to restore
the use of Government House in Jerusalem to General Odd
Bull and to re-establish freedom of movement for United
Nations observers in the area; and that we then decide to
adjourn and to decide the time and date of the next
meeting after consultations with members as soon as, and
without any delay, 1 have the information required from
the Secretary-General, it being understood of course that
the members of the Council Will hold themselves available
for any urgent meeting at any time should we be faced with
an emergency situation again. Would such a formula be
acceptable?

239. Those are the comments that 1 wish to make on your
suggestion, Mr. President, with which 1 agree.
240. The PRESIDENT: In order that we might try to
complete our discussion now, 1 would say, in reply to what
the representative of Bulgaria has said, that according to my
record, the representative of Israel said that his country
would give every opportunity to the United Nations to
facilitate investigations. In his second intervention he said
that he could support tlte motion made by the representative of Syria. 1 think that this is a factual statement,
but we might ask the representative of Israel whether he
would wish to confirm it. That is the way 1 understood it,
although 1 may be wrong. It wasmy understanding that the
representative of Syria and the representative of Israel were
quite in agreement on this point.
241. Mr. RAFAEL (Israel): You have quoted me correctly, Mr. President.

233. Mr. FEDORENKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republits) (translated front Russian): Mr. President, 1 think that
you have expressed fairly clearly what was proposed in
general not only by the Soviet delegation but also by the
United Kingdom representative and the representative of
France. But we should like the last part to be worded more
precisely, as follows: we agree that aIl members of the
Council hold themselves available and should be ready to
attend an emergency meeting at any time, but the Council
should nevertheless meet again in any case not later than
10.30 tomorrow morning.

242. The PRESIDENT: In these circumstances it appears
that we all agree that we should request the parties
concerned to extend all possible co-operation to United
Nations observers in the discharge of their responsibilities,
that we should request the Government of Israel to restore
the use of Government House to General Odd Bull and
should ask the parties to re-establish freedom of movement.
1 believe we are also agreed that the time and date of the
next meeting Will be decided after consultation with
members and as soon as 1 have the information from the
Secretary-General. This last point has been changed: thc
meeting Will take place at 10.30 tomorrow morning.

234. The PRESIDENT: With that addition, then, would
my suggestion be acceptable to a11 members of the
Council?

243. In accordance with the request made by the representative of Bulgaria, 1 shall ask the Secretary-General
whether he considers it possible to have the information
required, provided these conditions are fulfilled, before
10.30 tomorrow morning.

23.5. Mr.

TARABANOV
(Bulgaria) (translated from
French): I have no objection to the suggestion you have
just made, Mr. President; but 1 should like to make some
comments which may perhaps help us.

244. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
It is rather difficult
for me to conjecture at this stage about the time which
would be necessary for the proper functioning of the
machinery which we contemplate. First of all, 1 shall have
to send a table to General Odd Bull immediately, and then
he Will have to make contact with the observers in the field.
As 1 reported to the Council earlier, he has lost contact
with most of his observers because of the unsettled
conditions in many parts of tlie area.

236. First, I said in my last statement that Israel’s
co-operation was essential. The Syrian representative has
said, on behalf of his Government, that we could Count on
its co-operation- We have not received the same assurance
from the Permanent Representative of Israel, although it
has been supposed that he gave it. He said: ‘<Go ahead if
you wish; we agree.” But the Secretary-General has asked
for the return of Government House. The representative of
Israel has not said that his Government agrees to this; at
any rate 1 did not hear him say SO.Perhaps 1 am mistaken;
if SO,1 hope someone Will correct me. The representative of
Israel could certainly make such a statement here on behalf
of his Government SOthat the Secretary-General would be
in a good position to provide us with the necessary
information.
237. Secondly, the Israel Government
the co-operation we desire.

245. Secondly, if they regain freedom of movement, and
if the parties primarily concerned render them all possible
co-operation and assistance-and it is already, as members
of the Council are aware, six o’clock in the morning in the
area-if all those conditions are met, 1 am confident that 1
shall have some very substantive material to comrnunicate
to the Security Council before the convening of the
meeting tomorrow morning.

should give us ail

238. Thirdly, 1 must say that 1 agree with the Soviet
Union representative’s proposal that we should meet again

246. The PRESIDENT: In those circumstances, could we
agree to adjourn now, on the understanding, of course, that
20

a11members Will hold themselves available for an urgent
meeting at any time should we be faced with an emergency
situation?

submitted. Therefore, 1 take great exception to the two
words used by the representative of the United Kingdom.
We are dealing with a clear-eut case of aggression, with a
violation of a cesse-fire, of a resolution that was adopted
this morning. Names of villages and of other places have
been given. These are not rumour and hearsay. However,
my astonishment disappeared when I found the complete
agreement between the statement of the representative of
the United Kingdom and that of the Israel representative.
This much 1 should like to say.

247. 1 give the floor to the representative of Syria.
248. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): For the record, 1 wish to state
that 1 have just received information from the Foreign
Minister of the Syrian Arab Republic to the effect that an
attack from Massadeh, to which 1 have referred, has already
startcd.

250. The PRESIDENT: 1 take note of this statement
which the representative of Syria wishes included in the
record of this meeting.

249. During the intervention of the representative of the
United Kingdom, Lord Caradon, he stated that we were
now dealing with “rumeur” and “hearsay”. 1 was indeed
astonished to hear that, for, since early this morning, we
have not been dealing with rumour and hearsay; we have
been dealing with facts and names, which 1 submitted to
the Council, in two letters to the Secretary-General, and in
the various statements that 1 made, 1 also challenged the
representative of Israel to disprove those facts which 1

251. Since there is no objection to the procedure which 1
have suggested, we shall adjoum now on the understanding
that 1 have outlined.
The meeting rose ut 10.50 p.m

21
