222

General A~scmbl~ -- --Forl\ -\ccond Scssion

sioner for Refugees to keep the1r ..,ituat1011 under constan!
review;
2. Welcames the steps taken hy the Government of
Djibouti, in close co-operation with the High Commissioner, to implement adequate and lasting solutions in respect of the refugees in Djibouti;
3. Expresses its appreciation to Member States, the
specialized agencies, intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations and voluntary agencies for
their assistance to the relief and rehabilitation
programmes for the refugees and displaced persons in
Djibouti;
4. Urges the High Commissioner to intensify his efforh
to mobilize, on an emergency hasis, the necessary resources to implement lasting solutions in respect ofthe reí
ugees in Djibouti;
5. Calls upan ali Memher States, the organizations of
the United Nations system, the specialized agencies and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to continue to support the determined and constant efforts
made by the Government ofDjibouti to cope with the ur
gent needs of the refugees and to implement lasting solutions in respect of their situation;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session, through the
Economic and Social CounciL on the 1mplementation of
the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December !987
42/127.

Assistance to refugees in Somalía

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35; 180 of 15 December 1980,
36/153 of 16 December 1981, 37/174 of 17 December
1982, 38/88 of 16 December 1983, 39/104 of 14 November 1984, 40/132 of 13 December 1985 and 41/138 of
4 December 1986 on the question of assistance to refugees
in Somalía,
Taking note of the report of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees on assistance to refugees in
Somalía, 145
HavinK considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral 146 on the refugee situation in Somalia and the
comprehensive programme of assistance required to enable Somalía to cope with the situation,
Deeply concerned about the heavy borden that has been
placed on the fragile economy of Somalia by the continuing presence of large numbers of refugees,
Aware of the additional burden imposed by the continued influx of refugees and the consequent urgen! need
for additional international assistance,
Concerned about the continuing and serious shortfalls in
the provision of food assistance, which have resulted in
severe ration restrictions, malnutrition and extreme hardship in refugee camps in Somalia,
Conscious of the pressure that the refugee present·e continues to impose on the public services, in particular education, health, transport and communications, and water
supplies,
Noting with concern the deleterious effect of the refugee
presence on the environment, which has resulted in wide145 A/42/498 and Add. l.
146 A/42/645.

~pread deforestat1011, soil erosion and the threat of destruction toan already fragile ecological balance,
l. Cammends the Secretary-General and the United
Na1ions High C,1mmissioner for Refugees for their repor1s;
2. Expresses lis appreciation to the Government of
Somalía for the measures it is taking to provide material
and humanitarian assistance to refugees, in spite ofits own
limited resources and fragile economy;
.t Appeals to Member States, international organizat 1ons and voluntary agencies to render maximum and
timely material, financia! and technical assistance to enable the Government of Somalía to carry out the projects
and activities described in the report of the SecretaryCieneral;
4. Endorses for urgent and favourable consideration
the list of~rojects contained in the report ofthe SecretaryGeneraP 4 as the basis for a comprehensive programme of
action;
'i. Recommends for urgent and favourable consideration by the Government of Somalía, as well as by the
United Nations system and the international donor community, the suggestions proposed in para!raphs 67 to 69
of the report of t he Secretary-General, 1 6 which would
facilitate the implementation of the programme of action
recommended in the report;
ó. Calls upan the High Commissioner to ensure, as appropriate, that the care, maintenance and rehabilitation
needs of the refugees are adequately covered;
7. Calls upon the United Nations Development Programme to assume the leading role, as required by the Second I nternationa I Conference on Assistance to Refugees
in Africa, 105 in the conceptualization, implementation and
monitoring of refugee-related projects, and to be involved
in the mobilization ofthe financia! and technical means required, in close co-operation with the High Commissioner
and the World Bank;
8. Requests the pertinent organizations of the United
Nations system, namely the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Labour
Organisation, the World Health Organization, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
and the United Nations Children's Fund, as well as the
United Nations Environment Programme and the World
Food Programme, to prepare, in consultation with the
Government of Somalia, detailed project documentation
for the implementation of those projects and activities
identified in the report of the Secretary-General as priority
endeavours for a comprehensive programme of action;
9. Cal/s upon the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
consult with the Government of Somalía on how best the
international community can assist Somalia in protecting
and rehahilitating its damaged environment;
10. Recognize., the important role that nongovernmental organizations are playing with regard to
programmes for lhe care, maintenance and rehabilitation
of refugees, partirnlarly in activities related to small-scale
development pnijects, and in the fields of health and
agriculture;
11. Ca/Is upon the international community to support
1he activities of 11011-governmental organizations, both lo-

147

//Jld.. para,. s~ ht,

VI.

--

--

cal and international, in Somalía, in the planning and implementation of refugee projects and rcfugee-rclated dcvelopment activities;
12. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to apprise the Economic and
Social Council at its second regular session of 1988 of the
progress made in their respective fields of responsibility
with regard to those provisions of the present resolution
which concern them;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the United Nations High Commissioner and the
United Nations Development Programme, to submit a report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session on
the progress achieved in the implementation of the present
resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 Dccemhcr 1987

42/128.

Emergency assistance to voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41 / 140 of 4 December 1986 on
emergency assistance to voluntary returnees and displaced
persons in Chad, as well as ali its previous resolutions on
this question,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
emergency humanitarian assistance 10 voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad, 148
Deeply concerned about the persistence of the drought
and the invasion of locusts and predators, which are compounding the airead y precarious food and health situation
in Chad,
Conscious that the large number of voluntary returnees
and displaced persons resulting from the war and the
drought in Chad poses a serious problem of integrating
them into society,
Considering the mass return to their home villages of
persons displaced as a result of war and drought in the
northern region of Chad,
Bearing in mind the many appeals made by the Government of Chad for international emergency assistance to
the voluntary returnees and displaced persons in Chad,
who are victims of the war and of natural disasters,
1. Endorses the appeals made by the Government of
Chad for emergency assistance to thc voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad;
2. Reiterates its appeal to ali States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support,
by generous contributions, the etforts being made by the
Government of Chad to assist and resettle the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;
3. Takes note with satisfaction ofthe action undertaken
by the various organizations ofthe United Nations system
and the specialized agencies with a view to mobilizing
emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;
4. Again requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to mobilize emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary returnees and displaced persons
in Chad;

---··

--

5. Ca/Is upo11 the Secretary-General to continue his effort~ t,, mobilize special humanitarian assistance for the
resettkmcnt of displaced persllllS in the northern region of
Chad.
6. Rt'qucsts the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, to
report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session
on the 1mplernentation ,,f thc present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December /987
42/129.

Situation of refugees in the Sudan

Illl' (i,,neral Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 41/ 139 of 4 December 1986 and
its other previous resolutions on the situation of refugees
in the Sudan,
Hav1nf.!. considered t he report of the SecretaryGeneral149 on the situation of refugees in the Sudan and
thc report of the inter-agency mission annexed thereto,
Appreciating the important measures that the Government llÍ the Sudan is taking in order to provide shelter,
protection, food, education and health and other
humanitarian services to a very large and persistent number of refugees in the Sudan,
Recog11izing the heavy burden placed on the people and
Government ofthe Sudan and the sacrifices they are making in caring for the refugees and the need for adequate international assistance to enable them to continue their efforts to provide assistance to the refugees,
Grave/y concerned at the continuing serious social and
economic impact of the massive presence of refugees, as
wcll as its far-reaching consequences for the country's development, security and stability,
Exprcssing its appreciation for the assistance rendered by
Member States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations in support ofthe refugee programmc in the Sudan,
Bearing in mind the tindings and recommendations of
the inter-agency mission to the Sudan reported to the General Assembly at its forty-first session, particularly the
suggestion that the intcrnational community should explore new and effective approaches to ensure that the burden ,1f dealing with refugees is shared more equitably, 150

Recognizing the need to view refugee-related development projects within local and national development
plan ...,
1 'J'ake.~ note of the report of the Secretary-General 149
on thc implementation ofresolution 41/139 and welcomes
the report of the inter-agency mission annexed thereto;
2. Commends the measures that the Government of
the Sudan is taking to provide material and humanitarian
assistance to refugees, in spite ofthe effects ofthe drought
and the serious economic situation it faces, and stresses
the need for additional resources to lessen the impact of
the presence of refugees on the economy ofthis least developcd country:
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
tht.' l 1nited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
do1101 countries and intergovernmental and non-

WJ t\i 42/Mó.

148 A/42/506.

223

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

1

·os,,,. 1\/41 /264. annex. 11ara. 5.1
