S/2020/1275

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 23 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, as well as the statements delivered
by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia,
France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the
video-teleconference on “The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question” convened on Monday, 21 December 2020.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 by
the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
annexed briefing and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

20-17744 (E) 301220 270121

*2017744*

S/2020/1275

Annex I
Statement by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-General,
Nickolay Mladenov
I am devoting my regular briefing on the situation in the Middle East to the
sixteenth report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2020/1234).
The written report, which members have already received, covers the period
from 21 September to 10 December 2020. I will begin by providing an update on
developments since the submission of the report to the Security Council.
On 15 December, the Palestinian Prime Minister and the Acting Humanitarian
Coordinator for the occupied Palestinian territory launched the 2021 humanitarian
response plan, which includes an appeal for $417 million to help 1.8 million vulnerable
people over the coming year. The latest humanitarian needs assessment found that
2.5 million Palestinians — some 47 per cent of the population — currently need aid.
Settlement-related developments continued after the submission of the written
report. On 13 December, the Israeli authorities announced a tender for 290 housing
units in the settlement of Gilo, in East Jerusalem. On 16 December, in a preliminary
vote, the Israeli Knesset advanced a bill that sets a two-year time frame for the
legalization of 65 outposts and mandates that they should be treated as authorized
settlements in the interim, with their residents receiving all municipal services.
Also since the submission of the written report, violent incidents continued
throughout the occupied Palestinian territories.
On 11 December, a Palestinian man from Nablus, who was deaf and mute,
reportedly died from complications resulting from an injury sustained from live
ammunition. The man was shot by private security guards on 17 August at the
Qalandia checkpoint, north of Jerusalem. Israeli security forces previously stated
that an investigation was opened into the incident.
On 13 December, in the context of clashes, the Israeli security forces injured
two Palestinians, including a 15-year-old, in Al-Shawabka, north of Tulkarm. The
boy was reportedly shot in the knee with live ammunition.
On 14 December, Israeli forces at the Gaza perimeter fence fired one shell that
landed near the Al-Bureij refugee camp, causing damage to a house. Israel Defense
Forces said that the incident was accidental and have also opened an investigation.
I would like to focus on some observations concerning the implementation of
the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) during the reporting period.
I remain deeply troubled by continued Israeli settlement expansion in the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Over the past year, Israeli authorities
advanced controversial settlement plans that had been frozen for years. The total
number of units advanced in 2020 are on a par with 2019 numbers, despite an eightmonth hiatus this year. Some 50 per cent of them are deep in the West Bank, in areas
crucial for the contiguity and viability of a future Palestinian State.
In the strategic location of E-1, plans for some 3,500 units were advanced
after an eight-year delay. If implemented, the E-1 plan would sever the connection
between the northern and southern West Bank. Similarly, a tender was issued for
some 1,200 units establishing a new settlement in Givat Hamatos that threatens to
further disconnect East Jerusalem from Bethlehem and the southern West Bank. If
either project moves forward, it would significantly undermine the establishment of
a viable and contiguous Palestinian State as part of a negotiated two-State solution.
2/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
constitute a flagrant violation of United Nations resolutions and international
law. Settlements entrench Israel’s occupation and undermine the prospect of
achieving a two-State solution. The advancement of all settlement activity must
cease immediately.
The continued demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures, notably
humanitarian projects and schools, is deeply concerning. I call on Israeli authorities
to end the demolition of Palestinian property and the displacement and eviction of
Palestinians and to approve plans that would enable those communities to build
legally and address their development needs.
The continuing violence, attacks against civilians and incitement to violence
are unacceptable. All perpetrators of violence must be held accountable. I am
appalled that children continue to be victims — with a particularly troubling series
of incidents over the past month in the occupied Palestinian territory. Children
should not be the target of violence or be put in harm’s way.
I reiterate that security forces must exercise maximum restraint and may
use lethal force only when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life. Israeli and
Palestinian authorities must carry out thorough, independent, impartial and prompt
investigations into all instances of possible excessive use of force.
The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars towards Israeli civilian
population centres by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and others is prohibited
by international humanitarian law, and Palestinian militants must cease that
practice immediately.
I am deeply concerned at the continued settler-related violence in the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. I call on Israeli authorities to abide
by international law, protect Palestinians from violence by Israeli settlers and ensure
that farmers can access their land freely and safely.
Regrettably, the fate of two Israeli civilians and the bodies of two Israeli
soldiers held by Hamas in Gaza remains an important humanitarian concern. I call
upon Hamas to release them immediately. I also remain concerned at the continued
Israeli practice of holding the bodies of killed Palestinians and call for the return
of withheld bodies to their families, in line with its obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Human rights defenders and peace activists continue to be subject to pressure
and arrest; authorities have an obligation to respect the freedoms of expression,
association and assembly and to facilitate and promote an enabling environment for
civil society to function in the occupied Palestinian territory.
Since Gaza courts continue to hand down death sentences, in violation of
Palestinian law and the State of Palestine’s international obligations, I call upon
Hamas in Gaza to impose an immediate moratorium on executions and cease the use
of military tribunals to try civilians.
The financial situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains a serious concern. With
support from partners and a loan from the Central Emergency Respond Fund, a
disruption of vital services was averted last month. Unfortunately, despite that
support, there is a funding gap of $88 million in December. That includes some
$22 million to pay salaries to nearly 30,000 front-line education, health, social and
other workers directly assisting Palestine refugees. The income forecast for UNRWA
in January 2021 is worse and may well require more drastic measures to prevent a
financial collapse of the Agency in the months to come. The Agency is not only a
20-177443/34

S/2020/1275

lifeline for millions of Palestine refugees and fully engaged in the fight against the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) but is also critical for regional stability. Sufficient
funding is essential for the Agency’s continuity, and I renew my appeal for support.
The situation in Gaza remains fragile amid the immense suffering of the
people. The risk of a major escalation remains. While taking into consideration its
legitimate security concerns, I urge Israel to ease the restrictions on the movement
of goods and people to and from Gaza. Only by fully lifting the closures, in line with
resolution 1860 (2009), can we hope to sustainably resolve the humanitarian crisis.
It is deeply regrettable that agreement has not been reached on the holding
of long-overdue Palestinian presidential and legislative elections. I continue to
encourage the parties to overcome outstanding differences, in line with Egyptianled intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts.
With regard to the wider peace process, I join the Secretary-General in urging
Israelis, Palestinians, States of the region and the broader international community
to take practical steps to enable the parties to re-engage. Such steps must also be
accompanied by concrete actions to restore a legitimate political horizon to end the
conflict. The Middle East Quartet — alongside Arab partners — and Israeli and
Palestinian leaders must work together to return to the path of meaningful negotiations.
I hope that recent developments will encourage Palestinian and Israeli leaders
to restart meaningful negotiations, with the support of the international community,
and will create opportunities for regional cooperation. As we have seen in statements
from around the world, the commitment to the two-State solution, in line with
United Nations resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements, continues to
be affirmed by broad regional and international consensus.
I would like to highlight some progress and opportunities following the
Palestinian Authority’s decision to restart civilian and security coordination with
Israel, which I briefed the Security Council on last month (see S/2020/1128).
The Palestinian Government has received some $900 million in backrevenues vital to the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic and the deteriorating
financial situation.
In meetings with leaders on both sides, I have strongly encouraged them to
seize this moment to begin a process of updating their economic and administrative
relationship. I am encouraged by recent technical-level exchanges between the
Ministries of Health and encourage high-level discussions between the Ministries of
Finance. An agreement on relevant reforms would not only have notable humanitarian,
economic and development benefits but also represent an important first step on the
path back to meaningful negotiations.
I again encourage Israel to maintain its commitment to backstopping the
Palestinian Authority’s finances up to a minimum monthly transfer of revenues for
the duration of the emergency and to take concrete steps, such as granting permits
to Palestinians from Gaza to work in Israel and the West Bank when adequate
health precautions are in place. It remains vital to also ease dual-use restrictions for
imports into the Gaza Strip and grant construction permits in Area C of the occupied
West Bank.
Similarly, I reiterate my call on the Palestinian Authority to take important
steps towards mitigating future risk to its banking sector and revenues by aligning
its expenditures with the recommendations made by the World Bank and the
United Nations Special Coordinator’s Office (UNSCO) in June, including for the
introduction of a single basic income support scheme. I note President Abbas’
decision to form a committee on that issue. Reforming the system of payments to
4/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Palestinian prisoners, their families and the families of those killed or injured in
the context of attacks would not only mitigate risk but could remove a significant
obstacle to some donor support and talks on more substantive steps to modernize the
economic relationship. All sides can take immediate steps to facilitate the movement
of goods in and out of Gaza and to allow trade to increase between the Gaza Strip,
Israel and the West Bank.
The support of the international community is vital. In addition, it is
important to ensure support to the inter-agency humanitarian response plan and the
socioeconomic response plans of the United Nations country team and the Palestinian
Authority. I have also encouraged donors to support a few critical initiatives that
could be implemented immediately and would create some 20,000 jobs in Gaza for at
least 12 months; accelerate critical infrastructure initiatives in the water, sanitation,
energy and health sectors; and support small and medium-sized enterprises.
Daily violence has continued throughout the occupied Palestinian territory.
Settlement expansion and the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures continue
unabated, raising tensions on the ground and further undermining the viability of a
two-State solution. Intra-Palestinian division remains unresolved. The humanitarian,
economic and health crisis in Gaza has grown increasingly dire amid debilitating
closures, political division and militant activity.
In that context, we must persevere in our efforts to prevent violent escalation
and encourage leaders on both sides to takes steps towards enabling a return to
negotiations, not a re-establishment of the conflict. We remain guided by the
clear and unwavering United Nations position that only a two-State solution that
realizes the legitimate national aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis, in line with
United Nations resolutions, international law and previous agreements, can lead to
sustainable peace between the two peoples.
In addition, over this past year, the pandemic has upended life around the
globe and has exacerbated many of those negative trends, bringing crucial economic
and humanitarian systems to the brink of collapse. I wish to thank and commend the
front-line health workers on the ground and my United Nations colleagues for their
tireless commitment to helping the Palestinian people weather yet another storm.
While the cost in lives and livelihoods has already been too great, I am certain
that, without the swift and robust interventions by health authorities, civil society
organizations, donors and United Nations agencies, the crisis would have proved
deeper still.
I remain hopeful that next year we will not only turn the corner on the
pandemic but, by facing that challenge together, find renewed confidence in the path
towards a sustainable solution to the conflict.
As this will be my last briefing to the Council, I would like to share a few
parting thoughts.
Israelis and Palestinians, Jews and Arabs have lived with conflict for too long.
The painful reality of their struggle has affected every single family for generations.
Loss and displacement are part of the personal history of every single household.
Palestinians have been upended from their homes and forced to seek refuge across
the region. Jews have been upended from across the region and forced to seek refuge
in Israel. The conflict is not only a conflict over land, since both peoples have the
right to call Israel and Palestine their home. It is not only a conflict over history —
personal and collective — but also a conflict over the very right of two nations
to co-exist.

20-177445/34

S/2020/1275

In 1994, the leaders of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization agreed
on something that has rarely been done in the troubled history of the Middle East —
they agreed to end the conflict not through war, not by declaring one side a winner
and the other side a loser, but through peaceful negotiations. That was clearly not
an easy decision but one that faced opposition from all sides. Yet it was a decision
that was so bold, so visionary and so fragile that the international community
immediately came together to protect it, nurture it and help the leaders advance it.
Sadly, today that vision remains unachieved. It is a vision that has been
marred by intifadas, continuing occupation and a rapidly diminishing will to reach
an agreement that is just and sustainable. Over the course of the past five years, I met
almost no Palestinian who did not believe that negotiations are only a facade for the
loss of more land. Neither did I meet an Israeli who did not believe that every round
of negotiations will lead to more violence and terror.
Security Council members know the realities of the conflict only too well. Our
monthly Council briefings serve as a testament to the situation on the ground. As I
depart this Office, I remain firmly convinced that the world cannot leave the situation
unattended. Over the years, the Security Council has adopted a series of resolutions
that consider key aspects of how the conflict can be resolved. Bilateral agreements
were signed and ratified. The Middle East Quartet was created. In the past two years,
the United States put forward a vision, albeit different from the broad consensus
in the Council. Despite the differences, no one in the international community has
questioned the fundamental premise that any resolution of the conflict must be based
on two States, with the appropriate security and economic arrangements, achieved
through direct negotiations and facilitated by the international community.
Despite all our collective efforts, the only way forward out of the one-State
reality that we increasingly face on the ground is through engagement between the
parties, not through violence. Perhaps today is not the time for big international
initiatives but the time for steps — sometimes small, sometimes bold — that protect
that goal of two States, living side by side in peace and security, and create the
conditions for agreement.
Perhaps today is not the time for grandstanding or symbolic victories. Perhaps
today is the time to admit that both Israelis and Palestinians must look inward and
see what they can do, both in coordination and independently of one another, to
protect the goal of sustainable peace. In 2016, the United Nations, together with its
partners in the Middle East Quartet, produced a joint report (S/2016/595, annex) on
what some of those steps might be. I encourage Council members to look at that
report again, as its recommendations remain valid.
Perhaps today is the time to admit that there are real opportunities for
agreement, which flow from the fact that we face a global COVID-19 pandemic and
we all need to work together to protect our societies from radicalization, religious
extremism and economic implosion and to build on the new opportunities created in
the region by the Abraham accords.
It is not going to be easy. In fact, it will be extremely difficult, painstaking
work to stitch back together what is necessary to allow the leaders on both sides to
engage in a meaningful process. Yet, for all the goodwill in the world on which the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples can count, rekindling the hope that the conflict can be
resolved through peaceful negotiation cannot be imposed from outside. It must come
from within, from both peoples and from their freely elected leaders.
In the absence of meaningful negotiations, I have worked to uphold the
international consensus that the goal is a two-State solution. I have warned of the
dangers of eroding the status quo, supported intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts
6/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

and, above all, focused on preventive diplomacy. Together with Egypt and with
the critical support of Qatar and others in the international community, the United
Nations has played a pivotal role in preventing another devastating war in Gaza. I
have spoken out against injustices. I have condemned terror.
I firmly believe that the goal of a just and lasting peace between the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples remains achievable through negotiations that can be mediated by
the Middle East Quartet and critical Arab partners.
I would like to thank Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas, their
Governments, their civil servants and all interlocutors in Israel and Palestine for their
open engagement with the United Nations. On many occasions we have certainly not
seen eye to eye. However, their openness and willingness to engage have helped
to put the United Nations in a unique position to mediate and talk to all parties to
the conflict.
I want to thank the Security Council for its relentless engagement and support
for our work, and the Secretary-General and the services of the Secretariat for their
steadfast guidance.
Finally, I want to thank my colleagues at UNSCO for their outstanding
professionalism and friendship. UNSCO is in an excellent position to deal with the
challenges of the future and to use the opportunities presented to advance the goal
of a just and lasting peace on the basis of two States, in line with United Nations
resolutions. In January, my successor, Tor Wennesland, should take over this mission.
He is one of the most capable diplomats with whom I have ever worked. I wish him
every success in the years ahead and I hope that the Council will extend its full
support to him, as it has done to me.

20-177447/34

S/2020/1275

Annex II
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
[Original: French]
I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his very comprehensive
briefing. I would also like to thank him for his tireless efforts in pursuit of a lasting
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian question.
Throughout its term on the Security Council, Belgium’s position has always
been guided by respect for international law, including with regard to the IsraeliPalestinian question. We remain firmly convinced that respect for international
law is the only way to achieve the aspirations of both parties in a just and lasting
manner. The legal framework for the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian question
is well known and has been endorsed by an overwhelming majority of the
international community. Unfortunately, the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/1234) demonstrates that it is not the lack of a legal framework
but the lack of implementation that is hindering the resolution of this conflict. We
therefore call on all parties to comply with their obligations under international law,
including resolution 2334 (2016), and recall in particular Israel’s obligations as the
occupying Power.
We also call on the Palestinian political parties to work in good faith for the
reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under a single legitimate and democratic
authority. We strongly encourage the Palestinian Authority to engage in a democratic
and inclusive electoral process based on the rule of law.
Despite the outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic last year, the
Israeli settlement policy has continued not only through settlement expansion
but also through demolitions and evictions, as we just heard from the Special
Coordinator. That policy is illegal under international law, including resolution 2334
(2016). Settlements are likely to undermine any prospect and viability of a future
Palestinian State.
In that regard, I would like to reiterate Belgium’s concerns over any plans
that threaten the territorial continuity of a future Palestinian State and the future of
Jerusalem as a shared capital. In keeping with the consistent position of the European
Union, we will not recognize any changes to the lines of 4 June 1967, including with
regard to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties in negotiations.
In that context, we also recall the obligation of all States under international law
to distinguish between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied
since 1967. Otherwise, the illegal settlement policy will be further strengthened.
Resolution 2334 (2016) calls for immediate measures to be taken to prevent all
acts of violence against civilians. However, that obligation is not being met. Human
rights defenders, peace activists and journalists, in particular, continue to suffer
violations of their civil and political rights and even arbitrary arrests.
Today I would also like to particularly focus on violence against children.
In recent weeks, we have noted with concern the use of several rounds of live
ammunition against Palestinian children, even causing the death of one of them. We
call for thorough and transparent investigations. It is also essential that the victims
and their families be well informed about the progress of the investigations and their
findings. Children must never be the target of violence, and neither should they be
exposed to the risk of violence or encouraged to participate in it. In all such cases,
the perpetrators must be held accountable.
8/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Belgium will continue to support the mandate and the work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. The
Agency’s work is of vital importance to its beneficiaries and is also crucial to
maintaining stability in the region.
We welcomed the normalization agreements concluded in recent weeks, as
they provide opportunities to foster peace and stability in the region. We encourage
all relevant actors to seize this opportunity to work actively towards a just, viable
and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The only way forward is the
resumption of a dialogue in good faith between the parties, with the active support
of the international community. For its part, Belgium will continue to be a partner
for peace to both Israelis and Palestinians.

20-177449/34

S/2020/1275

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: English and Chinese]
I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. I would
also like to use this opportunity to thank the Special Coordinator for his work over
the past five years, especially in pursuit of a solution to the Palestinian question. I
also wish him all the best in his new post.
Four years after the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), there has been no
noticeable progress in its implementation. The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory continues to deteriorate and the Middle East peace process is stalled. That
situation is deeply worrisome.
The relevant United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for peace and
the two-State solution, distilled from generations of wisdom and painstaking work,
must be observed and implemented. China notes with concern the continuation
and significant expansion of settlement activities. According to the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1234), over the past four years, plans for more
than 28,000 housing units have been approved, tenders have been announced for
12,000 units and the construction of approximately 6,000 units has started. We call
on all the parties concerned to abide by United Nations resolutions, settle the final
delineation of the Palestinian-Israeli borders through peaceful negotiations, refrain
from unilateral actions that may exacerbate tensions, abandon the annexation plans
and cease settlement activities.
The past few months have seen increased demolitions of Palestinian houses
and an escalation of violence against civilians. With their homes gone, we have seen
hundreds of children forced into displacement. We urge the relevant authorities to
immediately lift the blockade on Gaza, cease demolishing Palestinian houses and
destroying Palestinian property and stop acts of violence against civilians.
As close neighbours that cannot physically move away from each other,
Palestine and Israel must adhere to the strategic option of peace talks and relaunch
dialogue on an equal footing without delay. We welcome the initiative of President
Abbas to convene an international peace conference early next year. We commend
the two parties for restarting civil and security cooperation and resuming the transfer
of tax revenues.
At the international level, we must all remain impartial and objective,
working in good faith to advance the Middle East peace process. Any solution to the
Palestinian question must take into account the voices of the countries of the region,
especially Palestine, accommodate the concerns of all parties and not be imposed
on any party.
Given the current context, the international community must place the
economic and humanitarian impacts of the coronavirus disease on Palestine high
on its agenda. We applaud the tireless efforts of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to improve the
humanitarian situation in Palestine. General Assembly resolution 75/94, on the
operations of UNRWA, was adopted with an overwhelming majority this month —
an eloquent testimony to international recognition of the Agency’s work. At a time
when UNRWA is under tremendous financial pressure, the world needs to honour
its commitments and actively provide financial contributions to help the Agency
overcome the current difficulties.
10/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Since the start of this year, China has provided numerous shipments of personal
protective equipment and other anti-epidemic supplies to Palestine, sent a team of
health experts and made significant donations to UNRWA. Recently, anti-epidemic
supplies were provided by the Chinese Government to UNRWA-affiliated health
institutions, and health kits were provided through UNRWA to Palestinian refugees
in Palestine, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria. Earlier this month, the United Nations
commemorated the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People.
For the eighth consecutive year, President Xi Jinping sent a message to the General
Assembly on the annual observance, fully demonstrating China’s firm commitment
to, and support for, the just cause of the Palestinian people and its sincere wish for
peaceful development in the Middle East. China is ready to continue working with
the international community in its unwavering effort to achieve a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Palestinian question at an early date.

20-1774411/34

S/2020/1275

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive update on
the situation on the ground in the light of the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2020/1234).
At the outset, we reaffirm that respect for human rights, international law,
the sovereignty and self-determination of peoples and the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations continue to be the main guidelines of the
Dominican Republic in addressing the issue before us today. Like everyone here, we
call for the pursuit of a just, lasting and comprehensive solution that will address the
legitimate concerns of both parties to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. We therefore
reaffirm our full support for a two-State solution, as set out in the various United
Nations resolutions.
We note with dismay the continued expansion of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, referred to in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1234),
with the advancement, approval or tendering of more than 28,000 units since the
adoption of resolution 2334 (2016). We also reiterate that any movement towards
annexation in the occupied Palestinian territory not only contravenes international
law but also has serious implications for the security and stability of, and a future
negotiated peace between, the two countries.
Today we wish to refer to a pressing situation that requires our full attention
and was extensively addressed by the Secretary-General in his report. For a long
time, violations of children’s rights have been part of our discussions. However, the
current pandemic, which has clearly worsened the overall situation, has exacerbated
the already difficult circumstances in which the children of Gaza live, with
difficulties in accessing essential services, including limited access to health, water
and electricity. Palestinian children’s access to education is particularly hampered.
Schools continue to be demolished and students are harassed, subjected to the
indiscriminate use of force or simply caught in the middle of fighting on their way to
and from school. Children need stability and the ability to live without fear of war,
arrest, dispossession or homelessness. Every child has the right to childhood and to
be protected from all forms of violence. We urge all parties to fully respect, protect
and fulfil the rights of all children and to refrain from using violence against them,
in accordance with international law.
We welcome the announcements of the readiness of the Palestinian Authority
and Israel to restore coordination of public security and resume the receipt of tax
revenues. That openness, together with the current momentum presented by the
normalization agreements between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, should be
used to promote and strengthen direct dialogue between the parties — a genuine
dialogue that addresses the aspirations and concerns of both parties — with a view
to building a viable peace for the entire Middle East region.
Finally, it is the Dominican Republic’s most sincere aspiration that this
forthcoming period, which is already beginning to show signs of real rapprochement
between the Arab world and Israel, should be the gateway for Palestinians and
Israelis to resume dialogue and, on the basis of justice and mutual respect, build a
future free of war, confrontation, violence, terror and mutual hatred between their
peoples, who should be able to live side by side in peace and security.
12/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. I would
also like to express my appreciation for his efforts and dedication during his term in
office. I wish him every success in his new and challenging job.
We reiterate our call to the Israelis and the Palestinians to take steps towards
solving the conflict and to re-engage in meaningful negotiations on all final-status
issues. We urge both sides to engage with the members of the Middle East Quartet
and other regional players in that regard.
We believe that the normalization of relations between Israel and certain Arab
States is a significant step, and we hope that development will also give impetus
to reviving the Middle East peace process with the aim of achieving a two-State
solution. The decision by the Palestinian Authority to resume civilian and security
coordination with Israel is most welcome and will hopefully also improve prospects
for resuming peace negotiations.
Regarding the situation on the ground, we call on all parties to refrain from
any unilateral steps that undermine the viability of the two-State solution. We call
on Israel to halt the continued settlement expansion and demolitions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including in East Jerusalem and in sensitive areas such as
Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and Area E-1. We also call upon all States to distinguish
between the territory of the State of Israel and the territories occupied since 1967.
We repeat our call for preventing all acts of violence against civilians,
including acts of terror, incitement and provocation. We condemn the continued
firing of rockets from Gaza towards Israel and any other form of violence targeting
civilian populations.
We encourage the Palestinian factions to commit to the intra-Palestinian
reconciliation process and reach an agreement on holding presidential and legislative
elections. We also share the concern mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/1234) about the continued arrest of human rights defenders and
peace activists by all parties. We remind the parties of their obligation to respect the
freedom of expression and assembly.
Finally, I would also like to reiterate the important role that the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays in
terms of stability for the region. We also acknowledge the Agency’s efforts aimed at
mitigating the impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on Palestinian refugees.
Estonia continues to support the work of UNRWA financially and urges all other
countries to do the same.

20-1774413/34

S/2020/1275

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I thank the Special Coordinator for his briefing and extend our thanks to him
for his tireless work over the past five years as Special Coordinator, as well as our
warm congratulations on his new position.
Almost four years after the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), France regrets
that the Security Council’s call to reverse the negative trends on the ground has not
been heeded and the two-State solution is more in danger than ever.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2020/1234) is unequivocal: over the
past four years Israel has advanced or approved 28,000 housing units in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem and has issued tenders for another 12,000 units. France
regularly condemns Israeli decisions on settlement activity, which as they stand
only increase the risk of the de facto annexation of Palestinian territories. In that
regard, my country has condemned the recent announcements with respect to Givat
Hamatos. Together with our European partners, we called upon Israel to reverse that
decision and all other unilateral measures that undermine the viability of a future
Palestinian State. I reiterate that urgent call today.
We are also very concerned at the sharp increase in demolitions and the
seizure of Palestinian structures, some of which have been funded by international
donors, including France and the European Union. France urges Israel to effectively
implement the freeze on demolitions in the context of the pandemic and, when
necessary, to compensate those affected. France also reminds Israel of its legal
obligations as an occupying Power under the Geneva Conventions.
France will not recognize any changes to the 1967 lines apart from those
agreed between the parties. It also recalls the obligation for all States, in their
relevant dealings and exchanges, to distinguish between the territory of Israel and
the territories occupied since 1967. That distinction must be made in particular
in bilateral agreements and in all trade — for example, through the differentiated
labelling of products from the West Bank and East Jerusalem settlements.
The continuation of settlement activities at an accelerated pace threatens the
two-State solution more than ever, which is why it is more urgent than ever today
to relaunch a political process. The parameters of the settlement for the IsraeliPalestinian conflict are well known and are constantly recalled in the Security
Council: two States, living in peace and security, within secure and recognized
borders based on the 1967 lines, both with Jerusalem as their capital. Those
parameters have been defined in order to bring about a fair and lasting peace in the
region. They guarantee Israel’s security and respond to the legitimate aspirations of
the Palestinians, in accordance with international law. It is our responsibility to work
together to make them a reality.
To that end, we must first work to restore trust between the parties. Accordingly,
France welcomes the resumption of cooperation between the Palestinian Authority
and Israel, in particular through the resumption of the payment of tax clearances
to the Palestinian Authority, following the Israeli authorities’ commitment to
respecting the adopted bilateral agreements. We call on the parties to go further,
to work together to implement the recommendations of the Special Coordinator
referred to in his socioeconomic report of 10 November. In particular, it is urgent
that Israel ease the restrictions in the Gaza Strip in the context of the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
14/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Finally, there is an urgent need to strengthen the cohesion of Palestinian
governance. That will require the organization of long-overdue elections. In that
regard, we regret the absence to date of an agreement between the Palestinian factions.
It is more necessary than ever that everyone act responsibly and demonstrate
political courage. France will continue to work with its German, Egyptian and
Jordanian partners to recreate a climate conducive to dialogue between the parties.
It will spare no effort to promote the resumption of a credible political process, in
consultation with all the stakeholders concerned, and will continue to give its full
support to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East.

20-1774415/34

S/2020/1275

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
Let me start by thanking Nickolay Mladenov, United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing. As always, he was
very clear. I thank him for his tireless efforts. I carefully listened to his final remarks.
It is very good that he continues to have the vision of 1994 as his point of reference.
I do not have much to add to what I have said over the last two years. Things
have not become any better. Germany has a principled position. As members of
the Security Council know, we defend the rules-based international order. Conflicts
should be resolved politically and based on international law, including resolutions
adopted by the Security Council. From our perspective, resolutions are not a menu à
la carte. One cannot pick and choose and forget about the last parameter set forth in
resolution 2334 (2016), or resolution 478 (1980) with regard to Jerusalem or resolution
497 (1981) with regard to the Golan Heights. We believe that the implementation of
the landmark resolution 2334 (2016) remains the only viable way forward.
With regard to the implementation of that resolution, we continue to be deeply
concerned by the negative trends on the ground, which are increasingly threatening
the two-State solution: annexation plans, settlement expansion, demolitions, seizures,
evictions, plans to retroactively legalize illegal settlement outposts or to take over
private Palestinian land by declaring it “State land”. We are also deeply concerned
about rockets that are fired into Israel, violence, incitement and the absence of a
solution for Gaza. We condemn all attacks against Israel by Hamas, Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and other terrorist groups.
Over the past four years since the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), plans
for more than 28,000 settlement units have been advanced or approved in Area C
and East Jerusalem. Tenders have been announced for some 12,000 units and the
construction of more than 6,000 new units began in Area C. That leads me to a
question for the Special Coordinator. Resolution 2334 (2016) already warned about
“entrenching a one-State reality”. Considering that Israeli settlement activities,
including in sensitive areas around East Jerusalem, such as Givat Hamatos, Har Homa
and Area E-1, effectively prevent a contiguous Palestinian State, does Mr. Mladenov
still believe in a two-State solution? Is his thinking closer to John Kerry’s when he
was Secretary of State and was very frustrated at those kinds of developments?
We have followed very closely the Israeli-Arab rapprochement. Kelly Craft, the
United States representative, just outlined how many countries are now recognizing
Israel, which is a most welcome development.
While preparing for this meeting, I picked up a small but significant story in
The Economist dated 12 December about an Israeli football club, Beitar Jerusalem.
According to the article, Beitar Jerusalem is the most racist club in Israel. When
Beitar Jerusalem signed two Muslim players in 2013, fans burned down the club
offices. Just a few weeks ago, the cousin of the de facto ruler of the United Arab
Emirates purchased, with the blessing of an Israeli rabbi, a 50 per cent interest in
Beitar Jerusalem. I find that to be a spectacular Israeli-Arab accomplishment.
There are other spectacular examples of cooperation. As Council members
may recall, in April 2019, when Germany held the Council presidency, we invited the
Israeli-Palestinian non-governmental organization EcoPeace Middle East to brief the
Council on peacebuilding efforts through cooperation in the specific area of water
conservation (see S/PV.8517). Having a non-governmental organization represented

16/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

by an Israeli, a Palestinian and a Jordanian was one of the highlights of my time in
the Security Council.
We will continue our joint efforts with our European and Arab partners,
France, Egypt and Jordan in facilitating a path towards credible dialogue and serious,
meaningful and effective negotiations about all final-status issues and on the basis
of the internationally agreed parameters. We support the efforts of the Middle East
Quartet and explicitly wish to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his active
engagement in exploring and consulting with all relevant actors on the best path
forward, including an international conference or any other multilateral format to
enable the parties to resume meaningful dialogue and negotiations. I thank him for
a job really well done.
Finally, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA) remains a major provider of stability in the region.
Germany has therefore contributed $200 million in 2020 to the Agency. We call on
other countries, in particular those from the Gulf, to provide more financial support
in order to enable UNRWA to continue its critical work.

20-1774417/34

S/2020/1275

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Indonesia to the
United Nations
I offer my thanks to Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his valuable
briefing. Allow me to take this opportunity, on behalf of my Government and also
on my own behalf, to extend our appreciation for all the work that Mr. Mladenov has
done, for his tireless efforts and, of course, for his excellent work in trying to pursue
peace in the Middle East despite the wide variety of challenges faced. I wish him all
the very best in his future endeavours.
The report before us today (S/2020/1234) is the sixteenth quarterly report on
the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) submitted to the Security Council;
sadly, we have seen little progress between the first quarterly report and this one. The
many elements that hinder the peace process have remained relatively unchanged:
ongoing settlement expansion, increased demolitions, worsening settler violence, a
deplorable humanitarian situation, civilian casualties and the absence of direct and
credible negotiations between the parties.
Resolution 2334 (2016) remains the last major achievement of the Council on
the question of Palestine. Although it was once thought to be a major breakthrough,
we are reminded today that, in the four years since its adoption, nothing has truly
changed, especially for the Palestinian people. I had high hopes when I joined the
Council two years ago, but I am saddened that there has been progress; on the
contrary, there have been setbacks. People are still dying in the Palestine territory.
We are still seeing many issues involving violations of the resolution, as well as
many issues that are even more saddening for all of us. Against that backdrop, allow
me to convey the following points.
First, there is an urgent need to create positive momentum for the peace
process. In paragraphs 8 and 9 of resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council,
respectively, “[c]alls upon all parties to continue, in the interest of the promotion
of peace and security, to exert collective efforts to launch credible negotiations”
and “[u]rges in this regard the intensification and acceleration of international and
regional diplomatic efforts”.
Indonesia welcomes and reiterates its support of President Abbas’s call to
convene an international conference in early 2021.
We are encouraged by the report of the Secretary-General, particularly the
efforts of the Foreign Ministers of Jordan, Egypt, France and Germany, in trying to
jump-start the peace process, as reported.
All efforts and initiatives should be directed towards upholding Palestinian
rights and implementing the two-State solution, as the only way to bring a sustainable
peace to the region.
More important, we remain hopeful for the continued intra-Palestinian
reconciliation talks and stress the importance of unity among Palestinians to create
a conducive and inclusive environment for the peace process.
Our hope is that there might be a new beginning in 2021 — that there might
be more jump-starting of the peace process and greater momentum towards reaching
the two-State solution.
Secondly, any violations must have consequences. In paragraph 1 of resolution
2334 (2016), the Council also “[r]eaffirms that the establishment by Israel of
settlements in the Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
has no legal validity and constitutes a flagrant violation under international law”. As
18/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

such, the message is clear. Those who speak the English language know very well
that the message is clear.
We call on the international community to demand accountability and ensure
that any violations have consequences. If we ever truly wish for a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, we simply cannot allow a culture of impunity to prevail. We
in the Council continue to reiterate that point about impunity, but in this particular
case we have not done our job. We strongly urge the Israeli authorities to immediately
and completely cease all settlement activities and to fully respect international law.
Thirdly, we recall the obligations of the occupying Power. As vaccines for
the coronavirus disease continue to become available, we would like to remind
Israel of its obligation as the occupying Power under international law to protect
the lives and safety of the Palestinian population, particularly in providing the
much-needed vaccine.
The international community should also continue to extend its support to the
Palestinians and leave no one behind, including support through the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
As this is Indonesia’s last meeting in the Council on the question of Palestine,
allow me to conclude by quoting our first President, Sukarno:
“As long as the freedom of Palestine has yet to be returned to the Palestinians,
then it will forever be for Indonesia to stand in defiance against the occupation
by Israel.”
It was true then, it is true now and it will remain true for the future: until the
Palestinian people are no longer denied their legal and inalienable rights to create a
sovereign and independent State, we will continue to fight for their cause.
Although we will no longer sit on the Council next year, we can assure
members that Indonesia will always extend its unequivocal support and solidarity to
the Palestinian people, and we will remain steadfast and unyielding in our support
for the Palestinian cause.
“Kita tidak akan pernah menyerah untuk perjuangan Palestina dan
untuk kebenara.”
Loosely translated: “We will continue to fight for the Palestinian cause: it is holy and
just and it is the right thing to do”.
I hope the Council, in future, will continue to do the right thing.

20-1774419/34

S/2020/1275

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Niger to the
United Nations
[Original: French]
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing
on the situation in the Middle East. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2020/1234). My
delegation paid keen attention to the briefing of the Special Coordinator and takes
note of the Secretary-General’s observations regarding the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016). The Niger deplores the lack of progress in the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), adopted four years ago, and remains concerned by what is
set out in the report of the Secretary-General.
The increase in the expansion of Israeli settlements in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, the continuation of the demolition and seizure of
Palestinian structures, including schools and agricultural land, and the upsurge in
attacks and violence against Palestinian civilians, including women and children,
constitute flagrant violations of United Nations resolutions and the principles of
international law, which we condemn and which must cease. The same goes for acts
of provocation and hate speech; the launching of rockets towards residential areas in
Israel; the disproportionate use of force against Palestinian civilians, who are often
unarmed; arbitrary detention, including of children; and extrajudicial punishments.
My delegation notes the upsurge in settlement activity in the occupied
Palestinian territories as one of the most worrisome trends, which threatens not only
to undermine the work achieved since 1967 to the present day by the United Nations,
in particular the Security Council, the parties themselves and the entire international
community, but also to jeopardize the prospects for a future Palestinian State that is
sovereign and viable and contiguous with Israel.
The Niger takes note of the normalization of relations between Israel and Arab
countries and expresses the hope that the momentum of that rapprochement will
help to ease tensions in the area and pave the way for a lasting peace and peaceful
coexistence in the Middle East.
However, the normalization of relations must not come at the expense of the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people for a viable independent State living
in peace with Israel, as envisaged by the internationally accepted parameters for the
settlement of the crisis.
Any attempt to deal with the conflict outside those parameters will only
prolong instability and violence and runs counter to the two-State solution, the only
just and lasting option that will allow the two peoples to achieve their legitimate
aspirations. It is equally crucial for all of us, in particular the Council, to spare no
effort in implementing United Nations resolutions, especially resolution 2334 (2016).
The situation in the Gaza Strip represents a further source of concern
addressed in the report of the Secretary-General. The upsurge in rocket and mortar
fire from Gaza towards residential areas of Israel continues to violate international
law and such actions must cease.
The many challenges facing Gaza — including poverty, food insecurity,
overpopulation, high unemployment, restrictions on imports and the free movement
of persons, and the fragility of the health system and of the management of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic — cannot be overcome without the lifting
of the illegal blockade Israel has continuously imposed on the area for 13 years.
20/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

It is just as important that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East have the resources it needs to continue providing
vital services to the thousands of Palestinian families in need, especially amid the
COVID-19 pandemic.
I would like to recall that it is more important than ever for us to step up
efforts and the necessary pressure to ensure that our decisions, especially resolution
2334 (2016), are not merely empty words. It is just as important that we push for the
resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process following years of interruption.
In that regard, the trend over recent months of normalization in relations
between Israel and its Arab neighbours and the political will demonstrated by the
Palestinian Authority must serve as a springboard for the revitalization of the peace
talks with a view to achieving a just, lasting and equitable solution to the crisis.
Finally, we commend Mr. Mladenov for his tireless efforts to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict throughout his time in office. We wish him the greatest
of success in his new role.

20-1774421/34

S/2020/1275

Annex X
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Russia to the United Nations, Dmitry Polyanskiy
[Original: Russian]
We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. We
express our appreciation for the diligent work he has done in his nearly six years in
office, which were extremely complex years for the Middle East peace process and
required substantial efforts — not to achieve progress, unfortunately, but rather to
maintain the central role of the United Nations and the international legal basis for a
peaceful solution of the Palestinian question. We wish Mr. Mladenov every success
in his new endeavours, in which he has our full support. We also stand ready to
render comprehensive support to the new Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process.
At the same time, we will maintain our consistent and principled position in
favour of a just solution of the Palestinian question on the basis of the international
legal framework endorsed by the United Nations, including its resolutions, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the fundamental principles of the two-State solution.
That foundation provides for creating an independent, sovereign and territorially
contiguous Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living in peace with Israel. Annual votes on relevant resolutions in the
General Assembly clearly demonstrate the continuing international consensus that
there is no alternative to that recognized foundation for a solution.
All final-status issues must be resolved through direct negotiations between
Palestinians and Israelis. President Abbas has reiterated his readiness for dialogue
under the auspices of the Quartet of international mediators. We call on our partners
in the Quartet — the United Nations, the European Union and the United States of
America — to step up their cooperation to that end. We are ready to involve key
regional players in those efforts. We need to pool our efforts and use the entire
potential of collective diplomacy.
We are extremely concerned by the information received about the progress in
implementing resolution 2334 (2016). We understand from the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2020/1234) that in October and November the Israeli authorities endorsed
one of the largest-scale plans to date for the construction of new housing units,
including in Area C and deep into the occupied Palestinian territories. Construction
in the area of East Jerusalem threatens to further undermine the territorial contiguity
of the Palestinian State as envisaged by United Nations resolutions.
We reaffirm our principled position that Israeli settlements in the West Bank
are unlawful. We call for an end to settlement activity and the policy of demolishing
Palestinian property. We are also concerned by the statistics provided by the United
Nations, which indicate that in 2020 the number of buildings demolished increased
by 72 per cent as compared with the previous year.
At the same time, violence and rocket launches against Israeli territory must
stop, and joint efforts should be undertaken to counter the threat of terrorism.
The task of restoring Palestinian unity remains as relevant as ever. We will
continue our efforts in that area by providing assistance to our Egyptian friends.
In addition, the international community must take active steps to improve
the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza, especially against the backdrop of the
coronavirus disease pandemic. We are extremely concerned about the reports of the
difficult financial situation currently facing the United Nations Relief and Works
22/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), whose work spans not only
the humanitarian but also the political dimension and acts as a stabilizing influence
on the Palestinian territories and the Middle East as a whole. The leadership of
UNRWA is taking steps to enhance performance and reduce overheads, which are
commendable. For its part, Russia continues to support UNRWA and calls on the
entire international community to do likewise.

20-1774423/34

S/2020/1275

Annex XI
Statement by the Second Deputy Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Halimah
Amirah Faridah DeShong
At the outset, I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his
comprehensive presentation on the sixteenth quarterly report on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2020/1234).
As the organ charged with maintaining international peace and security,
the Security Council fails all too often, through its inaction and inability, to fulfil
its responsibility to protect Palestinians living under occupation. It is imperative
that the Council facilitate the resumption of talks between both parties towards the
achievement of a viable two-State solution, with Israel and Palestine living side by
side in peace and security.
The goal of a two-State solution is today under serious threat. Throughout
2020, the international community has seen the continuation and expansion of
settlements, settler violence, access restrictions, the demolition of homes and
other structures and the eviction of families across the West Bank, including East
Jerusalem. As we look forward to 2021, we call for an end to all illegal activities
and for full adherence to international law and relevant United Nations resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016). Similarly, we reiterate President Abbas’s call on
the United Nations to convene an international conference in early 2021 to launch “a
genuine peace process” between Israel and the Palestinians.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines remains concerned about attacks against
civilians, particularly those directed against children, in the occupied Palestinian
territory. The reported killing of a 14-year-old Palestinian boy, as highlighted in
a recent letter to the President of the Council (see S/2020/1175), leaves a stain on
the conscience of the international community. We use this opportunity to reaffirm
our commitment to upholding the principles enshrined within the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and we call on all parties to fully respect international law,
international humanitarian law, the 1949 Fourth Geneva Convention and other
international conventions.
Turning to the humanitarian situation, we welcome the recent launch of
the humanitarian response plan on 17 December and encourage the international
community to contribute to that plan, in an effort to help people made vulnerable
in the occupied Palestinian territory. We also commend the efforts of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to provide
critical services to 5.7 million Palestinian refugees across the Middle East amid a
growing crisis that is made worse by the pandemic. We appeal to the international
community to provide much-needed assistance to Palestinian refugees through that
important Agency.
Let me reiterate that there can be no comprehensive and lasting peace without
a resolution of the decades-long conflict on the basis of the 4 June 1967 borders, with
agreed land swaps. The two-State solution must remain the primary focal point for
any future talks. In that connection, we reaffirm our commitment to the two-State
solution and reiterate that any annexation of territory in the West Bank severely
undermines prospects for lasting peace.
Before concluding, I take this opportunity to thank Special Coordinator
Mladenov for his important work on the Middle East peace process over the past
five to six years. We wish him much success in his new assignment.

24/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Mladenov for his sobering briefing on the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory and his concerted efforts to resolve the
long-standing question of Palestine. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his written report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2020/1234).
Since the question of Palestine was first discussed in the Security Council, in
1948, the Council has adopted more than 100 resolutions on the issue, surely more
than on any other agenda item on the Council’s agenda. However, it is the agenda
item that has also seen the least amount of progress. Since 1948, the Palestinian
people have seen no legitimate progress in the establishment of a sovereign State
of Palestine. They have seen their land, heritage and birthright seized, demolished
and resettled by strangers, house by house, village by village, olive grove by olive
grove, until the prospect of a peaceful, independent and contiguous Palestine is now
in serious jeopardy.
The ultimate goal for all of us should be the establishment of a sovereign,
independent, contiguous Palestinian State existing side by side with a safe and
secure State of Israel, based on the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as the
capital of the State of Palestine, as has been stated by the Secretary-General, his
Special Coordinator and many of us on the Council.
South Africa reiterates that the illegal occupation of Palestinian land and
the seizure and demolition of the Palestinians’ land and structures are illegal. Such
actions serve only to incite hatred and violence, as evidenced in the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report.
In two days’ time, on 23 December, it will be the four-year anniversary of the
almost unanimous adoption of resolution 2334 (2016). However, during that time
illegal settlements, seizures and demolitions of Palestinian property and structures
have continued unabated. In the four years since the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016),
more than 46,000 housing units have been announced, approved or constructed.
All of those units are without legal validity, constitute a flagrant violation of
international law and are a major obstacle to the two-State solution and a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace. Yet no action has been taken to address those grave
violations. Each and every one of those housing units is illegal under international
law and a broken promise to the Palestinian people.
In that regard, South Africa calls for the full implementation of resolution
2334 (2016). In addition, we call on the Council to address and take action against
those who have continuously and overtly violated this and previous Security Council
resolutions. It is the right, fair and just thing to do.
The staggering number of civilian casualties in the occupied Palestinian
territory as reported by the Secretary-General is truly appalling. In 2020 alone, six
Palestinian children have been killed and 1,048 injured by the Israeli security forces.
As stated in paragraph 87 of the Secretary-General’s report,
“children should not be the target of violence or put in harm’s way. They
should be afforded special protection from any form of violence”.
This must stop. Bullets are not a reasonable or proportional response to rocks.
Moreover, South Africa fully supports the call by Mr. Michael Lynk, Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied
20-1774425/34

S/2020/1275

since 1967, and Ms. Agnès Callamard, Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions, for an impartial and independent investigation into the
killing of Ali Ayman Abu Aliya, a 15-year-old boy, by the Israel Defense Forces,
where there was no threat of death or serious injury to the Israeli security forces.
Equally concerning is the number of children held in detention. Indeed,
157 children are currently being held in Israeli custody, while two others are being
held in administrative detention without charge or trial.
South Africa reiterates its call for the Council to make the long-overdue field
visit to the occupied Palestinian territory by those members of the Council willing
to do so. That will provide an opportunity for them to witness for themselves the
conditions, hardships and challenges faced by the Palestinian people on a daily basis.
In recent months, we have seen bilateral agreements that have been hailed
as breakthroughs for peace in the Middle East. However, those transactional
agreements, which did not include Palestine, a significant stakeholder in Middle
East peace, have not yielded tangible results for those most affected by the illegal
occupation. Palestinians continue to live under occupation and are denied their most
basic civil and human rights.
Those bilateral agreements do not change international law; they do not
change Security Council resolutions. While Israel’s annexation plans may have been
suspended, de facto annexation continues with ongoing and increased settlement
activity, as we have previously noted.
The situation in Gaza is deeply alarming. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
and the associated restrictions have further impacted the deteriorating humanitarian
situation. The health-care sector is unable to cope with the increased demand, and
patients with life-threatening non-COVID-19 cases are being denied permits to
travel for critical medical care. We call on Israel to end its inhumane treatment of
the citizens of Gaza and honour its obligations under the Fourth Geneva Convention
as an occupying Power.
In that regard, we commend the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), its leadership and personnel for
their dedication and unfailing support for the Palestinian people in truly challenging
circumstances. The Agency’s financial situation is truly concerning, and we appeal
to the international community to increase its financial support for UNRWA, which
is a lifeline of support for millions of people.
As I conclude my statement at this, South Africa’s last meeting on the question
of Palestine, let me reiterate South Africa’s long-standing and dedicated support
for Palestine’s right to fundamental freedoms, human rights and self-determination.
South Africa will continue to make every effort to support the Palestinian people
and their just cause. That includes advocating for political dialogue between the
parties on an equal footing, based on internationally agreed parameters that take
into account the needs and aspirations of the Palestinian people. No peace plan or
initiative can have any merit or succeed if all parties to the conflict are not included
in such political processes as equal partners from the very beginning. Conflicts
can be resolved only by treating each party as part of the future solution, not as a
potential adversary.

26/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations
I should like to thank Mr. Niсkolay Mladenov for his valuable briefing and
praiseworthy efforts in service of peace in the Middle East. I should also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his sixteenth report (S/2020/1234) on the implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016).
On 29 November, along with the rest of the international community, Tunisia
proudly celebrated the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian people. On
that occasion, my country reaffirmed its unwavering support for the just Palestinian
cause and declared that it would stand forever with the fraternal Palestinian people
in its principled defence of its legitimate rights, which cannot be extinguished with
the passage of time. The most prominent of those rights is the right to establish an
independent State on its territory along the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital. Moreover, on that occasion, the international community, at the national,
regional and international levels, renewed its commitment to supporting the just
Palestinian cause, in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In contrast to the broad international support for a two-State solution on
the basis of United Nations resolutions and the agreed-upon terms of reference,
the reality is that, much to our regret, the stalemate in the peace process drags on,
and the occupying Power continues to deny the Palestinian people its fundamental
rights and to take unilateral actions that are contrary to international law, including
the expansion of settlement-building activity, intensification of house demolitions,
displacement of the Palestinian population and efforts to cut the geographical
connection between East Jerusalem and the West Bank, thereby seriously threatening
the two-State solution and undermining the prospects for a peaceful settlement.
Perhaps the most significant factor that has encouraged the occupying
authorities to continue with their hostilities against unarmed Palestinian civilians,
their human rights violations in Palestine and their gross violations of international
law is that the international community is not serious about holding them accountable.
In view of the gross violations that have been committed by the occupiers
and their racist practices, Tunisia calls upon the Security Council and the entire
international community to shoulder their responsibility to halt those violations
and save the two-State solution, in particular by compelling Israel, the occupying
Power, to cease its settlement-building activities immediately and, in accordance
with resolution 2334 (2016), completely abandon its plans to annex territory once
and for all and end its occupation of Palestinian territory. Tunisia also calls upon the
international community to ensure the protection of the Palestinian civilian population
and put pressure on the occupying Government to end the restrictions imposed in the
occupied territories and the unjust blockade of the Gaza Strip, which are threatening
the Palestinian economy with collapse and exacerbating human suffering, especially
in the light of the unprecedented challenge posed by the pandemic.
In keeping with its commitment to peace as a strategic option, Tunisia renews
its support for the international community’s efforts to launch serious and credible
negotiations in accordance with a defined timetable aimed at establishing a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace on the basis of international law, internationally
authoritative resolutions and the terms of reference for the settlement of the situation.
Tunisia reiterates that the Palestinians must participate in any efforts or initiatives
aimed at settling the conflict and achieving peace in the region.

20-1774427/34

S/2020/1275

Accordingly, Tunisia supports the initiative launched by Palestinian President
Mahmoud Abbas to convene a plenipotentiary conference in which all stakeholders
participate, with a view to embarking upon a peace process on the basis of established
principles. Tunisia hopes that this initiative will receive the support it deserves from
the Quartet, the Security Council and stakeholders, in order to lay the groundwork
for the convening of such a conference and thereby promote security and peace in
the region.
Tunisia renews its support for the vital role that the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East plays in alleviating the
suffering of refugees in its various areas of operation and supporting stability in the
region until a just solution to the Palestine refugee issue has been found. Tunisia
urges all regional and international actors to step up the humanitarian response in
order to help the Palestinian people respond to the effects of the pandemic and the
economic restrictions imposed by the occupiers.
In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates that achieving a just, comprehensive and
lasting peace and ensuring security and stability in the Middle East necessarily
requires Israel to withdraw from all occupied Arab territories, including the occupied
Syrian Arab Golan, in accordance with internationally authoritative resolutions, the
terms of reference for the peace process and the Arab Peace Initiative.

28/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, and Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process Mladenov for his briefing. As others have done, I should like to
pay tribute to his tireless work in that role to de-escalate tension and advance peace
between the parties to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. I look forward to continuing
to work with Nickolay Mladenov in his new role and to welcoming his successor.
Let me first express the United Kingdom’s sadness at the death of the Palestinian
child Ali Ayman Abu Aliya following clashes between the Israel Defense Forces and
Palestinian civilians. We have urged Israel to ensure that its investigation is swift
and comprehensive. Unfortunately, the death of Abu Aliya is not an exceptional
occurrence. He is the most recent of 23 Palestinian civilians to have been killed by
Israeli forces in the West Bank this year. The toll is unacceptable, and the United
Kingdom continues to urge restraint in the use of live fire and potentially lethal force
by Israeli forces. We also condemn the killing of an Israeli civilian by a Palestinian
in the same period.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/1234) notes, throughout this year
we have seen further settlement advancement, including in highly sensitive areas
around East Jerusalem. We have seen the highest level of demolitions of Palestinian
homes and structures since 2016 and ongoing evictions of Palestinians from their
homes. In East Jerusalem, hundreds are at risk, including those eight families facing
imminent eviction in Silwan. The United Kingdom’s position on those issues is clear
and well known. Settlements are illegal under international law. They are an obstacle
to peace, and they undermine the physical viability of the two-State solution.
Demolitions and evictions in all but the most exceptional of circumstances are illegal
under international law and cause unnecessary suffering to ordinary Palestinians.
We urge the Government of Israel to cease those policies in order to build confidence
with the Palestinians and encourage the pursuit of dialogue.
However, as resolution 2334 (2016) recognizes, settlements are not the only
obstacle to peace. The people of Israel deserve to live free from the scourge of
terrorism and anti-Semitic incitement, which gravely undermine the prospects for a
two-State solution. It is critical that the Palestinian leadership continue their efforts
to tackle them. We also condemn violence by Israeli settlers against Palestinians.
The Israeli security forces must provide appropriate protection to the Palestinian
civilian population.
I would like to raise the Commissioner-General’s urgent call for additional
funding for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East (UNRWA). The United Kingdom has contributed £51 million,
or approximately $69 million, to UNRWA in 2020 and engaged closely with the
Commissioner-General. We call on States that have cut their funding in recent years
to support UNRWA now. We must do what we can to deal with the immediate needs
of refugees throughout the region, preserve stability and ensure that those in need do
not suffer. We are also clear that we must work with UNRWA in the longer term to
help them to reach a secure and sustainable financial footing.
Recent Arab-Israeli agreements have shown that dialogue triumphs over
hostility. We as the international community must now work with the parties
alongside the incoming United States Administration to ensure that the closer ties
and benefits of those normalization agreements are also extended to the Palestinians.
20-1774429/34

S/2020/1275

We urge the Israeli and Palestinian leaderships to also enter into a political dialogue
with the goal of ending the occupation and delivering a two-State solution.
In conclusion, unilateral steps will not deliver peace; a settlement to the
conflict must be negotiated directly and reflect the religious and national interests of
both the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. Compromise will be needed on both sides.
The United Kingdom continues to believe that a two-State solution is the only viable
long-term solution. It is the only way to permanently end the Arab-Israeli conflict
and preserve Israel’s Jewish and democratic identity. As we move into a new year
and a new era for the region, the international community must redouble its efforts
to support the Israeli and Palestinian leaderships in delivering that peace for both
their peoples.

30/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Kelly Craft
I thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. We are incredibly
grateful for his dedicated and honourable service as the United Nations Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace for more than five years; his diligent efforts
to help resolve this conflict have been invaluable. We wish him all the best as he
makes the transition out of Jerusalem, and I look forward to seeing him in the next
couple of days and working with him on his next assignment.
As this year comes to a close, I would like to reflect on the progress we have
made to date and how that progress has overturned a number of assumptions that
framed our thinking on Middle East peace in ways that stood in the way of progress.
The dispute between the Israelis and the Palestinians in this forum dates back to the
earliest days of the Security Council. Since 1948, there has been a stream of efforts
to resolve the conflict, yet they have generally failed. Those decades-old approaches
have not only fallen short but they have stymied regional economic cooperation
and growth and have largely prevented Israelis and Palestinians from establishing
friendly relations.
Recognizing the impasse we found ourselves in, President Trump presented
a bold new vision for Middle East peace — a realistic, detailed plan to resolve the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, while making Israelis, Palestinians and millions of
others in the region both safer and more prosperous. President Trump’s Vision for
Peace saw Israel commit itself to working towards a two-State solution at an event
that was witnessed by other Arab nations, including the United Arab Emirates and
Bahrain, which attended the initial presentation of the Vision. Building on that
momentum in August, the President then brokered a historic agreement to normalize
relations between the United Arab Emirates and Israel — now known as the Abraham
Accords — which was the first such agreement between Israel and an Arab country
since 1994.
The following month, Bahrain joined the United Arab Emirates in signing
the Abraham Accords declaration at the White House, committing to an exchange
of Ambassadors and launching a flurry of activity, including the first direct flights
between those countries, as well as cooperative initiatives across a broad range
of sectors, each of which was a major step forward in achieving an enduring and
warm peace in the region. By October, the Sudan and Israel had also agreed to end
the state of belligerence between them, thus extending the reach of the Abraham
Accords to the African continent. Finally, on 10 December, Morocco announced that
it would resume diplomatic relations with Israel and expand economic and cultural
cooperation to advance regional stability. In less than four months, four States opened
diplomatic relations with Israel, paving the way for still more engagement that will
help bring about the prosperity envisioned under President Trump’s peace plan.
For decades, the prevailing assumption was that the world would see
normalized international relations with Israel only following a resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian dispute, but we have proven that assumption wrong. Instead,
Israeli entrepreneurs are now making regular trips to Dubai and Manama to explore
economic opportunities that will benefit all their citizens, while Emirati and Bahraini
entrepreneurs travel freely to Israel with the same goals. Those economic exchanges
are a bright spot in a global economy that has been overshadowed by the regional
conflict and the coronavirus disease.
For decades, we had also seen little progress in resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict as parties continued to reflexively resort to the same old tired rhetoric
20-1774431/34

S/2020/1275

and hardened positions. Today we see instead practical, real examples of genuine
economic and cultural ties being formed. As a result, all of us in the Security Council
should think long and hard about what else we may have missed or misinterpreted
over the years.
We once again encourage our regional partners and the members of this body
to thoughtfully consider the United States Vision for Peace. We continue to urge the
Palestinians to consider the opportunities within the Vision and to negotiate with
Israel and present their objections within the context of direct talks based on the
Vision. A peace deal would bring much needed economic support and investment
to the Palestinians and open up an even broader world of opportunities — for
Palestinians, regional partners and the world. We look forward to the day, hopefully
soon, when the Security Council no longer needs to debate this matter.
Last week, Jewish communities in Israel and around the world celebrated
Hanukkah, the festival of lights, and there is a brightly lit Christmas tree in Manger
Square at the Church of the Nativity. I hope that, amid the darkness of the winter, a
global pandemic and far too many conflicts around the globe, we as a Council, and
the international community more broadly, which represents so many religious and
cultural traditions, will embrace the light represented by the Abraham Accords. May
we all work together to seek ways to spread that light to other nations.

32/34

20-17744

S/2020/1275

Annex XVI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to
the United Nations, Hai Anh Pham
I would like to thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his final briefing, and
especially his tireless efforts and dedication over more than five years in his capacity
as the United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. I wish
him further success in his new capacity at a very crucial juncture for Libya.
As the year 2020 comes to an end, we regrettably find ourselves in the same
worrisome situation. Month after month, quarter after quarter, we receive reports
that little progress has been made in the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016).
Despite some recent positive signals in the cooperation between the Palestinian
Authority and the Israeli Government, we have seen continued violations of most
parts of the resolution.
The expansion of settlements has been continuing at an alarming rate
throughout the entire year. Notably, some 50 per cent of those settlement units
were located in outlying areas deep inside the occupied West Bank, impeding the
contiguity of a future Palestinian State. We are particularly concerned about the
plan for the construction of about 3,500 units in the strategic location of E-1. If
implemented, it would significantly undermine the chances of establishing a viable
and contiguous Palestinian State as part of the negotiated two-State solution.
We would like to reiterate our position that settlements in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, have no legal validity and constitute a
violation of international law and relevant United Nations resolutions, including
resolution 2334 (2016). We join many other States Members of the United Nations
in calling on the Government of Israel to immediately cease the advancement of all
settlement activities.
We are also troubled by the continued demolitions and seizures of Palestinian
structures and properties in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Last month, the occupying Power carried out the most extensive demolition in the
West Bank in years, not even sparing schools and basic infrastructure facilities.
Decade-long petitions and appeals against the demolitions continued to be rejected.
We call on Israeli authorities to end those activities immediately, in accordance with
resolution 2334 (2016).
While the situation has not escalated for the last few months, we remain
concerned by the violence perpetrated throughout the occupied Palestinian territory,
including clashes between Palestinians and Israeli security forces and settler-related
violence. The daily acts of violence threaten to widen the gap between the parties
and erode the hope for negotiations and dialogue.
We call upon the parties to refrain from taking actions and making statements
that could complicate the situation and hamper negotiation and dialogue. We also
welcome all initiatives for international cooperation that may help achieve a just,
sustainable and long-lasting solution to the Middle East peace process on the basis
of international law and relevant United Nations resolutions.
We remain gravely concerned about the difficult living conditions and the
humanitarian situation of millions of Palestinian people, in particular women and
children, throughout the occupied Palestinian territory, including in the Gaza Strip.
We would also like to reiterate our strong support for the work undertaken by United
Nations agencies, particularly the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and by the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process. In that regard, we welcome the recent launching of
20-1774433/34

S/2020/1275

the humanitarian response plan to address the humanitarian needs of Palestinians in
2021, and we urge members of the international community to fulfil its commitments
and provide further support for the implementation of the plan.
In conclusion, Viet Nam reiterates its unwavering support for the legitimate
struggle of the Palestinian people and their inalienable rights. We strongly support
the two-State solution, including the establishment of the State of Palestine, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, peacefully coexisting with the State of Israel and with
secure and internationally recognized borders on the basis of the pre-1967 lines, in
accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and relevant
United Nations resolutions, in particular resolution 2334 (2016).

34/34

20-17744
