A /72/PV.72

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

72nd plenary meeting

Tuesday, 12 December 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Davies
(Liberia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 127
Global health and foreign policy
Notes by the Secretary-General (A/72/113 and
A/72/378)
Draft resolutions (A/72/L.27 and A/72/L.28)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Thailand to introduce draft resolutions
A/72/L.27 and A/72/L.28.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand): Today, I have the honour
to introduce two draft resolutions under agenda item
127, “Global health and foreign policy”, on behalf of the
seven core members of the Foreign Policy and Global
Health Initiative, which are Brazil, France, Indonesia,
Norway, Senegal, South Africa and Thailand.
The Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative
was formed by the Foreign Ministers of those seven
countries in September 2006, under the leadership of
the then Foreign Minister of Norway, Mr. Jonas Gahr
Støre. The group foresaw the growing importance of
global health, while noting the persistent and emerging
challenges in the area of health that moved across
and beyond borders. Every year since 2008, we have
therefore introduced in the General Assembly draft
resolutions on global health and foreign policy in order
to advocate greater recognition of the interdependence

of global health and foreign policy and the intrinsic
link between them, touching on various topics that are
seen as key challenges and that require greater attention
from the international community.
This year, at the seventy-second session of the
General Assembly, under Thailand’s chairship, the
Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative has the
honour to introduce two draft resolutions that continue
to promote effective links between global health and
foreign policy, while reaffirming the commitments
that we made under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, particularly that of leaving no one behind
and reaching the furthest behind first.
The first draft resolution, contained in document
A/72/L.28, is entitled “Global health and foreign
policy: addressing the health of the most vulnerable
for an inclusive society”. The rationale behind the draft
resolution is that health is an outcome and indicator
of all three dimensions of sustainable development as
well as a precondition for them. In order to effectively
respond to health-related challenges, the international
community has to cooperate and to take an inclusive,
holistic and people-centred approach to health issues. It
is therefore imperative that when forming foreign policy
we take into account health and its linkages with other
social, economic and environmental determinants.
The draft resolution underlines the importance
of the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable
standard of physical and mental health for all people,
including those who are vulnerable or live in vulnerable
conditions, regardless of their status or their situation.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-43755 (E)

*1743755*

A/72/PV.72

At present, millions of people die every day as a result
of diseases that could have been prevented or cured
because they have limited access, or none at all, to
quality health services and quality, essential, affordable
and effective medicines. In some cases, the alarming
fact is that there is no functioning health infrastructure
in place at all.
The draft resolution reflects our common resolve
to complete our unfinished business and achieve
sustainable development by 2030, with people at the
centre of our efforts. It calls for greater attention to be
paid, in particular, to those who are often forgotten and
whose voices may not be loud enough. It urges us all
to do more for children, women, older people, persons
with disabilities, including those with mental health
conditions or psychological disabilities, people living
with, at risk of or affected by HIV/AIDS and other
prevalent diseases, such as tuberculosis and cholera,
and those suffering from anti-microbial resistance
or other non-communicable diseases, including
indigenous peoples, refugees, internally displaced
persons and migrants.
The draft resolution underscores the underlying
importance of ensuring good health for all at all
ages, everywhere, in all aspects, including sexual
and reproductive health and reproductive rights
in accordance with the Programme of Action of
the International Conference on Population and
Development, the Beijing Platform for Action and the
outcome documents of their review conferences, as
well as mental health.

12/12/2017

medicines. It improves service delivery to the people,
while ensuring that they do not face financial hardship
or fall back into poverty because of medical bills. That
is in line with our commitment in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development to eradicate poverty in all its
forms and dimensions.
We also strongly believe that it is time to bring
the discussion on universal health coverage to United
Nations headquarters in New York. The issue,
in particular in the context of the 2030 Agenda,
encompasses a much broader spectrum than health
alone. We need the highest possible level of political
commitment and will on a matter that is crucial for
humankind’s future. Only in that way can we ensure
greater concrete action in countries around the world,
as well as meaningful global partnerships, through
North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation,
with the involvement of the private sector and other
relevant actors and partners.
I would like to take this opportunity to make an
oral correction to the text of draft resolution A/72/L.28.
In the fourth line of paragraph 21, the phrase “through a
technical assistance and capacity-building programme”
should read “through technical assistance and capacitybuilding programmes”.
(spoke in French)

The draft resolution calls for sustainable financing
of investment on health infrastructure, in particular
research and development of new medicines and tools.
It underlines the need to assist the States Members of
the United Nations, in particular developing countries,
in their efforts to ensure that their peoples have access
to quality health services and medicines, including
through existing international legal mechanisms.

The second draft resolution, A/72/L.27, is entitled
“International Universal Health Coverage Day”. The
Global Health and Foreign Policy Initiative proposes
that 12 December be celebrated as International
Universal Health Coverage Day. The draft resolution
invites Member States and stakeholders to celebrate the
day each year in a suitable manner and in accordance
with national priorities, in order to raise awareness about
the importance of strong and resilient health-care and
universal health coverage systems. The draft resolution
also underscores the importance of having access to
high-quality health care and safe, effective, quality and
affordable medicine and vaccines for everyone.

The draft resolution highlights the importance of
strong and resilient health systems and an effective
health workforce. It is for that reason that the core
group has decided to propose, in paragraph 24, that
the General Assembly convene a high-level meeting on
universal health coverage in 2019 here in New York.
We strongly believe that the universal health coverage
system is the most effective means to guarantee
equitable access to quality health services and

The adoption of the draft resolution today will be
very significant. From now on, countries that have been
celebrating International Universal Health Coverage
Day on 12 December will be able to do so on the same
day as it is officially recognized by the United Nations.
It will also be the day when the United Nations officially
joins this just cause, in solidarity with countries and
various partners that have advocate universal health
coverage since 2012.

2/7

17-43755

12/12/2017

In conclusion, I must mention that the final texts of
the two draft resolutions are the result of the strenuous
efforts of numerous delegations that took an active and
constructive part in the negotiations. I would like to
thank all of them for their commitment and flexibility
in their efforts to reach consensus. I also thank those
who have already sponsored or will sponsor the draft
resolutions. Their support today is vital because it helps
to strengthen the implementation of the Sustainable
Development Goals, in particular by advancing our
shared objectives of healthy lives and well-being for
everyone, regardless of age, so that no one is left behind.
Ms. Razana (Maldives): Good health and well-being
are two of our most precious gifts, and maintaining a
healthy life requires continuous investment. We believe
that investment in the health sector is not just an end
in itself but also a means to achieve great advances in
social and economic development.
That has been the experience of the Maldives.
The Maldives spends more than 9 per cent of its gross
domestic product on health-related expenses — the
highest in the South-East Asia region. In 1977, the life
expectancy of people in the Maldives was just 47 years.
It now stands at 78. Maternal mortality rates stood at
680 per 100,000 live births in 1977, but had dropped
to 45 by 2016. Those are dramatic improvements.
The Maldives has also made significant progress
in controlling and eliminating several contagious
diseases. We became the first member of the World
Health Organization’s South-East Asia region to be
verified malaria-free in 2015, and went on to eliminate
lymphatic filariasis and measles over the past two
years. Polio and neonatal tetanus have been eliminated,
and leprosy has not been a public health problem since
2000. For diseases such as tuberculosis, the Maldives
is one of the very few countries in the world that have
reached the global target.
The Maldives was able to make those gains because
of considerable investment in the health sector. Our
progress has enabled us to escape the least developed
country category. Every Maldivian is proud of that. Yet
in small island developing States such as the Maldives,
moving to the next level of development is a signficant
challenge, particularly where the provision of health
services is concerned, as well as efforts to achieve
health-related sustainable development goals, along
with other goals that have an impact on health. This
requires significant investment in the health sector.

A/72/PV.72

The Government of the Maldives is currently
building the country’s largest-ever hospital, with
state-of-the-art equipment. It will be completed in the
next few months and will cater to citizens’ growing
need for advanced treatment. Private-sector investment
in advancing the country’s health sector is especially
noteworthy. The tertiary hospital being constructed
by a private company in the capital will introduce
super-specialty services to health care in the Maldives.
Although partnership with the private sector is vital,
international cooperation is crucial to improving
countries’ capacity to respond to health challenges
such as pandemics and epidemics, and to addressing
the rise of non-communicable diseases at the local and
national levels. The Ebola crisis and the Zika outbreak
are sobering reminders that global health crises can
transcend national borders and devastate communities
and entire regions. Such pandemics highlight the
importance of promoting a greater level of cooperation
at the international, regional and subregional level.
In today’s era of globalization, we must encourage
innovative ideas, broaden and develop new partnerships
and mechanisms so that countries are better equipped
to deal with possible outbreaks of epidemics. We must
accelerate our partnership to improve health for all,
guided by the principles of ownership, with a clear focus
on results, inclusiveness and shared responsibility.
Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank the Director General of the
World Health Organization (WHO) for preparing the
report on health employment and economic growth (see
A/72/378). The document is a timely reminder of the
importance of investing in training qualified medical
specialists to react swiftly to crises in the area of
health care. That topic is especially opportune given
the growing number of challenges and the intensity of
outbreaks of illness that we are seeing. That is very often
grounded in high population mobility, urbanization and
continued increases in poverty.
In that connection, we welcome the intention of
the Director General to structure and focus the work of
the WHO on such key areas as ensuring general health
and medical care coverage, preventing emergency
situations, protecting the health of children and
women, and preventing the possibility that dangerous
environmental outbreaks may damage the WHO’s
coordinating role.

17-437553/7

A/72/PV.72

The Russian Federation attaches special importance
to the staffing sector in our country. For the past
three years, since our State health-care development
programme began, we have increased the number of
doctors in all specialties, including those working in
rural communities, by an average of 10 to 25 per cent.
The Government is taking steps to fully eliminate
the imbalance in the distribution of medical workers
between rural and urban areas in the near future. To
that end, we have amended the programme for training
and qualifications, improved the system for practical
training, and enhanced the prestige of the profession.
The Russian Federation supports the adoption of
draft resolutions A/72/L.28, entitled “Global health
and foreign policy: addressing the health of the most
vulnerable for an inclusive society”, and A/72/L.27,
entitled “International Universal Health Coverage
Day”. We express our gratitude to the representative
of Thailand for coordinating the negotiating process.
We note that these draft resolutions encourage Member
States to actively work on the preparations for the highlevel meetings of the General Assembly on infectious
diseases and tuberculosis in 2018 and on universal
health coverage in 2019. We focus particular attention
on the holding of those meetings, which will become
yet another step in countries’ timely achievement of
targets related to Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
3. For our part, we are prepared to make a constructive
contribution to the drafting of the outcome documents
of those events.
In the fight against tuberculosis, we have already
embarked on the initial stage of convening a global
WHO ministerial conference in Moscow, bringing
together professionals from more than 120 countries,
including heads of agencies, leaders of international
organizations, representatives of civil society and
the private sector. That has enabled us to formulate
a comprehensive package of recommendations for
fighting this severe infectious disease. We hope that
these will be part of a political declaration for the
forthcoming high-level meeting on tuberculosis.
In the framework of the meetings on non-infectious
diseases, we must take stock of the 2014 outcome
document of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the comprehensive review and assessment
of the progress achieved in the prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases (resolution 68/300).
The significant success was achieved in fighting
non-infectious diseases thanks to the establishment
4/7

12/12/2017

and strengthening of the United Nations Inter-Agency
Task Force on the Prevention and Control of
Non-communicable Diseases. The Montevideo WHO
Global Conference on Non-Communicable Diseases,
enhancing policy coherence between different spheres
of policymaking that have a bearing on attaining
SDG target 3.4 on non-communicable diseases
by 2030, highlighted the important links between
reducing the number of cases of premature death
from non-communicable diseases and enhancing the
coordination of policies in various areas.
Health care has made progress in recent decades.
However, taking into account the fact that many areas
of this issue remain long-term in nature and that poverty
levels are still increasing, the greater the significance of
universal access to medical care, which can enable us
to carry out preventive action and early diagnosis, and
ensure access to high-quality and effective care to all
categories of patients, including the most vulnerable.
Taking into account the timeliness of the annual
resolution on global health and foreign policy and in
full support of it, we joined in the consensus and have
signed on as a sponsor.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.27, entitled
“International Universal Health Coverage Day”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and in
addition to those delegations listed on the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/72/L.27: Algeria, Australia, Bangladesh,
Belgium, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, Chile, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Finland,
Georgia, Greece, Guinea, Iceland, India, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Kiribati, Latvia, Lebanon, Luxembourg,
Malaysia, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar,
Nauru, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Palau, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Portugal, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sri Lanka, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, the United Kingdom, Uruguay,
Ukraine, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam and Zambia.
17-43755

12/12/2017

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.27?
Draft resolution A/72/L.27 was adopted (resolution
72/138).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/72/L.28, entitled
“Global health and foreign policy: addressing the
health of the most vulnerable for an inclusive society”,
as orally corrected.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/72/L.28, and in addition to those delegations listed
in the document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution, as orally corrected:
Algeria, Andorra, Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, the Central
African Republic, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, El Salvador,
Finland, Georgia, Greece, Guinea, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Madagascar,
Mexico, the Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, the
Russian Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/72/L.28,
as orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/72/L.28, as orally corrected,
was adopted (resolution 72/139).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to those wishing to speak in explanation of position,
I would like to remind speakers that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Ms. Phipps (United States of America): I would
like to start by thanking Ms. Nathita Premabhuti for
leading the negotiations on the global health and foreign
policy resolutions 72/138 and 72/139 so skilfully and for

A/72/PV.72

bringing consensus to the many difficult but important
issues treated in those resolutions. She has ably guided
the negotiation schedule over the past several weeks,
and we appreciate the fact that the text was concluded
in a timely manner.
We would first like to take this opportunity to
welcome the focus in the resolutions on the health of
the most vulnerable. We also wish to make important
points of clarification on some of the language that we
see reflected.
Regarding all references to universal health coverage
in both resolutions, the United States emphasizes that
Member States should choose their best path towards
universal health coverage, in line with their national
contexts and priorities. We applaud efforts to encourage
universal health access, understanding that efforts to
expand access do not imply primarily Governmentcentric solutions or mandates, which we do not support.
We further underscore that the resolutions and many of
the outcome documents referenced therein, including
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, are non-binding
documents that do not create rights or obligations under
international law.
Regarding the reaffirmation of the 2030 Agenda,
the United States recognizes the Agenda as a global
framework for sustainable development that can help
countries work towards global peace and prosperity. We
applaud the call for shared responsibility in the Agenda
and emphasize that all countries have a role to play in
achieving its vision. We also strongly support national
responsibility, as stressed in the Agenda. However,
each country has its own development priorities, and
we emphasize that countries should work towards
implementation in accordance with their own national
policies and priorities.
We also highlight our mutual recognition in
paragraph 58 of the 2030 Agenda that the implementation
of the Agenda must respect and be without prejudice
to the independent mandates of other processes and
institutions, including negotiations, and that it should
not prejudge or serve as a precedent for decisions and
actions under way in other forums. For example, the
Agenda does not represent a commitment to providing
new market access for goods or services. Moreover,
the Agenda does not interpret or alter any World Trade
Organization agreement or decision, including the

17-437555/7

A/72/PV.72

Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS).
Regarding the reaffirmation of the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda specifically, we note that much of
the trade-related language in that outcome document
has been overtaken by events since July 2015 and is
immaterial. Our reaffirmation of the outcome document
has no standing in the ongoing work and negotiations
involving trade. Indeed, some of the intervening
events happened just months after the release of the
outcome document.
The United States recognizes the importance of
access to affordable, safe and effective medicines
and the critical role that intellectual property plays in
incentivizing the development of new and improved
medicines. However, we regret the inclusion in the
twenty-eighth preambular paragraph of unacceptable
language on the WTO TRIPS agreement and the
Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health.
It is unacceptable to the United States that the United
Nations and some Member States have used non-WTO
multilateral forums to attempt to characterize WTO rules
and agreements. That could lead to misinterpretation of
international trade obligations in a manner that might
negatively affect countries’ abilities to incentivize new
drug development and expand access to medicines.
The United States reaffirms in that context that
the strong protection and enforcement of intellectual
property rights incentivizes the creation and
distribution of life-saving medicines and other useful
consumer products around the world that address the
health, environmental and development challenges of
today and tomorrow through a carefully negotiated
balanced set of TRIPS member rights and obligations.
We continue to oppose language that we believe
attempts to characterize trade commitments. We do
not believe that United Nations resolutions are the
appropriate vehicles for such pronouncements, and we
are concerned that inclusion of this language may be an
attempt to prejudice negotiations that are under way or
anticipated in other more appropriate forums.
Regarding paragraph 14, the United States believes
that women should have equal access to reproductive
health care. We remain committed to the principles laid
out in the Beijing Declaration and the Programme of
Action of the International Conference on Population
and Development. As has been made clear over many
years, there was international consensus that those
6/7

12/12/2017

documents do not create new international rights,
including any so-called right to abortion. The United
States fully supports the principle of voluntary choice
regarding maternal and child health and family
planning. We do not recognize abortion as a method
of family planning nor do we support abortion in our
reproductive health assistance. Let me reiterate that the
United States is the world’s largest donor of bilateral
reproductive health and family planning assistance.
In accordance with the United States position on the
global compact for safe, orderly and regular migration,
we do not support its inclusion in paragraph 15 or
reference to the development of the global compact for
safe, orderly and regular migration.
Lastly, we interpret the resolution’s references
to obligations as applicable only to the extent that
States have assumed such obligations and with respect
to States parties to the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, in light of its
article 2.1. The United States is party neither to that
Covenant nor to its Optional Protocol, and the rights
contained therein, including the right to the enjoyment
of the highest attainable standard of health, are not
justiciable as such in United States courts. We read
the resolution as urging States to comply with their
applicable international obligations.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Holy See.
Monsignor Grysa (Holy See): My delegation
reaffirms its commitment to the promotion, protection
and full realization of the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical
and mental health as enshrined in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and in the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.
The Holy See believes that all our efforts must ensure
human dignity, including quality of health and life, and
the building of a better world for all generations to come,
without losing sight of the needs of the most vulnerable.
With regard to resolution 72/139, my delegation
would like to thank the facilitator for her commitment
to the consultation process. While we welcome this
resolution and the efforts made by delegations to
achieve consensus, we remain concerned about the
attempt to shift the balance of the text through the
inclusion of highly controversial language that does not
enjoy consensus or serve the purpose of the resolution.
For the reasons above, the Holy See, in conformity with
17-43755

12/12/2017

its nature and particular mission, wishes to express the
following reservations about the resolution’s concepts.
The Holy See considers sexual and reproductive
health, sexual and reproductive health-care services
and reproductive rights as applying to a holistic
concept of health. We do not consider abortion, access
to abortion or access to abortifacients as a dimension
of these terms. With regard to sexual and reproductive
health and reproductive rights, while the right to health
is inherent to every human person and recognized in
international human rights law, reproductive rights
are not. The Holy See recognizes the importance of
human rights in as much as they derive from a correct
understanding of human nature, the human person and
inherent human dignity, and provide the foundation for
appropriate women’s health measures. Such measures
must be implemented in accordance with international

A/72/PV.72

human rights instruments and, in particular, in respect
of the right to life. As is well known, the Catholic
Church is a front-line provider of primary health care,
in particular to those most marginalized and left behind,
and in ensuring that every woman can benefit from the
support and assistance she needs.
Lastly, with reference to gender, the Holy See
understands the term to be grounded in biological
sexual identity and difference, not in a psychological
state nor to be interpreted as a social construction.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
127. I would like to thank the organizers of today’s
meeting and all for their presence and participation.
The meeting rose at 11.05 a.m.

17-437557/7
