13

Resolutions adopted on reports of the First Committee-

Establishment of a permanent c,ommission of good offices

practicable in the circumstances and compatible with
the right of self-defence to bring the armed conflict to
an end at the earliest possible moment ;

379 (V).

( b) In particular, that such State shall immediately,
and in any case not later than twenty-four hours after
the outbreak of the hostilities, make a public statement
wherein it will proclaim its readiness, provided that the
States with which it is in conflict will do the same, to
discontinue all military operations and withdraw all its
militarv forces which have invaded the territory or
territo;ial water of another State or crossed a demarcation line, either on terms agreed !Jy the parties to t_he
conflict or under conditions to he indicated to the parties
by the appropriate organs of the Cnited Nations;

Mi11df11l of the provision in .\rticle ~3 of the Char!er
that the parties to any dispute, the cont111ua'.1ce of ,~luch
is likely to endanger the m:rn1tenance of mtern~t10nal
peace and security, shall, first of all,_ see_k a solt!t1on_ by
negotiation, inquiry, mediation, co!1ohat1011, a:b1trat10n,
j ucliciai settkmcnt, resort to reg1011al agencies. or arrangcnll'nts, or other peaceful means of their own
choice;
Ncca!linq that in Ceneral ;\ssembly resolution 295
(I\') the [ntcrim Committee of the General Ass_emhly
is charged to cnnsicler systematically the further 1mple111ent;11io11 of that part of . \ rticle 11 ( paragraph 1) of
the Charter relating to the general principles of cooperation in tlv~ maintenance of international peace and
securitv and of that part of Article 13 (paragraph 1 a)
which • dl'als with the promotion of international cooperatiun in the politicli field,
( ·onsidcrinr; that the IntPrim Committee of the Ge1:1eral ;\s,c111lilv has aln-acly begun to study the question
of the cstaliiislm1c11t of a permanent conciliation organ
like that proposed by Yugo~lavia, 7
Consid,'!iny that the study of this question is important and urgent,
I. Decides to refer to the Interim Committee item 73
of thl' agrnda of the present session ( Establishment of a
per111;u1cnl co111missio11 of goocl offices) ;
2. l{ccon1111end, to the Interim Committee, in continuing its systematic examination of machinery for the
pacific sdtkmcnt of disputes, to study this item in
ctmm·xion with the question of the establishment of a
permanent organ of conciliation and taking into account
the prnpo,al introduced by Yugoslavia pursuant to item
73 and the discussions of the fifth session of the General
.\ssc111lily on that item.

( c) That such State immediately notify the Secretary-General, for communication to the Security Council and to the 1\1 embers of the LTnited T\ ations, of the
statement made in accordance with the preceding subparagraph and of the circumstances in which the conflict
has arisen;
( d) That such State, in its notification to the
Secretary-Ceneral, invite the appropriate organs of the
United Nations to dispatch tlw Peace Ob,ervation
Commi,;sion 4 to the area in which the· conflict has arisen,
if the Commission is not already functioning there;
(e) That the conduct of the States concerned in
relation to the matters covered by the foregoing recommemlations he taken into account in any determination
of responsibility for the breach of the peace or act of
aggression in the case under consideration ancl in all
other relevant proc"eding., before the appropriate organs
of the U nite<l ;-J ations;
2. Determines that the provisions of the present
re~olution in no way impair the rights ancl obligations
of States under the Chartrr of the United '.'\ ations nor
the decisions or recommendations of the Security Council, the General Assembly or any other competent organ
of the United Nations.

The Ccncrai .·lsscmbly,

308th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.

308th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.
380 (V).

B

Peace through deeds

Thi' General Assembly,

The General Assembly,
Considering that the question raised by the proposal 5
of the Union of Soviet Socialist l~<:'puhlics can better be
examined in conjunction with matters under consideration by the International Law Commission, a subsidiary
organ of the United I\' ations,
Decides to refer the proposal of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and all the records" of the First
Committee dealing with this question to the International
Law Commission, so that the latter mav take them into
consideration and formulate its conclu;ions as soon as
possible.
308th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.
• See resolution 377 A (V), section B.
~ See document A/C.1/608.
8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth Ses,ion, First Committee, 384th to 390th meetings inclusive.

Rerogni:::ing the profound desire of all mankind to live
in enduring peace and security, and in freedom from
fear and want,
Confidrnt that, if all governments faithfully reflect
this desire and observe their obligations under the
Ckirtcr, lasting peace and security can be established,
Condenming the intervention of a State in the internal affairs of another State for the purpose of changing
its legally e~tablished governme11t by the threat or use
of force,
1. Solemnly reaffirms that, whatever the weapon!
used, any aggression, whether committed openly, or by
fommting civil strife in the interest of a foreign Power,
or otherwise, is the gravest of all crimes against peace
and security throughout the world;
T

See document A/1401.

General Assemhly-:Fifth Session

14

2. Determines that for the realization of lasting
peace and security it is indispensable:
(I) That prompt united action be taken to meet
aggression wherever it arises;
(2) That every nation agree:
(a) To accept effective international control of
atomic energy, under the United Nations, on the basis
already approved 8 by the General Assembly in order to
make effective the prohibition of atomic weapons;
( b) To strive for the control and elimination, under
the United Nations, of all other weapons of mass
destruction ;
( c) To regulate all armaments and armed forces
under a United Nations system of control and inspection, with a view to their gradual reduction ;
(d) To reduce to a minimum the diversion for armaments of its human and economic resources and to strive
towards the development of such resources for the
general welfare, with due regard to the needs of the
under-developed areas of the world ;
3. Declares that these goals can be attained if all the
Members of the United Nations demonstrate by their
deeds their will to achieve peace.
308th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.
381 (V).

Condemnation of propaganda against
peace

The General Assembly,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 110 (II) and 290 (IV),
paragraph 8, which condemn all propaganda against
peace and recommend the free exchange of information
and ideas as one of the foundations of good-neighbourly
relations between the peoples ;
2. Declares that such propaganda includes:
( 1) h1citement to conflicts or acts of aggression;
( 2) Measures tending to isolate the peoples from
any contact with the outside world, by preventing the
Press, radio and other media of communication from
reporting international events, and thus hindering mutual comprehension and understanding between peoples;
( 3) Measures tending to silence or distort the
activities of the United Nations in favour of peace or to
prevent their peoples from knowing the views of other
State~ Members.
308th plenary meeting,
17 November 1950.

382 (V). Threats to the political independence
and territorial integrity of Greece

A
The General Assembly,
Having considered the unanimous conclusions 8 of the
United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans con11 See resolutions 1 (I), 41 (I), 191 (III), 192 (III), 290
(IV) and 299 (IV).
'See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifth SesJ'ion, Stt/>Plement No. 11.

cerning those members of the Greek armed forces who
were captured by the Greek guerrillas and taken into
countries north of Greece,

Having noted that, with the sole excepti~:m of \':u~oslavia the other States concerned are still detammg
these ~embers of the Greek armed forces without justification under commonly accepted international practice,

l. Recommends the repatriation of all those among
them who express the wish to be repatriated,
2. Calls upon the States concerned to take the necessary measures for the speedy implementation of the
present resolution,
3. Instructs the Secretary-General to request the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
League of Red Cross Societies to ensure liaison with
the national Red Cross organizations of the States concerned, with a view to implementing the present
resolution.
313th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.

B
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report 10 of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans and having
noted that, although a certain improvement has taken
place in the situation on the northern frontiets of
Greece, there nevertheless remains a threat to the
political independence and territorial integrity of
Greece,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations Special Committee on the Balkans;

2. Continues the Special Committee in being until
the sixth session of the General Assembly, in accordance with the terms of reference and administrative
arrangements contained in General Assembly resolutions 109 (II), 1.93 ((III) and 288 (IV), unless
meanwhile the Special Committee recommends to the
Interim Committee its own dissolution;
3. Authori::;es the Interim Committee to act on such
recommendation as it thinks proper.
313th plenary meeting,
1 December 1950.
C

The General Assembly,
Noting with grave concern the reports11 of the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League
of Red Cross Societies and of the Secretary-General,
and particularly the statement 12 that "not a single
Greek child has yet been returned to his native land
and, except for Yugoslavia, no country harbouring
Greek children has taken definite action to comply
with the resolutions unanimously adopted in two successive years by the General Assembly",
10 /bid.

11
12

See documents A/1480 and A/1480/Add.l.
See document A/1480, paragraph 17.
