S/2015/3

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 January 2015
Original: English

Letter dated 2 January 2015 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
The Security Council, in its resolution 2167 (2014), underscored the
importance of developing effective partnerships in the area of peacekeepi ng
between the United Nations and regional organizations, in particular the African
Union, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
statutes of regional and subregional organizations. In that context, the Council
requested, in paragraph 13, that I initiate, in full and close cooperation with the
African Union, a lessons-learned exercise on the transitions from African Union
peace operations to United Nations peacekeeping operations in Mali and in the
Central African Republic, and provide specific recommendations that could be used
for possible future transitional arrangements.
The Department of Peacekeeping Operations led this lessons -learned exercise,
which was conducted in collaboration with the United Nations Office to the A frican
Union, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), and in consultation with the
African Union, the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and relevant United
Nations departments, offices, agencies, funds and programmes. The methodology of
the exercise included a desk review of relevant reports, including from the African
Union and ECOWAS, as well as interviews with United Nations and African Union
officials and other key stakeholders. On 19 November 2014, representatives from
the United Nations, the African Union, regional econom ic communities and regional
mechanisms held a consultative meeting in Cairo to discuss the findings and
recommendations, which were endorsed on 12 December 2014 during a joint United
Nations-African Union validation meeting at the headquarters of the Afric an Union
in Addis Ababa.
The transitions from the African Union peace operations to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Mali and in the Central African Republic took place
against the backdrop of an enhanced partnership at both the strategic and
operational levels. The role of the African Union and subregional organizations over
the past two decades has been critical in jointly addressing crises on the continent
within the framework of Chapter VIII of the Charter. From the peacekeeping
endeavours in Burundi to the Sudan and Somalia, various models of cooperation
have gradually emerged between the African Union and the United Nations,
anchored in the principles of complementarity and comparative advantage. Various
15-00020 (E)

120115

*1500020*

S/2015/3

processes and liaison mechanisms have been established at a number of levels to
facilitate and enhance cooperation, information-sharing and consultation, including
the Joint Task Force on Peace and Security and a desk-to-desk consultative meeting
on the prevention and management of conflicts. The establishment of the United
Nations Office to the African Union in 2010 has also contributed significantly to
fostering a more dynamic partnership between the two organizations.
In response to the multidimensional crises in Mali, on 13 November 2012 the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union requested the Security Council to
authorize, for an initial period of one year, the planned deployment of the
African-led International Support Mission to Mali (AFISMA). Council resolution
2085 (2012) authorized the deployment of AFISMA and requested the establishment
of a multidisciplinary United Nations presence in Mali, the United Nations Office in
Mali, in order to provide coordinated and coherent support to political and security
processes. Subsequently, resolution 2100 (2013) provided for the transfer of
authority from AFISMA to MINUSMA on 1 July 2013. Some 6,103 military
personnel, 20 individual police officers and three formed police units comprising
368 officers were rehatted from the African-led peace operation on that date.
Regarding the Central African Republic, on 19 July 2013, the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union requested the Security Council to authorize
the deployment of the African-led International Support Mission in the Central
African Republic (MISCA) for an initial period of six months. The transfer of
authority from the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central African
Republic, which had been operating in the country since 2003 under an ECCAS
mandate, to MISCA took place on 19 December 2013. Council resolution 2127
(2013) authorized the deployment of MISCA for a period of 12 months. The
transition from MISCA to MINUSCA was defined under resolution 2149 (2014),
which set the date for the transfer of authority on 15 September 2014. In the same
resolution, the Council also requested the immediate transformation of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic (BINUCA)
into MINUSCA. Those transitions also brought to the fore the important role played
by bilateral and multilateral partners, including the French operations Sangaris and
Serval and the European Union-led peacekeeping force in the Central African
Republic, in helping to address the crises.
The swift deployment of AFISMA and MISCA was critical to the international
community’s efforts to protect civilians in those countries. It also paved the way for
a smooth transfer of authority to MINUSMA and MINUSCA. Although the contexts
for cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union in Mali and in
the Central African Republic were distinct, a number of common lessons emerged.
The present letter contains the key findings and recommendations on the strategic,
operational, coordination and support arrangements required to enhance coherence
and inter-operability between the two organizations.
Strategic cooperation pre- and post-transition
As the Security Council has primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, its relationship with the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union is at the core of the overall strategic partnership between the
two organizations, which has been guided by the decisions and resolutions of both
Councils. The lessons learned from Mali and the Central African Republic

2/11

15-00020

S/2015/3

underscore that successful transitions from African Union peace operations to
United Nations peacekeeping operations require political coherence and the
harmonization of policy and strategies at the highest levels. The lessons -learned
exercise also highlights the need to ensure that, to the extent possible, the mandates
given by the Council and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union to
operations supported by both organizations are developed through close
consultation. They should also be written in a way that demonstrates unity of
strategic vision in order to facilitate the strategic planning process and enable a
more coordinated response.
A comparison between the processes leading up to the transitions in Mali and
the Central African Republic shows that specific instructions from the Security
Council on the conduct of joint strategic assessments and planning processes were
key to ensuring a coordinated response between the United Nations, the African
Union and the subregional organizations concerned. In the case of Mali, in its
resolution 2085 (2012), which authorized the deployment of AFISMA, the Council
requested the Secretariat to jointly assess with the African Union, ECOWAS and
other partners the operational requirements for the African-led operation. In the case
of the Central African Republic, strategic direction was provided by the Council in
several resolutions, including resolution 2127 (2013), in which the Council
requested the Secretariat to undertake, in consultation with the African Union,
expeditious contingency preparations and planning for the possible transformation
of MISCA into a United Nations peacekeeping operation.
The subsequent assessment missions led by my Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations in November 2013 and February 2014, with the
participation of African Union and ECCAS representatives, contributed to the
provision of harmonized recommendations and informed the mandate formulation
process that led to the transfer of authority from MISCA to MINUSCA. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations leadership’s engagement with the African
Union liaison office and ambassadors from ECOWAS and ECCAS member States
also helped in that regard. Notwithstanding the differences that emerged , enhanced
consultations between members of the two Councils, including through the African
members of the Security Council and an exchange of letters between the Chair of
the African Union Commission and myself, in February 2014, also contributed to a
harmonized approach to the transition process.
The transitions in Mali and the Central African Republic also indicate that an
effective partnership in peacekeeping between the United Nations and the African
Union has to be anchored in a clear division of labour, including beyond the date of
the transfer of authority. Sustaining regional engagement and leveraging the
comparative advantages of the United Nations, the African Union and regional
actors to move the political process forward has proven critical in the search for
lasting peace and stability in both Mali and the Central African Republic. The
Support and Follow-Up Group on the Situation in Mali and the International
Contact Group on the Central African Republic have served as effective instruments
in strengthening coordination among members of the international community and
national stakeholders in support of the peace process. They have also helped to
create an enabling environment for the implementation of the mandates of
MINUSMA and MINUSCA.

15-00020

3/11

S/2015/3

As indicated in my report of 3 March 2014 on the Central African Republic
submitted pursuant to paragraph 48 of Security Council resolution 2127 (2013)
(S/2014/142), a United Nations peacekeeping operation can only succeed when the
region plays an important and complementary role. In that regard, and in order to
enhance regional engagement in the Central African Republic, in its resolution 2149
(2014) the Security Council requested MINUSCA, within its existing resou rces and
mandate, to assist the political efforts of the African Union and ECCAS in support
of the transition process, following the transfer of authority on 15 September 2014.
The establishment of strong, post-transition African Union missions, such as the
African Union Mission for Mali and the Sahel and the African Union Mission for
the Central African Republic and Central Africa, contributed to sustaining regional
engagement and maintaining coherence and unity of vision at the strategic level. In
the long term, it could also contribute to facilitating United Nations exit strategies.
Lessons learned from the experiences in Mali and the Central African
Republic point to the need for greater clarity on the timelines and conditions under
which transitions takes place in order to increase their predictability. An early
indication from the Security Council, as was the case in its resolution 2127 (2013)
on the Central African Republic, of its intention to eventually transform an
African-led peace operation into a United Nations peacekeeping operation, in
coordination with relevant regional entities and the host nation, can facilitate the
early strategic engagement of both secretariats. Such an indication can also facilitate
the development of mission concepts and benchmarks that can contribute to a
smoother handover process.
Operational planning and coordination
The process leading up to the transfer of authority from MISCA to MINUSCA
benefited from lessons drawn from the transition from AFISMA to MINUSMA. In
the case of Mali, the United Nations enhanced its support for the planning process
of AFISMA in line with resolution 2071 (2012), in which the Security Council
requested the Secretariat to deploy military and security planners to assist ECOWAS
and the African Union in planning for AFISMA. However, those efforts were
hampered in part by the fact that, at that time, both ECOWAS and the African Union
had started to develop distinct concepts of operations.
Formal planning only started following the 19 October 2012 meeting of the
Support and Follow-Up Group on the Situation in Mali, which endorsed the African
Union-led Strategic Concept for the Resolution of the Crises in Mali. Subsequently,
the African Union and ECOWAS held a series of meetings with the sup port of the
United Nations and other partners to harmonize the concept of operations of
AFISMA. The concept of operations was eventually endorsed by the extraordinary
summit of ECOWAS held on 11 November and by the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union on 13 November. Building on the momentum generated by the
adoption of the strategic concept, regular consultations were held at senior levels
between the United Nations, the African Union and ECOWAS headquarters to
coordinate operational support to AFISMA, including within the framework of an
integrated task force.
Meanwhile, in the Central African Republic, the United Nations worked from
the outset to support the transition of authority from the ECCAS -led operation, the
Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic, to the

4/11

15-00020

S/2015/3

African-led operation MISCA, which took place on 19 December 2013. The United
Nations also participated in the African Union-led assessment missions as early as
April 2013, in support of the development of the MISCA concept of operations. As
called for in Security Council resolution 2127 (2013), the Secretariat provided
technical and expert advice to support the planning and deployment of MISCA and
strengthen its command and control, administrative infrastr ucture and training
capacity, including through the mobile training team model designed and delivered
in a coordinated fashion by the United Nations and the African Union.
Following the adoption of Security Council resolution 2149 (2014), the
African Union and the United Nations developed a transition plan focusing on key
strategic and operational measures to be implemented. The United Nations MISCA
support team, which deployed to the Central African Republic in February 2014,
played an important role in operationalizing the transition plan and linking
operational planning with donor support planning in Addis Ababa and New York.
The support team also served as the nucleus of the transition team recommended in
my report of 3 March 2014. The deployment of the transition team, which was
tasked with planning the establishment of MINUSCA and preparing for the transfer
of authority, with the participation of MISCA and BINUCA, contributed greatly to a
smoother transition.
Command and control
Clear command and control structures are critical to the success of
peacekeeping operations, particularly as they operate in volatile political and
security environments. They are very important in transitions when operations are
undertaken in coordination with another organization. The need for clear strategic
and operational guidance is vitally important. The transitions in Mali and the
Central African Republic re-emphasized that complex multinational peace
operations require a clear and effective command and control frame work. In both
contexts, the African Union encountered challenges due to the lack of means of
communication between force headquarters and sector headquarters, as well as a
lack of clarity on reporting procedures.
In Mali, the relatively short transition time frame affected command and
control structures in part by triggering the dissolution of the Joint Operations Centre
of AFISMA. That challenge was better managed in the Central African Republic
through the establishment of a common Joint Operations Cent re between the African
Union and the United Nations ahead of the transfer of authority. In addition,
continuity in command and control was facilitated by the rehatting of the Force
Commander of MISCA following a competitive recruitment process, as well as
some of the staff officers and several civilian staff members of MISCA. Despite
initial challenges regarding the establishment of communications infrastructure,
coordination between MISCA, Operation Sangaris and the European Union -led
peacekeeping force in the Central African Republic was facilitated by the integrity
of the command within the respective forces and the clarity of their respective
mandates, a lesson that should be taken into account when planning joint
endeavours in the future. The effective and continued direction provided by the
leadership of BINUCA/MINUSCA and MISCA throughout the transition was also
instrumental.

15-00020

5/11

S/2015/3

Rehatting modalities
The rehatting of police and force contingents operating under African -led
peace operations is a central element of the operational planning process during
transitions. In the cases of Mali and the Central African Republic, the Security
Council, in its resolutions 2100 (2013) and 2149 (2014), requested the United
Nations to absorb as many military and police personnel as possible from the
African-led peace operations into the United Nations peacekeeping mission, in
accordance with United Nations standards and in coordination with ECOWAS and
ECCAS. In March 2013, the Secretariat conducted an assessment to ide ntify critical
shortfalls among AFISMA troops. Efforts were also undertaken to bring troop levels
in line with operational requirements, enhance awareness of United Nations
peacekeeping mandates and upgrade equipment and self-sustainment capabilities. In
the case of the Central African Republic, a capability assessment was conducted
jointly with the African Union and ECCAS in May 2014. Shortfalls were then
communicated to concerned troop- and police-contributing countries and to bilateral
donors in an effort to raise their capacities prior to the transition.
Despite those efforts, which included the provision of grace periods and other
measures aimed at strengthening and aligning the missions’ command and control
structures and harmonizing doctrines and policies, most of the contingents that
MINUSMA and MINUSCA inherited on the date of their respective transfers of
authority had equipment and self-sustainment capabilities that remained below
United Nations standards. The transitions in Mali and the Central A frican Republic,
therefore, highlight the need for increased collaboration on force generation
between the African Union and the United Nations at an early stage, including
through joint predeployment visits in order to facilitate the rehatting process. Th e
challenges related to troop standards underscore the need for continued support for
broader efforts to build the capacity of African contingents, including through
support from bilateral partners.
Challenges also arose in both countries with regard to the implementation of
the United Nations human rights screening policy, owing to concerns about the
human rights record of some contingents to be rehatted, including contingents
belonging to national forces listed in the annexes of my annual report on chil dren
and armed conflict. The human rights screening policy requires the United Nations
to ensure that it does not deploy for service any person who has been involved in
violations of international human rights or humanitarian law. As far as AFISMA and
MISCA were concerned, the application of the human rights due diligence policy on
United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces revealed several
factors and risks that the Organization was compelled to take into consideration
ahead of the rehatting process in the Central African Republic. Those concerns were
only partially addressed by putting in place mitigation measures, including training
and additional proactive screening of MISCA contingents in the case of the Central
African Republic. In future, timely coordination on and implementation of the
human rights screening policy at the earliest stages of the African Union -United
Nations transition planning would enhance compliance with human rights standards.
Civilian capacities
The transitions in Mali and the Central African Republic also have
implications for the coordination and implementation of specific civilian -related

6/11

15-00020

S/2015/3

mandated tasks, principally human rights and the protection of civilians. There are
also issues related to coordination with the humanitarian community. In both
countries, the African Union deployed multidisciplinary civilian capabilities to
support the military and police components and enhance the capacity of AFISMA
and MISCA to deliver on their protection of civilians mandate and coordinate with
other stakeholders. However, the lessons learned from both transitions suggest that
the work and expertise of the African Union in the area of human rights could be
further harnessed. There is also a need for greater harmonizatio n between African
Union and United Nations standards and working methods, particularly when it
comes to monitoring, reporting and following up on human rights violations. There
were improvements in the case of the Central African Republic, owing to, notabl y,
the establishment of coordination mechanisms. However, the African Union and the
United Nations need to improve their common understanding of the protection of
civilians. The work of both organizations in that area would also benefit from more
systematic coordination, combined with enhanced civilian capacity to implement
strategies related to the protection of civilians.
Support arrangements
An operationally robust African Union peace support operation that can
seamlessly integrate, at the operational level, into a United Nations peacekeeping
operation is critical to a successful transition. In that regard, the ability to secure
adequate support is a major constraint facing the African Union in the conduct of its
peace operations. The Security Council has repeatedly emphasized, including most
recently in resolution 2167 (2014), the need to enhance the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of financing for regional organizations when they
undertake peacekeeping operations under a United Natio ns mandate. In the same
resolution, the Council also recalled the responsibility of regional organizations to
secure resources for their activities, including through contributions by their
member States and support from partners.
The Security Council requested in resolutions 2085 (2012) and 2127 (2013)
that I provide a package of “soft” support to AFISMA and MISCA, respectively.
Given the lack of available personnel, both AFISMA and MISCA required
additional support staff and civilian personnel during th eir start-up phases. In
accordance with resolution 2127 (2013), the deployment of United Nations experts
to support MISCA provided additional technical surge capacity to the African Union
mission, including in the areas of mission support, communications a nd military and
police planning. Meanwhile, in its resolution 2149 (2014), the Council authorized
the deployment of military enablers to MINUSCA before the transfer of authority on
15 September 2014, including to help stand up the military and police compo nents
of MINUSCA.
In its resolutions 2085 (2012) and 2127 (2013), the Security Council requested
that I establish trust funds to support AFISMA and MISCA operations, in
compliance with the human rights due diligence policy, in order to supplement the
resource mobilization efforts of the African Union. As a result, the trust funds
established for AFISMA and MISCA received $44 million and $5 million,
respectively. The trust fund established for the Central African Republic enabled the
delivery of a communications package to MISCA. Disagreements persisted,
however, over the condition of some equipment and led to a delay in its installation.
In Mali, the trust fund was initially intended to address some of the needs identified

15-00020

7/11

S/2015/3

for AFISMA through the acquisition of critical equipment from the United Nations
strategic deployment stocks.
The terms of reference of the AFISMA trust funds, established separately by
the African Union and the United Nations, allowed for the full range of logistical
support to be covered, including food, fuel and strategic lift, as well as
reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment. However, in the case of the United
Nations-managed trust fund, the relatively limited amount of funds available,
coupled with the uncertainty regarding the sustainability of the trust fund
mechanisms, shifted the focus towards one-time acquisition of equipment instead of
direct operational support. Most of the pledges made by donors were generally
earmarked for non-lethal assistance, and therefore precluded the African Union from
using them to reimburse contingent-owned equipment. That was the case for 98 per
cent of the support pledged at the donor conference for MISCA held by the African
Union on 1 February 2014 in Addis Ababa. The African Union also had to contend
with the low rate of disbursement of the pledges made by partners in Addis Ababa.
The lessons learned from the transitions in Mali and the Central African
Republic demonstrate that the planning for AFISMA and MISCA, in terms of troop
strength and capabilities, was influenced predominantly by the estimated
availability of voluntary contributions rather than the actual needs on the ground.
That was, however, partially offset in both cases by the use of already established,
bilateral and multilateral African Union-managed reserve funds for African-led
peace support operations. In response to the requests made by the Security Council
in resolutions 2085 (2012) and 2127 (2013) for Member States and partners to
provide financial support and contributions in kind to AFISMA and MISCA to
enable their deployment, some Member States, particularly France and the United
States of America, provided significant non-lethal and lethal support directly to a
number of troop- and police-contributing countries. The provision of weapons and
vehicles by France and strategic lift and other support by the United States were
essential for the deployment of additional MISCA contingents. Notwithstanding
those measures, however, some of the bilateral support to troop - and policecontributing countries was delivered only after the transfer of authority from
MISCA to MINUSCA.
Conclusions and recommendations
The specific circumstances of each conflict should determine the particular
model of collaboration between the African Union and the United Nations. It is
important, however, to continue to improve the manner in which the two
organizations, as well as the regional economic communities, collaborate to prevent
and manage conflicts. In that context, the issue of subsidiarity between the African
Union and its subregional organizations needs to be addressed with renewed vigour,
within the framework of the African Peace and Security Architecture, as partnerships
work best when there are common strategic objectives, political cohe rence and a
clear division of responsibilities. It is equally important that efforts be pursued to
enhance cooperation between the secretariats of the two organizations. That should
include the strengthening of existing mechanisms such as the Joint Task Fo rce on
Peace and Security of the United Nations and African Union.
The Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
have significant roles to play in setting the strategic direction for collaboration,

8/11

15-00020

S/2015/3

particularly in the context of a possible transition. It is therefore recommended that
the two Councils continue their constructive efforts to strengthen consultation and
information-sharing regarding countries on their respective agendas. That is
important at all times, but it is particularly important during the process of
mandating and deploying African Union-led peace operations. In that regard, I am
encouraged that the Security Council, in accordance with its presidential statement
of 16 December 2014 (S/PRST/2014/27), intends to hold timely consultations and
conduct collaborative field missions with the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as appropriate, to formulate cohesive positions and strategies on a
case-by-case basis in dealing with conflict situations in Africa.
The transitions in Mali and the Central African Republic highlight the
importance of early engagement by the two organizations in joint assessments and
planning from the outset, taking into account the political and security dimensions
of the conflicts concerned. Such planning should allow the United Nations and the
African Union to develop a common vision, resulting in increased efficiency and
more cost-effective mission support plans and doctrines. When the transition from
an African Union operation to a United Nations peacekeeping mission is envisaged,
an early indication that that is the intended course of action would improve planning
during the period.
To ensure greater predictability, the two organizations should identify contextspecific benchmarks that could be used to determine the conditions under which a
transition should take place, given the needs in the country and the situation on the
ground. The benchmarks should also take into account the time required to set up
support arrangements for an African Union-led peace operation and the lead time
needed to deploy a United Nations peacekeeping mission.
The transitions in Mali and the Central African Republic also confirmed that
continued regional engagement remains vital to furthering stabilization efforts and
sustaining political momentum. Future planning for transitions should therefore take
into consideration the role of post-transition, African Union-led presences and
mechanisms. It should also assess the support that the United Nations would be able
to continue providing to sustain such multidimensional presences. In that regard, I
again take note of the Security Council presidential statement of 16 December 2014,
in which it stressed the importance of supporting the political role of the African
Union during transitions, as well as in the formulation and implementation of
governance and other reforms to be carried out in addressing the root causes of
conflict in Africa.
Where rehatting of personnel from African Union to United Nations peace
operations is envisaged, it is important for the two organizations to collaborate from
the outset on force and police generation. They should consult closely with troop and police-contributing countries about the required capabilities and their
compliance with United Nations policy and doctrine, particularly with respect to
human rights. It should be envisaged within the broader context of the support of
the United Nations for the operationalization of the African Standby Force, whose
deployment in Mali and the Central African Republic has opened up new avenues
for cooperation.
Early joint planning and coordination should also apply to the transition of
civilian capacity, including with respect to the human rights and protection of
civilians mandates of the peace operations concerned. In that regard, the African

15-00020

9/11

S/2015/3

Union could consider developing an institutional framework for deploying human
rights personnel to peace operations. The United Nations could provide support for
the development of relevant policies, methodologies and planning processes. In
addition, increased coordination and understanding of the two organizations’
respective protection of civilians mandates and the strengthening of civilian
capacity would be critical to ensuring the effective delivery of those mandates.
Predictable and sustainable support remains critical to the success of
transitions from African Union peace operations to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. It should continue to be led by regional organizations who should secure
resources from their member States and partners. However, experiences in Mali and
the Central African Republic have also confirmed that no support modality is
sufficient on its own. The predictability and sustainability of funding is even more
important in the context of peace enforcement operations. In that regard, there is a
need to pursue efforts to optimize the full range of support modalities, including for
the timely operationalization of the African Standby Force, which can be done
through a combination of voluntary, assessed and bilateral support, as appropriate.
Pre-approved modalities for the use of trust funds and the establishment by the
African Union of pre-approved standing contracts with service providers could also
be envisaged. That would help shorten timelines for the operationalization of
support and enhance the management by the African Union of extrabudgetary
support packages provided by partners, such as the European Union -supported
African Peace Facility. In that regard, I welcome the report of the High -level Panel
on Alternative Sources of Financing the African Union, under the chairmanship of
the former President of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo.
The African Union and the United Nations, in consultation with other partners,
should conduct a lessons-learned exercise to review and assess the various
mechanisms available to improve the predictability, sustainability and flexibility of
financing African Union peace operations authorized by the Security Council. In
addition, as was done in the Central African Republic, the Council could consider
authorizing “soft” logistical support packages or technical support teams, as
appropriate. The early deployment of United Nations expertise an d military
enablers, including engineering assets and tactical lift capabilities, could also be
considered. The provision of additional United Nations technical and planning
advisory capacity and other bilateral assistance would enhance the capacity and
effectiveness of African Union operations and facilitate a seamless transfer of
authority. Where a transfer of authority is envisioned between the two organi zations,
the early deployment of a joint transition team would also be important for the
effective implementation of the transition plan.
I remain committed to ensuring closer interaction between both secretariats
and strengthening the existing mechanisms that guide their collaboration. That
would facilitate future transition processes, including with r espect to decisionmaking and tasking. To ensure a more coherent framework for global peacekeeping,
the United Nations is committed to working with the African Union to develop a
creative and flexible transition toolbox embodying a common vision that the U nited
Nations and African Union would employ, when and where appropriate, to inform
future transition processes. The toolbox would include guidance and standards on
(a) joint assessments and planning; (b) predeployment visits and force generation;
(c) coordination mechanisms; (d) continuity in command and control, as well as

10/11

15-00020

S/2015/3

rehatting; (e) transfer of civilian capacity; (f) support mechanisms; and
(g) arrangements to increase troop standards.
In that regard, as requested by the Security Council in its presidential
statement of 16 December 2014, I intend to present a report on ways to further
strengthen the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union on
issues of peace and security in Africa, including the work of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, in 2016. The outcome of the lessons -learned exercise
also has implications for cooperation between the United Nations regional
organizations more broadly, including the critical role played by bilateral partners
during transitions. I intend to explore those further in my report on the partnership
between the United Nations and regional organizations in peacekeeping, to be
issued by 31 March 2015, as requested by the Council in resolution 2167 (2014).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

15-00020

11/11
