A/65/PV.36

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

36

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 26 October 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Carrión-Mena
(Ecuador), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 41
Necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo imposed by the United States of
America against Cuba
Report of the Secretary-General (A/65/83)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.3)
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen): I am honoured to speak
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China at this plenary
meeting on agenda item 41, entitled “Necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”.
The Group of 77 and China has always been
firmly against the embargo. At the second South
Summit, held in Doha, Qatar, from 12 to 16 June 2005,
heads of State and Government of the Group of 77 and
China firmly rejected the imposition of laws and
regulations with extraterritorial impact and all other
forms of coercive economic measures, including
unilateral sanctions against developing countries. They
called on the Government of the United States to end
the economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba. That embargo, in addition to being
unilateral and contrary to the United Nations Charter
and international law and to the principle of good-

neighbourliness, causes huge material losses and
economic damage to the people of Cuba.
In this regard, the Group of 77 and China would
like to reiterate once again its long-standing position
on this important matter. At their recently held thirtyfourth annual meeting, which took place on
28 September at United Nations Headquarters in New
York, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the member
States of the Group of 77 and China,
“firmly rejected the imposition of laws and
regulations with extraterritorial impact and all
other forms of coercive economic measures,
including unilateral sanctions against developing
countries, and reiterated the urgent need to
eliminate them immediately. They emphasized
that such actions not only undermine the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, but also severely
threaten freedom of trade and investment. They
therefore called on the international community
to neither recognize these measures nor apply
them.” (A/65/486, annex, para. 69)
The Group of 77 and China notes the
communications from Governments and organs and
agencies of the United Nations contained in the
Secretary-General’s report on the implementation of
resolution 64/6 (A/65/83). Sadly, they demonstrate
unequivocally that the embargo remains largely
unchanged and continues to impose severe economic
and financial restrictions on Cuba. Furthermore, the
deepening impact of the global economic crisis on

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-60252 (E)

*1060252*

A/65/PV.36

Cuba, along with the continued embargo by the
Government of the United States, will further
aggravate the hardships that the people of Cuba are
experiencing.
The Group of 77 and China calls on the United
States to heed the international community’s increasing
calls to bring an end to the five-decade embargo and to
fully adhere to the principles of mutual respect and
non-interference in the internal affairs of a sisterly
country. The embargo frustrates efforts towards the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
and negatively affects regional cooperation in the area.
The Group of 77 and China are committed to
working towards a better world for all in which
nations, large and small, can peacefully coexist. The
achievement of such peaceful coexistence among
States requires adherence by all to the cardinal
principles of the United Nations Charter and the
peaceful conduct of relations among nations.
The Group of 77 and China will again fully
support the draft resolution against the embargo
(A/65/L.3) and urges all Member States to do so as
well.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to the next speaker, given the long list
of speakers inscribed on my list, I should like to
propose that the list of speakers for the debate on this
item now be closed. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
take it that the Assembly agrees to this proposal.
It was so decided.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): It is with great pleasure
that I address the General Assembly today on behalf of
the 118 Members of the United Nations that are
members of the Non-Aligned Movement, and to start
by extending a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Cuba, and expressing to him the Movement’s
full support.
Two days ago, on 24 October, we celebrated
United Nations Day, the anniversary of the day on
which the Organization officially came into existence
65 years ago, when 50 nations, big and small, jointly
proclaimed their resolve to realize a set of noble aims
based on timeless values and undying ideals and
decided to eternalize them in the United Nations
Charter. Today, the Non-Aligned Movement once again
reaffirms its unwavering commitment to uphold,

2

preserve and promote those principles and to ensure
the continued viability of all the provisions of
international law, which together constitute the very
essence of our multilateral work and guide our
collective efforts to maintain international peace and
security, achieve lasting economic growth and
sustainable development and ensure full respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms.
It is in that context that the Non-Aligned
Movement finds it disturbing that unilateral measures
and laws of a coercive nature are still being adopted
and implemented against countries of the Movement —
measures and laws that prevent them from exercising
their right to freely decide their own political systems
and the economic and social regimes of their
preference. We cannot but firmly reject such violations
of multilateralism and call for their immediate end. We
also appeal to all States to refrain from recognizing
such measures or laws and to support the claim of
affected countries to compensation for any damage
incurred as a result of this breach of internationally
agreed norms of conduct.
This year, the President of the General Assembly
has wisely chosen as the theme for the Assembly’s
sixty-fifth session “Reaffirming the central role of the
United Nations in global governance”. But that can
only happen if all countries of the United Nations
respect the rules that govern multilateralism and refrain
from taking measures that defy the principles of the
Charter, the norms of international law and respect for
sovereignty, territorial integrity, good-neighbourliness
and mutual trust. The embargo imposed by the United
States of America against Cuba undoubtedly runs
counter to those principles and raises many questions.
How can a country put up obstacles to the freedom of
commerce of one of its neighbours when it
continuously calls for nations to trade freely? How can
a country impose limits on the right of its people to
travel when it strongly advocates the freedom of
movement? The Non-Aligned Movement is bewildered
by those apparent contradictions and believes that they
should be promptly rectified.
To that end, the United States should once and for
all end its embargo against Cuba. It is the longest and
toughest system of sanctions that the United States has
ever applied against any country throughout its history.
This is not only the demand of Cuba or of the members
of the Non-Aligned Movement, as clearly expressed by
their heads of State and Government at the

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

Movement’s fifteenth summit conference held in
Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt, in July 2009; it is the demand
of 187 countries of the United Nations, which last year
voted in favour of resolution 64/6, the eighteenth
resolution to be adopted by the Assembly on the issue.
We once again urge the United States to immediately
and fully comply with all General Assembly
resolutions calling for the immediate end of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
against Cuba.
I am sure that members will agree with me that
there is no need for a detailed exposé of the damage
that the embargo is causing to the economic and social
development of Cuba and to the welfare of its people.
We are all aware of the detrimental repercussions of
the embargo, not only on the financial, banking, trade,
investment and tourism sectors of the Cuban economy
but also on health, nutrition, water quality, education
and culture. The evidence on the ground is a stark
reminder of what the embargo has done to Cuba.
Furthermore, this unilateral blockade has an extended
effect on companies and citizens from third countries.
It thus violates the sovereign rights of many other
countries. The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its
deep concern over the widening of the extraterritorial
nature of the embargo, which we consider an added
argument in favour of the prompt elimination of those
unjustified sanctions.
The Chair of the Non-Aligned Movement has
stood here before the Assembly year after year and
urged the United States to remain true to the words that
the founding fathers of the United Nations clearly
inscribed in the Charter by taking the necessary steps
to swiftly lift the embargo it is imposing against Cuba.
In a period increasingly characterized by international
cooperation to address challenges to our very existence
and to ensure the welfare of our peoples, maintaining
the embargo seems to be part of an era long gone. The
United States Administration should now more than
ever match its statements about openness and
engagement with the outside world to actions that
would be welcomed by the international community,
which will soon vote in favour of the draft resolution
on the necessity of ending the embargo on Cuba
(A/65/L.3). The Non-Aligned Movement will continue
to send this message to the United States: end the
blockade now. I express the expectation that this time
our call will not go unheard.

10-60252

Mr. Bowler (Malawi): It is with great pleasure
that I address the General Assembly. Let me join my
colleague who spoke before me to add Malawi’s voice
and that of the Group of African States to the call
regarding the necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba, which has been
on the United Nations agenda for the past 18 years.
Speaking on behalf of the Group of African
States, the continent of Africa and as Chair of the
African Union, I reiterate the decision of the fifteenth
Summit of the African Union Heads of State and
Government, which met in Kampala, Uganda, on
27 July 2010. On taking a decision on the issue of
sanctions on Cuba, the African Union called upon the
Government of the United States of America to remove
the long-standing and unjustifiable economic and trade
embargo imposed on the Republic of Cuba, thereby
enabling that country to enjoy all the legitimate
prospects for its sustained development, which is long
overdue.
In his address before a plenary meeting of the
General Assembly on 23 September 2010, His
Excellency Mr. Bingu Wa Mutharika, President of the
Republic of Malawi and Chairman of the African
Union, stated categorically that sanctions have caused
great economic hardship, especially for the poor and
vulnerable in targeted countries, including Cuba. On
behalf of the African Union, he challenged those
concerned to promote social progress and better
standards of life, as set forth in the Preamble to the
Charter of the United Nations. We in Africa believe
that it is now time to give dialogue a chance and allow
Cuba to continue to effectively contribute its fair share
to global development, and the United States should
lift its long-standing embargo.
The countries of Africa, like the majority of the
countries and Member States of the United Nations, as
can be seen from the voting trend over the years in the
General Assembly, are of the view that it is high time
that the embargo on the people of Cuba were lifted,
considering that it has now been 50 years since it was
imposed on the innocent people of that country.
Children born after 1960, who are now men and
women, have not known anything else except the
embargo on this beautiful country that has so much
potential and goodwill.

3

A/65/PV.36

It is time for change. Now is the time. The
African Group and the African Union have the
confidence that President Obama’s Administration can
and should bring this change. Once again, the African
Group, the African Union and indeed Malawi call for
the immediate lifting of the embargo on beautiful
Cuba.
Ms. Bethel (Bahamas): I have the honour to
address the General Assembly on behalf of the
14 member States of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM), which also aligns itself with the
statements made by the representative of Yemen, who
spoke on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and by
the representative of Egypt, who spoke on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
As we have done in the past, CARICOM member
States continue to reiterate their unequivocal
opposition to the United States imposition of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba, which has been opposed by the overwhelming
majority of the international community for the past
18 consecutive years. The unilateral imposition of
extraterritorial laws on third States is contrary to both
the letter and the spirit of the United Nations Charter.
The embargo itself runs counter to the principles of
multilateralism, international law, sovereignty and free
trade, which this body traditionally champions.
The stubborn persistence of the embargo is
apparently impervious to the sustained chorus of
international criticism or to the logic of a world that
has changed immeasurably over the past four and a
half decades since the imposition of the blockade. The
embargo has now outlived the Cold War by 19 years. It
has outlasted the terms of eight Presidents of the
United States and that of Cuban President Fidel Castro.
Over 70 per cent of Cubans alive today were born
under the embargo. CARICOM considers the embargo
an anachronism that has succeeded only in contributing
to the suffering of generations of ordinary Cubans and
is unnecessarily increasing tensions between the
United States and Cuba. It serves no justifiable legal,
political or moral purpose in the twenty-first century.
The punitive embargo is of particular concern to
CARICOM, which shares a history, culture and
sisterhood with the people of Cuba. Cuba is the most
populous State of the Caribbean region and an integral
part of the pan Caribbean process. Caribbean ties with
Cuba have historical significance, cemented by years

4

of active cooperation at various levels. The member
States of CARICOM continue to maintain close
relations with Cuba through a wide range of
programmes of cooperation in areas including trade,
health care, infrastructure and human resource
development. In many ways, our future regional
development depends upon our collective advancement
and progress. In that context, we view the embargo not
just as a punitive act against Cuba but as an
impediment to our shared regional development.
This year’s report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 64/6 (A/65/83), like
previous reports on this matter, outlines responses from
an overwhelming majority of Member States that share
a common perspective as to the continued unilateral
embargo against Cuba. Indeed, the report of the
Secretary-General demonstrates that the embargo even
affects the manner in which organs and agencies of the
United Nations system carry out their work in Cuba.
CARICOM States therefore reaffirm the positions of
the Group of 77 and China and the Non-Aligned
Movement in opposing such unilateral actions. We
maintain the position that constructive engagement and
peaceful negotiations remain the only acceptable
means for advancing long-term peace stability.
The annual resolution, which has been repeatedly
adopted by the General Assembly, also constitutes a
blot on the credibility and efficacy of the United
Nations. There is probably no single issue on which the
United Nations has made such sustained, strong and
unambiguous pronouncements. Yet the embargo
continues, in the face of overwhelming international
reproach. CARICOM believes that the President of the
General Assembly
should
explore
additional
mechanisms to operationalize the words of the
resolution. The continued disregard for the will of the
General Assembly will only complicate the President’s
stated goal of improving the role of the United Nations
in matters of global governance.
The significance of the embargo on the Cuban
economy continues to be of great concern to
CARICOM. The humanitarian impact on the people of
Cuba, especially in the area of health care and food, is
especially saddening. The inability of Cuba to acquire
necessary medical equipment, spare parts and the latest
generation medications because of the embargo
continues to affect the health-care system, where
treatment remains free of charge to the Cuban people.

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

With the strengthening and more frequent storms
and hurricanes wrought by climate change and Cuba’s
geographic susceptibility to these natural disasters, the
unacceptable humanitarian impact of the embargo
becomes even more acute. Additionally, construction
materials and heavy equipment are becoming
increasingly inaccessible to Cuba because of stringent
rules regarding origin and restrictions against
corporations based outside of the United States. The
negative effects on the Cuban economy and its growth
are obvious and tangible. The embargo has now cost
Cuba almost $100 billion since it was imposed in 1962.
It is remarkable that, even as Cuba struggles with
the recent unfortunate string of natural disasters and
the continued impacts of the global economic crisis, it
continues to assist other nations in the developing
world, starting with its immediate Caribbean
neighbours. Thousands of Caribbean students have
attended Cuban universities without charge. Thousands
have received free surgery and medical assistance in
Cuba. And thousands more have been treated in their
home countries by Cuban doctors and nurses. We have
benefited from technical expertise, capacity-building
programmes, infrastructure assistance and from the
selfless generosity of the Cuban people. The people of
Cuba have threatened no one, and neither the embargo
nor its deleterious side effects has prevented them from
continually extending a hand of friendship and
solidarity, even across ideological divides.
Given Cuba’s peaceful, generous and cooperative
international stance, it should not be isolated or
excluded from participation in regional and
hemispheric processes. CARICOM reiterates its
unwavering support for the right of the Cuban people
to self-determination, in a manner beneficial to their
social and economic development. We call once again
for the end to an embargo that has preserved a state of
tension between two neighbouring countries and
generated concern, disquiet and discomfort throughout
the Caribbean.
CARICOM States continue to enjoy friendly
relations with both Cuba and the United States. Those
two neighbours, a mere 90 miles apart, have produced
great scholars, scientists and global leaders. The two
countries possess proud and noble histories, and are
populated by friendly, open and loving peoples. As
such, in spite of a long history of dashed hopes,
CARICOM continues to believe that a new beginning

10-60252

is possible in the relationship between
Governments of Cuba and the United States.

the

However, we consider the lifting of the embargo
to be a prerequisite of any meaningful rapprochement
between the two countries, not a negotiated end result.
While there have been some recent positive indications
of flexibility, there have also been reminders of
unilateral rigidity.
We remain guardedly optimistic that the United
States recent recommitment to multilateralism will
result in an increased willingness to consider the
opinions and concerns of its global friends and
partners. On this issue, global opinion can hardly be
conveyed in a more convincing or consistent manner.
As such, our faith in the recent pronouncements of the
United States Government carries with it an
expectation that these few remaining historical and
unilateral wrongs will be righted expeditiously.
It is within this context that CARICOM States
unstintingly support the draft resolution on the
necessity of ending the economic, commercial and
financial embargo by the United States of America
against Cuba (A/65/L.3).
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the member States of
the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) and
Venezuela, a State that is in the process of joining the
bloc. The associated States of Bolivia, Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador and Peru align themselves with this
statement.
First of all, I would like to express a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Cuba’s Minister for Foreign Affairs.
MERCOSUR was founded on the principles of
solidarity, interdependence and good-neighbourly
relations. We believe that tolerance is the basis for the
historic convergence in our continent of peoples from
every corner of the world. We are joined with our Latin
American neighbours by the desire to live in peace,
promote
mutual
understanding,
defend
the
independence, equality and sovereignty of States and
promote respect for international law. These ideals
have historically guided the relationship among Latin
American States and societies and are enshrined in the
charter of the Organization of American States.

5

A/65/PV.36

In that regard, we have welcomed efforts and
decisions taken last year, including the easing of travel
restrictions, the removal of limits on remittances and
the relaxation of conditions for sending packages.
However, it is nevertheless unfortunate that further
steps in that direction have not been applied recently,
that the embargo against Cuba continues unchanged
and that conditions are once again being placed along
the path towards greater openness and direct dialogue.
MERCOSUR and its associated States believe
that the embargo against Cuba is contrary to the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and that
it contravenes the rules of international law, in
particular in relation to the equality of States, the
principle of non-interference in internal affairs and the
peaceful solution of conflicts. Moreover, the embargo
is contrary to the principles of justice and human
rights, for it punishes an entire innocent population for
no apparent reason.
We reject on principle unilateral and
extraterritorial measures that cause irreparable harm to
the welfare of peoples and obstruct the process of
regional integration.
We once again reaffirm our unequivocal support
for the draft resolution before us (A/65/L.3).
MERCOSUR and its associate States reiterate their
commitment to multilateralism as a legitimate tool for
resolving disputes and as an effective way to promote
international cooperation and understanding among
peoples.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
against Cuba is just another example of an outdated
policy that does not belong in today’s world. By
adopting the draft resolution before us, the General
Assembly will bear witness once again to its resolute
political will in defence of the ideals of freedom,
solidarity and respect for sovereignty and international
law.
Ms. Rovirosa (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): For
19 consecutive years, the Government of Mexico has
come to this forum to reiterate its rejection of the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba and to reaffirm its opposition to the use of
coercive actions that have no legal foundation in the
United Nations Charter.

6

In 1992, the Government of the Republic of Cuba
submitted a draft resolution for consideration and
adoption by the General Assembly in order to put an
end to the embargo imposed by the Government of the
United States. Ever since, Mexico has come to this
forum to reaffirm its long-standing position of
principle that any kind of political, economic or
military sanctions to be imposed on States can flow
only from decisions or recommendations made by the
General Assembly or the Security Council once they
have determined that such actions are necessary in
accordance with the United Nations Charter and
international law.
Mexico believes that unilateral measures applied
in an extraterritorial fashion on third-party countries
have severe humanitarian consequences, in open
contradiction of the goals that supposedly drive them.
Moreover, such measures also signal the abandonment
of diplomacy and dialogue as appropriate ways of
resolving disputes among States.
Multilateralism, respect for international law and
for the rules and principles that regulate coexistence
between nations, as well as respectful dialogue remain
the best way to resolve disputes, guarantee peaceful
coexistence among States and ensure an international
climate of peace.
Various organs and entities of the United Nations
system have noted the negative impact that the
embargo has on Cuba’s economic and social
development, as evident in the economic, commercial
and financial transactions that this country undertakes.
They have also noted the damaging effects on sensitive
areas that have a direct impact on the lives of Cuba’s
people, as well as the indirect repercussions on thirdparty countries owing to the impossibility of
interacting with Cuba when it comes to many
economic and social activities.
That is why Mexico has always supported all
initiatives against the embargo and unilateral measures
in various forums, at the United Nations and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development as well
as in others such as the Organization of American
States, the Latin American and Caribbean Economic
System, the Ibero American Summit and the Rio
Group. We will continue to support Cuba’s inclusion in
global economic, commercial and financial dialogue
and trade mechanisms in line with that country’s own

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

desire and sovereign decisions, so as to foster
cooperation and development.
The Government of Mexico bases its bilateral and
multilateral relations on the overarching principles of
international law that govern peaceful and civilized
coexistence among sovereign States in the modern
world. Those principles have preserved the same
solidarity and continuity over time in the relations
between Mexico and Cuba, two States that have
maintained steadfast historical ties in an atmosphere of
renewed trust and unfailingly following the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations.
Based on what I have said here, Mexico reiterates
that the economic, commercial and financial blockade
imposed by the United States of America on Cuba must
come to end, given that the embargo is based on a
policy that, extended for almost half a century, has
affected the people of Cuba in a silent, systematic and
cumulative manner. Mexico believes that the
observance of international law and the rules and
principles governing coexistence among nations, as
well as respectful dialogue irrespective of imbalances
or differences, are necessary tools for overcoming
differences between States and for ensuring a climate
of international peace.
From our own experience we know that societies
evolve and change according to their own
circumstances, and not as the result of arbitrary or
coercive measures imposed from outside. In the light
of this, the Mexican Government again reiterates its
firm commitment to contributing actively and
decisively to the rule of international law as it pertains
to this item on the General Assembly’s agenda. We will
support the draft resolution (A/65/L.3) that has been
proposed at this session.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to welcome the report of the
Secretary-General submitted under this agenda item
(A/65/83). The Chinese delegation associates itself
with the statement made by the representative of
Yemen on behalf of the Group of 77 and China.
For 18 consecutive years, by an overwhelming
majority, the General Assembly has adopted
resolutions urging all countries, in compliance with the
United Nations Charter and the principles of
international law, to repeal or invalidate all laws and
measures with extraterritorial effect that compromise

10-60252

the sovereignty of other States, undermine the
legitimate rights and interests of entities and
individuals under the jurisdiction of those States and
affect the freedom of trade and navigation.
Regrettably, however, those resolutions have not
been effectively implemented over the years, and the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba imposed by the country concerned is yet to be
lifted. This constitutes a serious violation of the
purposes and principles of the Charter, adversely
affects normal commercial and trade exchanges
between Cuba and other countries and impedes the
operations of the agencies of the United Nations
system in Cuba. What is more, it also seriously
undermines the Cuban people’s rights to survival and
development.
The information obtained from Governments and
international organizations in the Secretary-General’s
report shows that over the past year the economic
embargo against Cuba has remained substantially
unchanged. It thus continues to inflict enormous
economic and financial losses on Cuba, which
immeasurably limit the Cuban people’s efforts to
eradicate poverty, promote economic and social
development and achieve the Millennium Development
Goals. The international community is now faced with
multiple serious challenges posed by the financial,
food and energy crises, as well as climate change,
making the embargo and sanctions against Cuba all the
more unreasonable.
China pursues an independent and peaceful
foreign policy, and is committed to developing friendly
relations with all countries on the basis of the five
principles of peaceful coexistence. We are of the view
that every sovereign State is entitled to independently
choose its own suitable social system and path to
development. No country has the right to unilaterally
impose military, political, economic or other forms of
sanctions on other countries. Experience shows that
sanctions usually fail to achieve their expected results;
on the contrary, they may end up victimizing civilians,
in particular the most vulnerable groups, such as
women and children.
In today’s world, multilateralism and the
democratization of international relations have taken
root in people’s hearts, while openness, cooperation,
mutual benefit and win-win progress have become the
consensus of the international community. When

7

A/65/PV.36

disputes arise, dialogue on an equal footing, with
friendly consultation, represents the best path to a
settlement. The Chinese Government has always
maintained that countries should develop their relations
in compliance with the purposes and principles of the
United Nations Charter.

substantial changes in the foreign policy of the United
States, in particular with regard to the blockade against
Cuba. The United States Government continues to
ignore the voices of the peoples of the world, which
demand the end of that genocidal policy as a violation
of the most basic human rights.

It is always our hope that in State-to-State
relations, dialogue will replace confrontation, and
engagement and exchange will replace embargoes and
sanctions. The Chinese Government urges the country
concerned to terminate its economic, commercial and
financial embargo against Cuba as soon as possible. In
this connection, China will support the draft resolution
(A/65/L.3) that has been submitted by Cuba under this
agenda item.

It is noteworthy that the Torricelli and HelmsBurton Acts, which prevent Cuban trade with United
States companies and their subsidiaries in third
countries, continue to be in force. Through the
extraterritorial application of United States legislation,
the blockade affects the legitimate interests of any
sovereign State that legitimately decides to become a
business partner of the Republic of Cuba.

Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela aligns itself with the statements
made this morning by the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, by the
representative of Yemen on behalf of the Group of 77
and China and by the representative of Brazil on behalf
of the Southern Common Market. I would like,
however, to raise the voice of my country at this
historic moment.
During the sixty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, the overwhelming majority of Member
States voted in favour of ending the economic,
commercial and financial blockade that has lasted a
half century and seeks to limit the right of the Cuban
people to decide their own destiny. Those countries
forcefully call for respect of the sovereignty and selfdetermination of peoples and strongly condemn threats
to the political independence of States, as inconsistent
with the principles of the United Nations Charter.
Will the imperialist Government of the United
States continue to ignore the will of this Assembly,
which has repeatedly condemned the blockade against
our sister Republic of Cuba? In reaffirming its longstanding commitment to the values of humanism and
solidarity among peoples, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela rejects the aggression against the Cuban
people, which undermines the peaceful coexistence of
nations and international law.
The change of administration in the United States
generated great expectations for a new policy that
would respect the sovereignty of nations. There is
nothing, however, that suggests that there have been

8

The devastating collateral damage inflicted each
day on the brotherly people of the island by the
blockade policy is unjustifiable. As noted by the
American Association for World Health, the blockade
would cause a massive humanitarian disaster in Cuba if
that nation did not have an extraordinary public health
system. The blockade against Cuba has diverse impacts
on the daily lives of women and men, children and the
elderly. It manifests itself harshly in the way it affects
the quality of life of children with acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia, who must do without the standard treatment
for this disease. The blockade also makes it difficult
for people to enjoy their housing rights. It hinders the
import of building materials needed to replace and
repair the huge number of buildings damaged by
hurricanes. The blockade causes millions in losses each
year in Cuba’s basic industries, sugar, steelwork and
tourism.
In short, the blockade represents a repeated and
unilateral denial by a signatory to the United Nations
Charter of the right to development of another Member
State and its people, without the aggrieved State ever
having committed aggression of any kind against the
aggressor State. And what is the reason for the
recurring hostility against the Cuban people? The
answer was given by Ernesto Che Guevara on 9 April
1961, when he said that the heroic Cuban people had
risen up against the “despotic rule of imperialism,
which crushes national identity, insults patriotic feeling
and colonizes the economy”. The heroism of the Cuban
people is, therefore, an example of the struggle for
dignity and sovereignty of nations. The imperialists
have not been able and will not be able to break that
patriotic spirit.

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

Despite the criminal blockade, the Cuban
Government and people have provided extraordinary
support to the plans and programmes developed in
Venezuela to achieve social justice. The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela wishes to express its gratitude
for that invaluable solidarity.
This is a special day at the United Nations. We
are discussing an issue of cardinal importance to the
peoples of the world. The Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela strongly embraces the sovereignty,
independence and dignity of nations, and therefore we
strongly support the draft resolution presented by our
sister Republic of Cuba (A/65/L.3), which again
demands the suspension of the economic, commercial
and financial embargo imposed by the United States on
Cuba.
Mr. Khazee (Islamic Republic of Iran): The
Islamic Republic of Iran subscribes to the statements
made on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Group of 77 and China on the subject under
consideration. We would also like to cordially welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Cuba to this meeting. Many of the rights of nations and
people are of an economic and social nature. Attempts
to deprive people and countries of those rights infringe
on their basic human rights and are therefore
illegitimate. Indeed, that is the main feature of
sanctions as we know them today.
Economic blockades and sanctions have to be
viewed as illegitimate for at least the following
reasons: First, there is no single case where certain
Powers have not been behind economic sanctions
against developing countries or territories. Sanctions
have turned out to be a tool, not to spur international
peace and security but to impose hegemonic intentions
of big Powers against other countries and populations.
Therefore, the imposition or prolongation of sanctions
or their extension against any State under the pretext of
securing international peace and security but with the
real aim of achieving the political objectives of one or
a few States is deplorable. Secondly, worst of all,
sanctions always end up targeting the daily lives of
ordinary people. They have a dramatic impact on rights
recognized in the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights. For instance, they often
cause significant disruption in the distribution of food,
pharmaceuticals and sanitation supplies, jeopardize the
quality of food and the availability of clean drinking
water, severely interfere with the functioning of basic

10-60252

health and education systems, and undermine the right
to work.
The victimization of innocent civilians in
instances where sanctions have been imposed,
including ostensibly legitimate ones, remains a matter
of serious concern and dismay. There is ample
evidence that sanctions, first and foremost, put the
economic growth and prosperity of people in peril.
They are simply misguidedly punitive. Thirdly,
notwithstanding all the harm that sanctions cause, they
have also proven to be futile. There is no strong proof
that independent countries compromise their revered
national interests and yield to the antagonistic wills of
hegemonic Powers because of sanctions. Fourthly, the
argument that sanctions are a better option than more
forceful measures has also proven to be irrelevant.
Certain Powers are not concerned about the
consequences of punitive measures, nor do they
conform in their actions to the provisions of the United
Nations Charter. They make their cases independently
of the concerns of the international community and
tend to misuse the available means in the Charter to
address their narrowly defined interests. Whenever
they deem it necessary, they without fail resort to
force, with or without first exercising sanctions or
other non-violent measures and with or without United
Nations approval. Sanctions will not stop them from
exercising force, should they themselves find it
desirable.
Yet, the most unjustifiable and deplorable form of
sanctions is the imposition of unilateral blockades and
extraterritorial application of domestic laws by one
State, which happens, unsurprisingly, to be the United
States of America. Such actions against others have an
effect not only on the population under sanctions but
also on the interests of the third parties, who are
disproportionately and unreasonably being punished.
Numerous international documents have asked for the
swift invalidation of all such measures. This Hall has
witnessed during the past 19 years the overwhelming
support of the international community and
countries — coming from every region and part of the
world — to the call made through 18 resolutions so far
to annul the inhumane and futile measures imposed
against the Government and people of Cuba.
Indeed, one may wonder what more could be
done to convince the United States to lift the economic
blockade. What more could be said to argue that those
illegal measures flagrantly violate the United Nations

9

A/65/PV.36

Charter, the rule of international law, the multilateral
trading system, the norms and principles governing
relations among States, as well as the clear will of the
international community? That will has been
unequivocally expressed in so many resolutions
adopted by this body.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States against Cuba, which has
lasted for decades, serves no purpose other than to
inflict tremendous hardship and suffering on the people
of Cuba, especially women and children. The embargo
has seriously jeopardized the legitimate rights and
interests of Cuba and other States. The economic,
commercial and financial embargo against Cuba runs
counter to the principles of international law and
contradicts the letter and spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations. Such measures continue to adversely
affect the living conditions and human rights of the
Cuban people and to hamper the efforts of the Cuban
Government to achieve its development goals — in
particular the eradication of poverty and hunger and
the promotion of health and education — as
indispensable means for achieving economic and social
development.
The Islamic Republic of Iran strongly rejects and
opposes the application of unilateral economic and
trade measures imposed by one State against another,
as well as the extraterritorial application and effects of
national legislation on the sovereignty of other States.
We oppose and condemn such measures and laws and
their continued application. We will do everything to
effectively thwart them and urge other States to do
likewise by refraining from recognizing, adopting or
implementing extraterritorial or unilateral coercive
measures or laws, including unilateral economic
sanctions, other intimidating measures and arbitrary
travel restrictions that seek to exert pressure on other
countries — threatening their sovereignty and
independence and their freedom of trade and
investment and preventing them from exercising their
right to decide, by their own free will.
The Islamic Republic of Iran shares the concerns
of the Cuban people and Government and therefore
emphasizes the urgent need to put an end to such
measures against Cuba and other developing countries
and calls for the full implementation of the relevant
General Assembly resolutions.

10

In conclusion, sanctions, whoever imposes them
under whatever pretext or disguise, continue to be
illegitimate, futile and misguidedly punitive.
Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria): Algeria aligns itself
with the statements made by the representatives of
Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and of
Yemen on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. I
would also like to warmly welcome His Excellency Mr.
Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Cuba.
Algeria would like to reiterate that it is deeply
concerned by the continuation of the economic,
commercial and financial embargo unilaterally
imposed against Cuba by the United States of America
for nearly half a century. The consecutive annual
adoption by almost all members of the General
Assembly of a resolution, virtually the same each year,
calling for the lifting of the embargo against Cuba
reflects the profound will of the international
community to put an end to that situation, which has
lasted far too long.
In accordance with the principles of its foreign
policy, Algeria has always condemned the imposition
of extraterritorial applications of laws and all forms of
coercive economic and trade measures, such as the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba, which contradicts international law and the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations. Every Member State should respect the
principles of the Charter, including, in particular, the
sovereign equality of States, territorial integrity,
non-intervention and non-interference in the internal
affairs of any other State.
It is a fact that that blockade is causing huge
material loss and economic damage to Cuba. It is also
negatively affecting the well-being of the Cuban
people on a daily basis. Those consequences are
exacerbated by the adverse effects of the current global
economic and financial crisis, which have seriously
compromised Cuba’s development efforts, as
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/65/83), based on information provided by
134 Governments and 25 organs and agencies of the
United Nations system, on the implementation of
resolution 64/6.
It is important to recall the long-standing position
of the Non-Aligned Movement on the issue, confirmed
again at the fifteenth summit, which rejected the use of

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

economic measures of coercion and extraterritorial
applications of law imposed on developing countries.
The heads of State and Government of the
Non-Aligned Movement also urged the Government of
the United States of America to put an end to the
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba, in strict compliance with the United Nations
General Assembly resolutions on that issue, adopted
annually since 1992.
Therefore, it is with conviction that Algeria will
vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted,
A/65/L.3, entitled “Necessity of ending the economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba”.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): For almost 50 years,
the people of Cuba have suffered as a result of the
economic, commercial and financial blockade by the
United States of America, which is a major hindrance
to the development of Cuba. That blockade constitutes
a violation of international law, and its imposition
shows disregard for the noble and abiding principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The
international community has consistently opposed the
embargo against Cuba. The unity with which the
international community reacted to that embargo when
it condemned it with a record vote of 187 to 3 in 2009
is testimony to the outright rejection of that unilateral
act, which has gone on for far too long and must come
to an end.
In that regard, South Africa supports the draft
resolution before us (A/65/L.3), entitled “Necessity of
ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”. We do so because that relentless and
unilateral action has caused untold suffering to the
people of Cuba.
My delegation associates itself with the
statements delivered by the representatives of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, of Yemen on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China and of Malawi on
behalf of the African Group. We also wish to extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, and,
through him, our fraternal greetings to the loving
people of Cuba.
For South Africa and its people, together with our
entire region, we continue to be humbled by the
historic role that Cuba played in our liberation and

10-60252

freedom. True to their commitment to international
solidarity, justice, freedom and equality, the people of
Cuba did not stand by as spectators when others were
oppressed. For that reason, we owe it to Cuba and its
people to join the progressive forces of the world and
unequivocally condemn the continued illegal embargo
imposed by the United States of America against Cuba.
South Africa has repeatedly joined the majority of
countries in expressing its disagreement with and
opposition to the embargo imposed by the United
States against Cuba. In so doing, South Africa has been
guided by the basic norms of international law and
conduct in its principled support for the need to
eliminate punitive economic measures as a means of
political and economic coercion. South Africa views
the continued imposition of an economic, commercial
and financial embargo against Cuba as a violation of
the principle of the sovereign equality of States.
In spite of that embargo, the Cuban people have
extended a hand of friendship and solidarity to other
people around the world. Cuba’s outstanding work in
the areas of health, education and biotechnology in the
developing world, particularly in Africa, is recognized
by the international community. South Africa and Cuba
have maintained long-standing cordial relations, which
continue to expand through increased cooperation on a
wide range of issues, including economic, commercial
and financial collaboration. The South Africa-Cuba
Joint Consultative Mechanism and the South AfricaCuba Joint Bilateral Commission continue to serve as
strategic platforms for the expression of our strong
bilateral relations.
We all, without exception, acknowledged the
hardship that we and our respective peoples have faced
after the onset of the financial crisis, which to date
continues to endure. The extremely harsh global
financial and economic crisis, as well as the embargo,
only worsen the fate of the Cuban people and stifle the
outstanding contribution by Cuba to the economic and
social development of the poor. The international
community should, therefore, take meaningful steps to
free the Cuban people from the devastating effects of
the embargo.
South Africa calls on the United States to end its
unilateral isolation of Cuba. We urge the United States
to engage in a meaningful dialogue with Cuba. We
further call for accelerated action to dismantle the
unjust sanctions regime against Cuba. Our collective

11

A/65/PV.36

message should, therefore, be loud and clear to the
United States, namely, that it should end its embargo
and sanctions.
South Africa reiterates its support for the draft
resolution before us today, and calls on all States to
refrain from recognizing the unilateral coercive
measures and laws that defy the principles of the
Charter and the norms of international law.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): In contributing to the
debate on agenda item 41 concerning the necessity of
ending the embargo imposed against Cuba since 1961,
the delegation of Indonesia wishes to associate itself
with the statement of the Group of 77 and China
delivered earlier by the representative of Yemen and
with the statement of the Non-Aligned Movement
delivered by the representative of Egypt.
Yet again, the General Assembly has been
convened to consider the impact of the 50 year
economic, commercial and financial embargo that was
unilaterally imposed on Cuba during the long Cold War
of the twentieth century. Although unilaterally
imposed, the embargo has also impacted the economic
and commercial relations of third countries. Much has
changed since the initial imposition of the embargo.
The world of 2010 is very different from that of 1961.
Even with the impact of recent crises on the global
economy, nations have opted to work together to
overcome the difficulties created by those crises. That
testifies to the fact that globalization has created the
conditions for true global solidarity and partnership
among nations. The embargo against Cuba runs
contrary to that spirit of unity and solidarity, which is
taking root in the world today.
Viewed from the perspective of the United
Nations Charter and international law, the embargo
lacks fairness and respect for the equality that should
exist among and between sovereign States. The Charter
is clear on the need for nations to develop friendly
relations among themselves. It is equally emphatic
about the need for nations to refrain from actions that
will threaten the political independence of others or
lead to intervention in matters that are essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of a particular State.
The embargo infringes on those principles. It has
a sharp political edge, which undermines relations
between the main parties. Instead of a dialogue to
resolve differences, what we have is an unwanted
stand-off that does not allow for an exchange of views

12

to normalize relations. Not only does the embargo give
rise to political complications, but the economic,
commercial and financial hardships that it causes can
hardly be justified on any humanitarian ground. It is a
great burden for any developing country, whose people
would benefit so much more from cooperation than
from confrontation.
Indonesia remains steadfast in its opposition to
the embargo imposed unilaterally against Cuba. While
it is true that some small meaningful changes in the
embargo have occurred in recent times, such as the
easing of travel restrictions to Cuba and the removal of
obstacles to the transfer of remittances, the preferred
resolution to the dispute is certainly for the embargo to
be lifted completely. The time is ripe for relations
between the two main parties to be transformed
through constructive engagement.
Lifting the embargo would also be in keeping
with the spirit of the times. It would demonstrate
unambiguously respect for the principle of
non-intervention, as embodied in the United Nations
Charter and international law. Cuba would then be able
to exercise its right to develop, unhindered by
restrictions to its trade and other business activities.
The tensions that now exist between the two nations
would also dissolve.
It is Indonesia’s hope that in the near future we
will see a thawing of the frosty relations that now keep
those two important neighbouring States apart. We
believe that it is time for peaceful coexistence.
Mr. Beck (Solomon Islands): I take the floor to
speak on agenda item 41, “Necessity of ending the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba”. My
delegation begins first of all by associating this
statement with the statement made by the
representative of Yemen on behalf of the Group of 77.
For the last 19 years, resolutions on lifting the
51-year embargo on Cuba have come before this
Assembly. Likewise, the international community
annually pronounces on the resolution, calling for the
lifting of the embargo. The embargo continues to be
cloaked in such an ideological suit that opportunities to
relax and bring about its lifting continue to elude us.
It is even sadder that that is happening between
geographical neighbours. We continue to witness Cuba
trying to adapt to the challenge of living under trying

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

circumstances without asking for a lighter burden. We
continue to be deeply touched by that, as new
generations born into the embargo take on the
responsibility before them with a common sense of
purpose. That testifies to a committed population, with
a host of approaches aimed at cutting up the huge
challenge into bits and pieces and managing those
challenges within their own means.
My delegation hopes that the principle of goodneighbourliness will win the day and that the people of
our partner country, the United States, will restore,
renew, revive, reclaim and redeem friendship and
respect for Cuba’s sovereignty within the letter and
spirit of the United Nations Charter.
At the end of the day, it is people who remain at
the centre of the Charter of the United Nations, which
begins with the words “We the peoples”. We members
of the United Nations must continue to give humanity a
chance. We must continue to do what is necessary in
the name of peace and security and in the preservation
of the rights of the Cuban people to development. The
imposition of the embargo is stuck in time, and we
must not leave it to time or chance to see change.
Rather, it is up to us, the Member States, to effect that
change by calling for the lifting of the blockade. Our
action on that noble request is also a declaration of our
character, our wish to reach out to all.
Therefore, Solomon Islands closes by calling for
the unconditional lifting of the blockade against the
Cuban people and replacing it with genuine dialogue
and cooperation. In the spirit of friendship and
outreach to all, we call for carrying out that humble
request in the name of humanity.
Mr. Raja (India): India associates itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Yemen on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China and of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. My delegation
would like to thank the Secretary-General for the
comprehensive report on the agenda item under
consideration today (A/65/83).
This is the nineteenth year in succession that this
Assembly has been deliberating the almost fivedecade-old economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed on Cuba. In all those years, this
Assembly has repeatedly rejected the imposition of
laws and regulations with an extraterritorial impact and
all other forms of coercive economic measures, which

10-60252

hurt the progress and prosperity of the people the world
over.
The General Assembly has also called upon all
States to respect their obligations under the United
Nations Charter and international law and to repeal and
invalidate laws and measures that have extraterritorial
effects on the sovereignty of other States and affect the
legitimate interests of entities or persons under their
jurisdiction and on the freedom of trade and
navigation. Despite the repeated calls of the General
Assembly, its resolutions remain unimplemented, in
contravention of world opinion. Such callous disregard
of the will of the United Nations undermines the
credibility of this body and weakens multilateralism.
Meanwhile, more importantly, the Cuban people
continue to face the hardships induced by the embargo
in their daily lives. The embargo and its extraterritorial
aspects continue to remain in full force. In particular,
domestic United States laws, such as the Cuban
Democracy Act of 1992 and the Helms-Burton Act of
1996, have enhanced the extraterritorial reach of the
embargo, encompassing foreign companies and foreign
subsidiaries of United States companies doing business
with Cuba or Cuban entities.
The
embargo,
particularly
through
its
extraterritorial effects, is adversely affecting the lives
of the Cuban people and their efforts to move forward
with the socio economic development of their country.
The embargo has denied Cuba access to United States
markets, investment, technology, financial services and
scientific, educational, cultural and sports institutions.
In the past five decades, Cuba has had to pay enormous
extra costs to obtain products, technology and services
from third countries located thousands of kilometres
away. The extraterritorial application of the United
States
embargo
has
discouraged
investment,
technology and its transfer and sale, and other forms of
business collaboration between Cuba and third
countries.
Health care, one of the commitments of the
Millennium Development Goals, is particularly
affected owing to the continuous denial of critical
medical equipment, medicines, technologies and
diagnostic aids to Cuban hospitals. Cuba’s efforts to
provide health assistance to fellow developing
countries as part of South-South cooperation has also
suffered from the embargo, making that yet another

13

A/65/PV.36

unexpected negative extraterritorial impact of the
embargo.
In the report of the Secretary-General, various
United Nations entities have detailed the impact of the
embargo and its extraterritorial effects. The United
Nations Resident Coordinator in Havana has noted the
high cost and negative impact of the embargo on
humanitarian
and
development
cooperation
implemented by the United Nations system in Cuba.
The Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean has stated that the embargo considerably
affects the standard of living of Cuban citizens and
may threaten Cuba’s food security in the future.
The United Nations Development Programme has
noted that the effects of the embargo can be observed
in all spheres of Cuba’s social and economic activities,
including the lives of the most vulnerable. The United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development has
stated that the impact on trade of the extraterritorial
application is considerable owing to significant United
States interests in transnational corporations. In recent
years, the financial, food and energy crises have made
the impact of the embargo even more acute.
Geography indicates that there ought to be
normal relations in trade and investment between Cuba
and the United States of America. Despite the embargo,
the United States continues to be a major source of
food imports for Cuba, insofar as permitted by the
United States Trade Sanctions Reform and Export
Enhancement Act of 2000. That only confirms the high
potential for trade, commerce and investment between
those countries.
People-to-people contact between the two
countries remains severely curtailed. The lifting of
United States travel restrictions on Cuba would bring
immense benefits to the Cuban tourism sector and to its
people. Congressional efforts in the United States to
relax or lift the embargo and the substantial interest in
United States business circles for unhindered access to
the Cuban market lend further credence to the annual
United Nations resolutions calling for the lifting of the
United States embargo against Cuba.
Before concluding, permit me to reiterate India’s
opposition to unilateral measures by countries that
impinge on the sovereignty of another country,
including attempts to extend the application of a
country’s laws extraterritorially to other sovereign
nations.

14

India joins all other nations in calling for an
immediate end to the United States embargo against
Cuba. India supports the draft resolution moved by
Cuba today (A/65/L.3).
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian delegation welcomes the
presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba,
Mr. Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, at today’s discussion.
We thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report on the issue before us (A/65/83). The opinions
of the Member States presented in the document
clearly show their disagreement with and objections to
the introduction of the unilateral and exterritorial
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba.
Russia’s position of principle with respect to the
draft resolution (A/65/L.3) is well known. Our country
fully shares the view of the overwhelming majority of
Member States of the international community in
firmly rejecting the United States embargo against
Cuba and in calling for its lifting as soon as possible.
We are convinced that ending the embargo against
Cuba and normalizing United States-Cuban relations
would generally help to improve the island’s situation.
We believe that the maintenance of the commercial,
economic and financial embargo against Cuba by the
United States is counterproductive, anachronistic and
not in keeping with current realities.
Last year, President Obama’s Administration took
steps to lift a number of restrictions on visits to Cuba
by United States citizens who have relatives there and
on monetary and postal transfers to Cubans from the
United States, as well as steps to resume dialogue on
migration issues. We therefore expect other actions that
will improve relations between the two countries and,
ultimately of course, put a complete end to the long
obsolete commercial and economic embargo against
Cuba.
For the time being, we feel that we must continue
our policy of voting in favour of the draft resolution
calling for the lifting of the embargo, guided by the
fundamental principles of the Charter of the United
Nations on the inadmissibility of any discriminatory
measures or interference in the internal affairs of
States.

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia): Zambia will vote in
favour of draft resolution A/65/L.3, as we have done in
the past and for the reasons listed in the statements by
the representatives of Malawi on behalf of the African
Group, of Yemen on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China, and of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, with which we would like to be associated.
On 12 June 1987, President Ronald Reagan made
a statement that has remained indelibly etched in the
history of the Cold War era. Addressing himself to the
President of the Soviet Union, he said “Mr. Gorbachev,
tear down this wall”, in reference to the Berlin Wall.
Today, for the sake of the suffering people of Cuba,
including women and children, we wish to make an
earnest and simple appeal: President Obama, please do
the right thing and lift the United States embargo
against Cuba. It is time to be on the right side of
history.
Mrs. Waffa-Ogoo (Gambia): The Gambia wishes
to associate itself with the statements made by the
representatives of Yemen on behalf of the Group of 77
and China, of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and of Malawi on behalf of the African
Group.
Last year, my delegation joined members of the
Assembly in calling for an immediate end to one of the
most protracted political sanctions regime that the
Assembly has ever known. We spoke in the hope that
the opportunity had finally arrived for the embargo to
become a thing of the past. To our bewilderment, the
half-century-old regime is still intact, with occasional
cosmetic tweaks made to resemble real change. Real
change is long overdue.
At this year’s general debate, the Gambia’s
Foreign Minister said:
“The United States embargo against Cuba is
one of the longest running political disputes that
this Assembly has needed to address for almost
two decades. It is embarrassing that such a cruel
and outmoded form of settling scores in
international relations is still in place. The
embargo has no legitimacy or appeal, and it is
time for those that imposed it to show genuine
leadership by ending it.” (A/65/PV.20)
In the coming months, we will look forward to the
exercise of true leadership towards ending that penal
regime.

10-60252

The devastating effects of the embargo on the
Government and people of Cuba are amply
documented in the Secretary-General’s report in
document А/65/83. It is also clear that the United
Nations system, too, is paying a heavy price in its
activities with Cuba, especially when it comes to the
travel of Cuban United Nations personnel, visa
restrictions and higher procurement costs directly
associated with the embargo.
Cuban agriculture is not spared. Cuban health
care, medical and scientific research, educational
cooperation, cultural exchanges and intellectual
property rights are all adversely affected by the
extraterritorial reach of the embargo.
Cuban companies, United States companies and
third-country companies continue to be penalized for
doing business in Cuba. Travel to Cuba continues to be
restricted in ways that make the cost prohibitive
because of cumbersome procedures that visitors are
required to meet. Financial transactions between Cuba
and other countries have also not been spared. The
odious nature of that embargo is apparent to all. Its
continuation therefore cannot serve any useful purpose.
Even children are not spared by the embargo. The
Secretary-General’s report highlights the hurdles
encountered by United Nations agencies in the
procurement of Ritonavir, a paediatric antiretroviral
drug. It states that the HIV/AIDS programme has also
been affected by the lack of procurement of the
antiretroviral drugs used in children, Kaletra and
Norvir, both produced by Abbott, which is a United
States-based company.
The Cuba we know does not deserve those
sanctions. It is a leader in humanitarian assistance
around the world and in providing health care and
education to millions all over the world. The Cuba we
know is not a threat to any country’s national security.
The Cuba we know is a country that promotes friendly
relations among its peoples and the countries of every
region represented in this Assembly.
It is no coincidence, therefore, that the
Government and people of the Gambia will today stand
in solidarity with Cuba by voting for draft resolution
A/65/L.3. It is once again our hope that those who
impose and maintain that inhumane embargo will find
it in their hearts to call for its total and unconditional
lifting. It is time to consign the Helms-Burton Act and
the Torricelli Act to the dustbin of history. A regime of

15

A/65/PV.36

friendly relations and good-neighbourliness should
finally replace them in the birth of a new era of CubanAmerican relations. We call on other countries to
support the draft resolution and to further support
efforts to dismantle that intricate web of extraterritorial
sanctions.

are counting on the support of the rest of the world for
an end to the embargo, which has had a debilitating
effect on their lives. Ghana has chosen to offer that
support today in the spirit of fellow feeling for our
brothers and sisters in Cuba, and urges the United
States to end its embargo.

Mr. Christian (Ghana): Ghana welcomes the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Bruno Rodríguez
Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba.

Mr. Goddard (Barbados): Barbados wishes to
associate itself with the statements by the
representatives by Yemen on behalf of the Group of 77
and China and by the Commonwealth of the Bahamas
on behalf of the Caribbean Community.

We associate ourselves with the statements
delivered today by the representatives of Yemen, Egypt
and Malawi on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
the Non-Aligned Movement, and the African Group,
respectively.
As in the past, Ghana has asked for the floor to
join other speakers in expressing its concern at the
continued imposition and implementation of an
economic, commercial and financial embargo against
Cuba by the United States. Last year, members of the
Assembly voted overwhelmingly in favour of
resolution 64/6, calling for an end to this blockade. The
strong solidarity demonstrated year after year in the
Assembly speaks for itself — those restrictions against
a Member State by a Member State should end.
In fulfilment of Ghana’s commitment to the
purposes and principles enshrined in the United
Nations Charter and in international law, we have
steadfastly refrained from promulgating and enforcing
laws whose extraterritorial effects adversely affect the
sovereignty of other States, the legitimate interests of
entities or persons under their jurisdiction, and their
freedom of trade and navigation. Indeed, Ghana and
Cuba enjoy excellent bilateral relations, based on our
shared goals and responsibilities towards an equitable
world in the spirit of cooperation and multilateralism.
Our long-standing cooperation with Cuba in the
areas of health, education and sports continues to
expand, and currently there are more than 200 Cuban
medical professionals working in hospitals across
Ghana and also teaching in some of our universities.
Cuba continues to offer scholarships to Ghanaian
students to study in Cuba in sectors that are deemed
critical to the development agenda pursued by the
Government of Ghana.
The embargo, in place for more than a half
century, has taken its toll on the well-being of the
ordinary people of Cuba, women and children. They

16

The purposes and principles of the United
Nations Charter call for respect for the sovereign
equality of States, non-interference in their internal
affairs, the right of peoples to self-determination, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the maintenance of
friendly relations among States. The maintenance of
international peace and security and the peaceful
coexistence of States require that all Member States
adhere to the rule of law, including the principles
enshrined in the United Nations Charter.
For those reasons, Barbados opposes the
imposition of unilateral punitive measures, especially
where they involve the extraterritorial application of
legislation that violates international law and restricts
freedom of trade and navigation and the sovereignty
and freedom of States. Barbados views the continued
imposition of the economic, commercial and financial
embargo against the Republic of Cuba as a violation of
the principles of the United Nations Charter.
The Government of Barbados fully embraces
Cuba as an important partner in the Caribbean region
and remains committed to a policy of constructive
engagement with its Government and people. We fully
respect its sovereign rights and support its full
integration into the hemisphere. We do not believe that
efforts to isolate Cuba or measures that create greater
hardship for the Cuban people, such as the decadeslong economic embargo, will foster change in that
country.
The embargo inhibits the development of normal
economic and cultural relations. It distorts trade and
investment flows and impedes legitimate business
opportunities among neighbouring States. Furthermore,
as the response of the United Nations Development
Programme in the report of the Secretary-General
states:

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

“The impact of the embargo can be observed in
all spheres of the country’s social and economic
activities, affecting opportunities for national and
local development and creating economic
hardship.” (A/65/83, p. 121)
Barbados maintains excellent relations both with
the United States of America and with Cuba and places
great value on its long-established and friendly
relations with both countries. In that spirit, we join the
international community in calling for an immediate
end to the embargo imposed by the United States on
Cuba and its people. We further urge the Government
of the United States of America to engage in a
constructive dialogue with the Government of Cuba
aimed at normalizing relations with Cuba. Such a step
would remove a source of tension and conflict and
would improve the prospects for peace, development
and cooperation within our region.
In support of the principles of international law
and the United Nations Charter, as in previous years,
Barbados will vote in favour of the draft resolution
(A/65/L.3) before us today.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to His Excellency Bruno Eduardo
Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Cuba, to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.3.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Serious and imminent dangers threaten the
existence of our species. To preserve human life, we
must preserve peace. The use of only a small part of
the world’s enormous nuclear arsenal would mean the
end of the species. The only guarantee that nuclear
weapons will not be used by any State or any
individual is their destruction, along with the
generation of conventional weapons of an almost
similar lethal power developed of late.
The only solution is disarmament. To survive, a
leap in humanity’s awareness is crucial. That is
possible only through the dissemination of truthful
information on such issues, which most politicians
conceal or ignore, which the press do not publish and
which for the people are so horrendous that they seem
unbelievable.
We are in a new era, and in our opinion, it is for
this General Assembly of the United Nations to lead,
with utmost urgency — and as Fidel Castro ceaselessly
asks — a world mobilization to demand respect for the

10-60252

right of human beings and of peoples to live. Let us
build a different world order. Let us institute a common
ethic based on human solidarity and justice. Let us find
a solution to conflicts through dialogue and
cooperation. Let selfishness and plundering, which
lead to war and the use of force, cease. In the face of
the serious threat, let us put aside that which confronts
us or divides us and let us unite to save peace, the
planet and the life of future generations.
Under those circumstances in particular, the
United States policy against Cuba does not have any
ethical or legal basis, credibility or support. That is
demonstrated by the more than 180 votes in the
Assembly, which in recent years have called for an end
to the economic, commercial and financial blockade. In
the Secretary-General’s report made available to us
(A/65/83), more than 180 countries and agencies of the
United Nations system document their opposition to
that policy.
The rejection by Latin America and the
Caribbean is forceful and unanimous. The Unity
Summit of Latin America and the Caribbean, held in
Cancún in February 2010, stated that resolutely. The
leaders of the region have conveyed that directly to the
current American President. It is clear that the express
rejection of the blockade and the Helms-Burton Act
characterizes, as few items do, the political heritage of
the region.
Equally unequivocal views have been endorsed
by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, the Ibero
American summits, the European Union and Latin
American and Caribbean summits, the African Union,
the summits of the African, Caribbean and Pacific
States and virtually any group of nations that has
declared its adherence to international law and to
observance of the principles and purposes of the
United Nations Charter.
There is broad and growing consensus in
American society and the Cuban emigrants in that
country against the blockade and in favour of a change
of policy towards Cuba. Recent polls show that 71 per
cent of United States citizens advocate the
normalization of relations between Cuba and the
United States, while 64 per cent of them and a similar
proportion of Cuban residents in south Florida oppose
the Cuba travel ban, which violates their citizens’
rights.

17

A/65/PV.36

As with other issues, two years after the United
States President announced a new beginning with
Cuba, the facts confirm that nothing has changed. The
President has not used his extensive privileges to relax
the blockade. The sanctions against Cuba remain intact
and are strictly implemented.
The economic siege was tightened in 2010, and
its daily impact continues to be seen in all aspects of
life in Cuba. Its consequences are particularly serious
in areas that are sensitive for the population, such as
health and food. Cuban ophthalmologic services cannot
perform transpupillary thermotherapy, which is done
through a surgical microscope, to treat children
suffering from retinoblastoma, that is, cancer of the
retina. It is impossible to obtain the equipment for that
treatment, which can only be bought from the
American company Iris Medical Instruments. Without
that technology, it is impossible to treat a retina tumour
and to save a child’s affected eye.
Cuban children have no access to a medicine
called Sevofluorane, the most advanced general
inhalation anaesthetic agent, that is, an anaesthetic to
operate on children, because its manufacturer, the
American company Abbott, is not allowed to sell to
Cuba. Nor can an optical coherence tomographer be
obtained from the German company Carl Zeiss to
examine the retina and the optical nerve because it has
components supplied by the American company
Humphrey.
The prevailing onerous and discriminatory
conditions for purchases of American foodstuffs —
which are supposedly protected as a humanitarian
exception, while all international trade standards are
violated — resulted in the dramatic reduction of those
operations in the past year. That reality harms not only
our people, but also American farmers.
It would be untruthful for anyone in this Hall to
again describe as a trading partner a country to which
Cuba cannot sell a single dose of medicine or a single
gram of nickel.
Although Washington has very selectively
authorized some cultural, academic and scientific
exchanges, they are still subject to severe restrictions,
and many such projects could not be carried out
because licences, visas and other permits were denied.
It is not widely known that Cuban artists are prohibited
from receiving payment for their performances in this
country.

18

Persecution with regard to Cuban property and
assets and commercial and financial transfers to and
from Cuba or those involving institutions or
individuals based in our country has intensified. In the
past year, Treasury and Justice Departments fines on
firms of their country and Europe for transactions with
Cuba, among other States, total more than
$800 million. In a clear escalation, the American
Government has also appropriated transfers in
currencies of third countries, such as the euro. The
confiscation of a transfer of more than €107,000
belonging to the company Cubana de Aviación, which
was made through the Banco Popular Español from
Madrid to Moscow, was true theft.
The direct economic damage caused to the Cuban
people by the implementation of the blockade in the
past 50 years exceeds $751 billion dollars at that
currency’s current value.
Despite universal rejection of that policy, high
officials of that Government have reiterated that it will
remain unchanged. On 2 September, President Obama
himself ratified the sanctions against Cuba, referring to
the alleged national interest of the United States.
However, everyone knows that the White House
continues to pay more attention to the well-funded
special interests of a tiny minority that has made the
policy against Cuba a very profitable business.
It is clear that the United States has no intention
whatsoever of lifting the blockade. There is no sign
that the Government has any will to dismantle the most
irrational aspects of what is already the most
comprehensive and long-lasting set of sanctions and
coercive economic measures ever applied against any
country. Traditionally, whenever the pretexts brandished as
alleged obstacles to lifting the blockade against Cuba
collapse, new excuses replace them in order to justify
the continuation of a policy that is unsustainable from
every viewpoint.
According to several news agencies, very
recently, on 19 October, President Obama described all
the practices that, in his view, are currently taking
place in Cuba as insufficient and made any new step
conditional on internal changes that they would like to
see in our country. The President is wrong to assume
that he has the right to interfere and to rate processes
taking place in Cuba today. It is regrettable that he is
so misinformed and ill advised.

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

The transformations that we Cubans are
embarking on today are in tune with our aspirations
and the sovereign decisions of our people. They seek to
update our economic model and make it efficient, to
improve our society, extend our culture and develop
our socialism. Those changes do not seek to appease
the desires or satisfy the interests of the United States
Government, which have always been contrary to those
of the Cuban people. For the super-Power, any process
that does not lead to the establishment of a regime
subordinated to its interest will be inadequate. But that
is not going to happen, because many generations of
Cubans have dedicated and continue to dedicate the
best of their lives to defending the sovereignty and
independence of Cuba.
The United States Government has also ignored
the many declarations and proposals submitted by the
Cuban Government — both in public and in private —
that bear witness to our willingness to establish a
serious and constructive dialogue under conditions of
equality and with full respect for our independence.
No response has been given to the new
cooperation projects proposed by the Cuban
Government in the course of the year 2010, aimed at
making progress in areas of common interest such as
the fight against drug trafficking and terrorism, the
protection of the environment, the prevention of
natural disasters, including addressing possible
accidents that may result from oil exploration in the
Gulf of Mexico. An opportunity to advance in areas of
mutual benefit to our peoples has, once again, been
missed. On the contrary, the United States Government
has continued its arbitrary practices of adding Cuba’s
name to spurious lists, including those of States that
allegedly sponsor international terrorism, produced by
the State Department to classify the behaviour of other
nations. That country does not have the moral authority
to draft such lists; as a rule, its name should appear at
the top of them all. There is no reason whatsoever to
include Cuba on any of those lists.
The United States Government likewise has
upheld the unjust conviction against the five Cuban
antiterrorist fighters who have been imprisoned for
more than 12 years and whose cause has inspired broad
solidarity within the international community. Cuba,
which has been and is still a victim of State terrorism,
calls for that Government to put an end to the double
standards and impunity enjoyed in its own territory by
the confessed perpetrators of acts of terrorism that

10-60252

were organized as part of the anti Cuban policy of that
country, which was conceived to destabilize our
country during the 1960s and which included sabotage,
kidnapping, assassination and armed aggressions. That
would be a genuine contribution to the international
struggle against the scourge of terrorism.
It is both outrageous and abnormal that the policy
of sanctions and subversion applied by the United
States against Cuba continues to be guided by the
thinking contained in the memorandum by the former
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Lester Mallory,
written on 6 April 1960, which was declassified a few
years ago. I quote:
“The majority of Cubans support Castro [...]
There is no effective political opposition [...] The
only foreseeable means of alienating internal
support [from the Government] is through
disenchantment and disaffection based on
economic dissatisfaction and hardship.
Every possible means should be undertaken
promptly to weaken the economic life [...]
denying money and supplies to Cuba, to decrease
monetary and real wages, to bring about hunger,
desperation and overthrow of government.”
This quote reveals a cruel and aggressive policy,
absolutely contrary to international law, that this
Government insists on maintaining, knowing that it
causes harm and suffering and violates the human
rights of an entire people.
This is not a bilateral issue, as is constantly
repeated by representatives of the United States. Its
distinct extraterritorial character is endorsed by laws,
and there are many examples of the implementation of
coercive measures against citizens and entities from
third countries.
The blockade, given its nature and scope,
qualifies as an act of genocide under Article II of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide, adopted in 1948, and also as an act
of economic warfare, in accordance with the
Declaration concerning the Laws of Naval War,
adopted in 1909. It is a hostile and unilateral act that
should be ceased unilaterally.
Once again, on behalf of the people of Cuba, I
ask the representatives of all the countries gathered
here to vote in favour of draft resolution A/65/L.3,
which I am honoured to present, entitled “Necessity of

19

A/65/PV.36

ending the economic, commercial and financial
embargo imposed by the United States of America
against Cuba”.
We Cubans feel proud of our work. Although this
economic warfare causes hardships, the fact that has
not taken a toll on human lives or managed to cause
widespread and traumatic harm to our people is thanks
to the efforts and sacrifices made by Cubans and the
willingness and determination of its Government.
Although the economic persecution constitutes
the main obstacle hindering the development of our
country and the improvement of the living standards of
our people, Cuba shows undeniable results in the
eradication of poverty and hunger; in health and
education indices, which serve as a global point of
reference; the promotion of gender equality; the
freedom and equal well-being of Cubans; social
consensus; the democratic participation of citizens in
the country’s decisions; the reversal of environmental
degradation and the development of international
cooperation with about 100 countries of the third
world.
A few weeks ago Cuba was able to declare in this
Hall that it had largely and exceptionally complied
with the Millennium Development Goals. Such results
are still a utopia for a large segment of the population
on this planet.
We Cubans face our historical destiny with
optimism, commitment and creativity. We are inspired
by the feelings of peace, justice and solidarity that
have characterized our people and the friendship that
the whole world feels for our free and rebellious island.
Cuba will continue to be ready to enter into peaceful
and respectful relations with the United States, as it has
with the overwhelming majority of the international
community and the entire hemisphere.
Cuba will never cease to denounce the blockade
or to demand its people’s legitimate right to live and
work for its socio economic development under
conditions of equality, in cooperation with the rest of
the nations and without economic siege or external
pressures.
Cuba expresses its gratitude to the international
community for its firm solidarity with our people,
convinced that, someday, justice will be served and
that this draft resolution will then no longer be
necessary.

20

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/65/L.3.
In that connection, I have two requests to speak
in explanation of vote before the vote. Before giving
the floor to the speakers in explanation of vote before
the vote, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Godard (United States of America): The
United States of America, like most Member States, is
firmly committed to supporting the desire of the Cuban
people to freely determine their country’s future.
The United States of America, like all Member
States, has the sovereign right to conduct its economic
relationships with other countries as it sees fit. The
United States economic relationship with Cuba is a
bilateral issue and part of a broader set of relations
meant to encourage a more open environment in Cuba
and increased respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Respect for those rights and
freedoms are part of this Organization’s core values.
We should not lose sight of that in a debate mired in
the rhetorical arguments of the past and focused on
tactical differences — a debate that does nothing to
help the Cuban people.
My delegation regrets that the delegation from
Cuba continues, year after year, to inappropriately and
incorrectly label United States trade restrictions on
Cuba as an act of genocide. Such an egregious misuse
of the term diminishes the real suffering of victims of
genocide elsewhere in the world. Additionally, those
who charge the United States sanctions as being the
cause of deprivation among the Cuban people should
be reminded that the United States holds no restriction
on humanitarian aid to Cuba and remains Cuba’s
largest provider of food.
The United States sold $533 million in
agricultural products, medical devices, medicine and
wood to Cuba in 2009. In agricultural products alone,
the United States exported $526 million in goods to
Cuba. Once again, in 2009, Cuba reported that the
United States was its fifth largest trading partner. The
United States in 2009 also authorized $237 million in
private humanitarian assistance in the form of gift
parcels filled with food and other basic necessities,

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

non-agricultural humanitarian donations and medical
donations.
It is equally important to note that the United
States has demonstrated that we are prepared to engage
the Government of Cuba on issues that affect the
security and well-being of both our peoples. In April
2009, President Obama stated that the United States
seeks a new beginning with Cuba, but there is a longer
journey that must be travelled to overcome the decades
of mistrust. Over the past 21 months, the United States
has begun to make progress on the vision that the
President has outlined. We lifted restrictions on family
visits and remittances and expanded the amounts of
humanitarian items that the American people can
donate to individuals in Cuba. The United States has
enhanced
the
ability
of
United
States
telecommunication companies to pursue agreements to
provide service to Cuba and has made it easier for
United States agricultural producers to pursue contracts
with Cuban buyers. Furthermore, we have resumed
bilateral discussions on migration, we have initiated
talks to re establish direct mail service between the
United States and Cuba, and we have increased artistic
and cultural exchanges between our countries,
consistent with our long-standing support for freedom
of expression. In the wake of the tragic earthquake in
Haiti, the United States coordinated with Cuba to
address the medical needs of Haitians as part of the
international relief efforts there.
President Obama has stated publicly that the
release of political prisoners and economic reforms are
positive steps for the Cuban people. The United States
hopes to see the fulfilment of those promises soon, as
well as a broader opening by the Cuban Government
signalling its willingness to engage constructively with
its own people. However, it is the view of the United
States that a new era in United States-Cuban relations
cannot be fully realized until the Cuban people enjoy
the internationally recognized political and economic
freedoms that this body has done so much to defend in
other countries around the world.
My delegation will vote against draft resolution
A/65/L.3. Indeed, the United States believes that it is
high time for this body to focus its energies on
supporting the Cuban people in their quest to freely
decide their own future and move beyond the rhetorical
posturing that this draft resolution represents.

10-60252

Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke
in Spanish): Nicaragua will explain why it is going to
vote in favour of draft resolution A/65/L.3, presented
by comrade Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Cuba, whom we thank for having
updated the General Assembly on the harm and damage
that President Barack Obama’s Administration
continues to inflict on the people of Cuba with the
most criminal blockade that has existed in the history
of humankind.
Before I do that, I wish to express our eternal
gratitude to the people and Government of Cuba for
their unconditional solidarity and for their most recent
noble initiative of solidarity that was carried out in my
country, Nicaragua. The President of our country has
just awarded the Rubén Darío order of cultural
independence to the Todos con Voz Cuban medical
brigade, which completed the historic mission of
diagnosing and recording all Nicaraguan brothers and
sisters with disabilities throughout our national
territory. I quote the words of Commander Daniel
Ortega Saavedra, President of Nicaragua, when he
made the award:
“To the Todos con Voz medical brigade,
exemplary exponents of the model of scientific
development and public health, humanism and
solidarity of Fidel and Raúl’s Cuba, recognized as
one of the best in the world and the pride of all
the world’s revolutionaries.”
The people and Governments represented here
think of Cuba as a kindred island, people and
Government, and recognize Cuba for its heroism,
solidarity, humanism, generosity and devotion when
faced with other people’s suffering, for its readiness to
lend a friendly hand when we need help. That is why
we will once again today express ourselves to demand
that the country that blockades Cuba, prevents its
development and threatens those that go near it — the
country which from the very first day of the Cuban
revolution initiated aggression against it — cease this
absurd and inhuman policy.
We meet once again today in the General
Assembly to bring together the voices of the
international community and to demand, for the
nineteenth consecutive time, that the Government of
the United States put an end to this criminal and
inhuman blockade against the heroic generous people
and Government of Cuba.

21

A/65/PV.36

Any country would understand this, simply from
reading the Secretary-General’s report (A/65/83) on the
replies of Governments and bodies of the United
Nations system. All but one of us understands. Once
again, the Government of the United States will be
isolated in the international community. Once again,
the world will stand by Cuba and its people in defence
of its sovereignty and its unstoppable revolution and in
demanding an end to the inhuman blockade. Latin
America and the Caribbean defend Cuba with a single
voice. We have closed ranks with Cuba so that the
Government of the United States will reconsider and
correct its historical error, which is an anachronism in
our region.
Not only does the United States continue to
ignore the will of the General Assembly; it has
tightened the main elements of the embargo against
Cuba. That is reflected in the increase in economic
sanctions and the targeting of Cuban business activity
and financial transactions. We can see how the
chokehold policy on Cuba is being carried out to the
letter by the new Obama Administration, just as
previous Administrations have done. Where is the
change of which so much mention was made during the
campaign? There has been no change at all. This
Administration is increasingly isolated in its obstinate
imperial policy.
We have just heard the words of our colleague the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cuba, representing his
worthy people and Government. He has again told us
that the blockade continues to be the major obstacle to
the economic and social development of his country,
and that its full effects on the Cuban economy is
approximately $751,363,000,000.
In addition to its criminal blockade, the United
States continues its policy of State terrorism by
supporting admitted terrorists who freely move through
the cities of the United States, planning and carrying
out terrorist actions against the people and the
Government of Cuba. At the same time, the United
States is assailing freedom and human rights by
insisting on keeping in its jails five heroic Cuban
patriots whose only crime was to defend their
motherland from terrorists acts committed from the
territory of the United States of America. We demand
the immediate release of these five Cuban anti terrorist
heroes. To them and their families we express our
respect and admiration on their heroic struggle against

22

terrorists who try to destroy Cuba and its unstoppable
socialist revolution.
With our vote, we shall once again express our
emphatic condemnation of the blockade against Cuba
and of all coercive measures of a unilateral nature and
with extraterritorial impact that contradict international
law and the accepted norms of free trade. Such
practices pose a grave threat to multilateralism. We
will also be condemning the use of coercive unilateral
measures, such as illegal sanctions against developing
countries aimed at preventing them from exercising
their right to determine their own political, economic
and social systems.
Nicaragua will vote in favour of draft resolution
A/65/L.3. We call on the community of nations to once
again stand by Cuba by voting in favour, thereby
sending a message of peace, solidarity, respect for the
Charter of the Organization and for non-interference
and non-intervention and, of course, for an immediate
and unilateral halt to the cruel and inhuman blockade.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote
before the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.3. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape
Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania,
Uruguay,
Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Palau
Draft resolution A/65/L.3 was adopted by
187 votes to 2, with 3 abstentions (resolution
65/6).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I shall
now call on those representatives who wish to explain
their votes. May I remind delegations that explanations
of vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Grauls (Belgium): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).

10-60252

The European Union believes that the United
States trade policy towards Cuba is fundamentally a
bilateral issue. However, American legislation such as
the Cuban Democracy Act of 1992 and the HelmsBurton Act of 1996 has extended the effects of the
United States embargo to third-party countries. As a
matter of principle, the European Union has firmly and
continuously opposed such extraterritorial measures.
While recognizing the decision by the United
States Government to lift restrictions on remittances
and family travel to Cuba, we cannot accept that
unilaterally imposed measures impede our economic
and commercial relations with Cuba. To address this
problem, the European Union Council of Ministers
adopted, in November 1996, a regulation and a joint
action to protect the interests of natural or legal
persons residing in Europe against the consequences of
these Acts. Furthermore, at the May 1998 European
Union-United States Summit held in London, a
package was agreed that also sought to alleviate the
problems with extraterritorial legislation. It covered
waivers to titles III and IV of the Helms-Burton Act, a
commitment by the United States Government to resist
future extraterritorial legislation of that kind, and an
understanding
regarding
disciplines
for
the
strengthening of investment protection. The European
Union reiterates its call on the United States to
implement this agreement.
The European Union’s policy towards Cuba was
set out in a common position in 1996. Reaffirming the
validity of this common position, the European Union,
in June 2008, lifted the restricted measures imposed on
Cuba in 2003. The dialogue with the authorities in
Havana was resumed without preconditions and on the
basis of reciprocity and non-discrimination. Full
political dialogue ministerial sessions have been held
with the Cuban Government to address issues of
common interest, including human rights, a question at
the core of relations with all third countries, including
Cuba.
The European Union reaffirms its determination
to pursue a results-oriented comprehensive dialogue
with the Cuban authorities as well as with
representatives of civil society and peaceful
pro-democracy opposition, in accordance with EU
policies. The European Union reiterates the right of
Cuban citizens to make decisions independently about
their future.

23

A/65/PV.36

The European Union is encouraged by the
ongoing release of 52 political prisoners from the
group imprisoned in 2003, and reiterates its call to the
Cuban Government to unconditionally release all
political prisoners. The European Union also reiterates
its call on the Cuban Government to fully grant its
citizens internationally recognized civil, political and
economic rights and freedoms, including the freedom
of expression and free access to information, to ratify
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, and, following the visit of
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right to
food, to extend invitations to other rapporteurs to visit
Cuba.
The existing restrictions on rights and freedoms
undermine and offset Cuban achievements in health
care and education. Similarly, domestic Cuban
economic policy seriously hampers its own economic
development. In this context, the European Union
looks forward to the implementation of the economic
reforms announced by the Cuban Government, and
expresses its hope that these reforms will be extended
and implemented in a manner that will address the key
concerns of the Cuban population.
The economic, commercial and financial embargo
imposed by the United States contributes to the
economic problems in Cuba, negatively affecting the
living standards of the Cuban people. The European
Union therefore believes that the lifting of the United
States embargo would open up the Cuban economy to
the benefit of the Cuban people.
We again express our rejection of all unilateral
measures directed against Cuba that are contrary to
commonly accepted rules of international trade. The
European Union urges the Cuban authorities to bring
about real improvements in all the areas I have
mentioned. In spite of continued concerns and
criticisms about the human rights situation in Cuba, the
European Union unanimously voted in favour of
resolution 65/6.
Mr. Cancela (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As in
previous years, Uruguay voted in favour of the draft
resolution presented by the delegation of Cuba
(A/65/L.3), adopted as resolution 65/6, since we
consider that the embargo against that country is
counter to the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and that it contravenes the rules of

24

international law, in particular norms that regulate
international trade and those that are binding on the
members of the World Trade Organization.
The position of Uruguay is in keeping with the
broader context of defending multilateralism,
non-intervention and the peaceful solution of disputes,
which are the fundamental principles of our diplomacy.
The Eastern Republic of Uruguay has expressed on
numerous occasions, and would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate, that we are against the
economic, commercial and financial blockade that has
been maintained against Cuba, which has affected the
well-being of the Cuban people.
As a matter of principle, Uruguay rejects and
does not recognize in its national legislation the
extraterritorial application of the domestic legislation
of other States. In this regard, we condemn the
application of unilateral coercive measures by the
United States against Cuba. These measures constitute
a form of pressure that is an obstacle to dialogue.
In voting in favour of this resolution, Uruguay
would like to reiterate its commitment to
multilateralism as a legitimate instrument to resolve
disputes between States and as an effective mechanism
in promoting international cooperation, human rights,
security and mutual understanding between peoples.
Mr. Solón (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke
in Spanish): The blockade against Cuba has failed.
Almost 50 years after the imposition of that inhuman
siege, far from having isolated the small island and its
heroic people, the blockade has in fact triggered the
broadest possible show of international solidarity. The
clearest example of that solidarity was the General
Assembly’s adoption, for the nineteenth time, of a
resolution on this subject.
One hundred and eighty-seven countries — that
is, 97.39 per cent of the Member States of the
Organization — have rejected the blockade imposed by
the forces of imperialism against a nation that had the
courage to speak with its own sovereign voice. The
resolution that has been adopted today (resolution
65/6) is a recognition of the dignity, resolve and
resistance of a nation, that, in the face of adversity, has
not fallen to its knees.
The United States, which claims to be the
defender of liberty, violates that very fundamental
principle itself through this blockade. The only thing

10-60252

A/65/PV.36

that this blockade does is violate the human rights of
the people of Cuba and generate economic losses that
have already exceeded $750 billion.
It is unacceptable to defend the extraterritorial
application of a legal standard sanctioned by a State in
order to govern another without the approval of that
State, as is the case with the well-known Helms-Burton
Act. The United States Congress cannot regulate the
political life of another sovereign State. That is in
absolute contravention of every founding principle of
the United Nations.
In the debate preceding the adoption of the
resolution, we were struck by the fact that the
representative of the United States said that the
blockade will end when the Cuban people enjoy the
freedoms that the Government of the United States
deems appropriate according to its own vision. This is
a confession by the Government of the United States
that it is using the blockade to impose its hegemonic
vision on the Cuban people. No country has the right to
impose its own vision or principles on another country.
We all have an obligation to respect the sovereignty of
all the Member States of the United Nations.
Cuba’s response in the face of the imperialist
blockade is an example for all humankind. Cuba has
reacted by showing solidarity to every country of the
world that has requested it. Its doctors and teachers
have helped to save thousands from illiteracy, darkness
and death in every region of the world. The most recent
example of that solidarity is the widescale support it
provided to the kindred Republic of Haiti.
The greatest success of the blockade against Cuba
has been to isolate the United States, as we note here
today in the General Assembly. The arrogance and the
imposition of sanctions by a reactionary and imperialist
minority in the United States will never defeat the
countries of the world that have taken Cuba into their
hearts.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): As in previous
years, Angola voted in favour of resolution 65/6, which
was presented to the Assembly by Minister for Foreign
Affairs Bruno Rodríguez Parrilla of Cuba, whose
presence in the Assembly today we welcome.
In his statement, he very vividly and clearly
described to us the dramatic impact of the sanctions on
the Cuban population. The result of the vote is very
eloquent. I am pleased to say that Angola joins the

10-60252

international community once again in condemning the
economic, commercial and financial embargo imposed
by the United States of America against Cuba. We
appeal for its end. The embargo, which has lasted for
half a century, is a flagrant and systematic violation of
the human rights of the Cuban people.
For consecutive years, the General Assembly has
overwhelmingly adopted resolutions urging all
countries, in compliance with the United Nations
Charter and the principles of international law, to
retract all laws and measures with extraterritorial
effects that compromise the sovereignty of other States,
undermine the legitimate rights and interests of entities
and persons under the jurisdiction of those States and
affect their freedom of trade and navigation.
Regrettably, however, the long-term economic,
commercial and financial embargo imposed by the
United States of America against Cuba is still in place,
in violation of those resolutions and in blatant violation
of the principles of the United Nations Charter and the
norms of international law. The General Assembly has
today adopted a resolution — a result that is really very
clear.
The changes adopted by the United States
Administration in relation to a few aspects of the
embargo have neither been relevant nor sufficient to
lessen the scope of the economic and social problems
resulting from the embargo. There is a need to continue
to move towards the lifting of the embargo. We
encourage the United States Government to pursue this
in a positive direction. We look forward to the day
when the General Assembly will no longer need to
include this item on its agenda.
By adhering to the principles enshrined in the
United Nations Charter and by fulfilling all the
pertinent resolutions adopted by the General Assembly,
we reaffirm our commitment to the norms of
international law by supporting the need to eliminate
coercive economic measures as a means of political
and economic persuasion.
Programme of work
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to inform members that, at 10 a.m. in this
Hall on Friday, 29 October, the General Assembly will
consider draft resolution A/65/L.7, entitled “Review of
the United Nations peacebuilding architecture”, jointly
under agenda item 13, entitled, “Integrated and

25

A/65/PV.36

coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the
outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and
summits in the economic, social and related fields”,
and agenda item 115, entitled “Follow-up to the
outcome of the Millennium Summit”. I wish to remind
members that, as scheduled, we will hold the joint
debate on those items on Tuesday, 23 November.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

26

10-60252
