S/2020/268

United Nations

Security Council

Distr. General
6 April 2020
Original : English

Letter dated 31 March 2020 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2518 (2020), in
connection with the item entitled “United Nations peacekeeping operations”. The
resolution was adopted on 30 March 2020 in accordance with the voting procedure
set out in the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of the Security Council
(S/2020/253), a procedure agreed upon in the light of the extraordinary circumstances
caused by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Pursuant to that procedure, I enclose herewith copies of the following documents:
•

My letter dated 27 March 2020 addressed to the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council, putting to a
vote the draft resolution contained in document S/2020/240 (see annex I
and enclosure thereto);

•

Letters received in reply from members of the Security Council, indicating
their national positions on the draft resolution (see annexes II to XVI);

•

Statements subsequently submitted by members of the Security Council,
providing their explanations of vote (see annexes XVII to XX).

The present letter and its annexes will be issued as a document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council

20-05234(E) 210420 210420

*2005234*

S/2020/268

Annex I
Letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of the Security
Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the
members of the Security Council
According to the understanding and procedure agreed upon by the members
of the Security Council during the current extraordinary circumstances caused by
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, and as reflected in my letter dated 27
March 2020, I would like to draw your attention to the following issue:
The members of the Council discussed and reached consensus on the draft
resolution submitted by the People’s Republic of China for the safety and security of
peacekeepers (S/2020/240). The draft resolution has been put in blue (see enclosure).
With the understanding of the members of the Council, in my capacity as
President of the Council, I shall put the above-mentioned draft resolution to a vote now.
Please kindly provide your vote (in favour, against or abstention) on that draft
resolution and possible explanation of vote by sending the Director of the Security
Council Affairs Division of the Secretariat (egian@un.org) a letter signed by the
Permanent Representative or Chargé d’affaires within the next non-extendable 24
hours. The process will then proceed accordingly, as agreed.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
President of the Security Council
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative
of the People’s Republic of China to the United Nations

2/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

Enclosure

S/2020/240

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional
26 March 2020
Original: English

China: draft resolution
The Security Council,
Recalling the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
reaffirming the primary responsibility of the Security Council under the Charter of
the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions and presidential statements
addressing issues of peacekeeping,
Reaffirming the basic principles of peacekeeping, such as consent of the parties,
impartiality, and non-use of force, except in self-defence and defence of the mandate,
Underscoring the importance of peacekeeping as one of the most effective tools
available to the United Nations in the promotion and maintenance of international
peace and security, and affirming that lasting peace is not achieved nor sustained by
military and technical engagements alone, but through political solutions and strongly
convinced that they should guide the design and deployment of United Nations
peacekeeping operations,
Noting with appreciation the progress made in efforts undertaken by the
Secretary-General to mobilize all partners and stakeholders in support of more
effective United Nations peacekeeping through the Secretary-General’s “Action for
Peacekeeping” initiative, which places high importance on the safety and security
of peacekeepers alongside advancing political solutions, promoting the Women,
Peace and Security agenda, strengthening protection of civilians, supporting
effective performance and accountability, strengthening the impact of peacekeeping
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, improving peacekeeping partnerships, and
strengthening the conduct of peacekeeping operations and personnel,
Expressing grave concern about the security threats and targeted attacks against
United Nations peacekeepers in many peacekeeping missions, which constitute
a major challenge to United Nations peacekeeping operations, including threats
posed by landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised explosive devices,
recalling the sacrifices of uniformed and civilian personnel in implementing United
Nations peacekeeping mandates in challenging environments, and condemning in the
20-052343/26

S/2020/268

strongest terms killing of and all acts of violence against United Nations peacekeeping
personnel, which may constitute war crimes, and paying tribute to all peacekeepers,
police and military as well as civilian ones, who lost their life while serving with the
United Nations,
Underscoring the importance it places on the safety and security of peacekeepers
in the field and the need for the Secretary-General and Troop-and Police-Contributing
Countries and Member States to work together to ensure that missions are adequately
resourced and all peacekeepers in the field are willing, capable and equipped
effectively and safely to implement their mandate,
Condemning violations of status-of-forces agreements by any party to those
agreements, recognizing the grave risks such violations can present to the safety and
security of peacekeepers and affirming that the entry of personnel or equipment into
the country and freedom of movement within the mandate should not be hindered,
Taking note of the measures taken and efforts made by the Secretariat and
Member States in preventing and addressing illnesses including infectious diseases,
among peacekeepers,
Noting that caveats not declared and not formally accepted by the Secretariat
may adversely limit mandate implementation, and stresses the importance of avoiding
caveats that may impinge upon the operational effectiveness of the mission and risk
the safety and security of peacekeepers, in particular in hostile environments,
Recalling the report on “Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers”,
the related Action Plan on improving safety and security, stressing that deficiencies in
training, equipment, capacity, leadership at all levels, performance and accountability,
and medical capacity in the missions can increase risks to the safety and security of
peacekeepers, including leading to increased risk of fatalities,
Recalling its resolution 2436 (2018), underscoring the link between performance
and safety and security of uniformed and civilian peacekeeping personnel, and
recognizing that institutionalizing a culture of performance in United Nations
peacekeeping will contribute to better delivery of peacekeeping mandates, as well as
lead to improvements in the safety and security of peacekeepers,
Reaffirming the importance of full, effective and meaningful participation of
women in peacekeeping operations and the importance of conducting and integrating
a gender analysis and gender assessments when considering the safety and security of
personnel,
Recognizing that possible adverse effects of environmental deterioration may,
in the long run, aggravate certain existing threats to the stability of some host states
which are particularly vulnerable to these adverse effects and which may influence
the safety and security of peacekeepers, while respecting the respective mandates of
all United Nations bodies in this regard,
Recognizing the critical role of United Nations peacekeepers in the promotion
and maintenance of international peace and security in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, and that the primary responsibility for the safety and security
of United Nations personnel and assets rests with the host state, recognizing further
that efforts to enhance safety and improve security need to improve at all levels both
at headquarters and in the field as a shared endeavour,

4/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

1. Stresses the importance of supporting United Nations peacekeeping
operations, recognizes the crucial role peacekeeping plays in achieving conditions for
stability and a lasting peace, and emphasizes the importance of enhancing the safety
and security of peacekeepers;
2. Requests the host states to fulfil their obligations to facilitate access and
freedom of movement for United Nations peacekeepers and their equipment consistent
with the mandate, including for casualty and medical evacuation, and requests the
Secretariat to instruct all peacekeeping missions to systematically document violations
of status-of-forces agreements and that Mission leadership should use this information
to monitor and resolve risks to the safety and security of peacekeepers as necessary;
3. Calls on all Member States hosting peacekeeping operations to promptly
investigate and effectively prosecute those responsible for attacks on United Nations
personnel, and to keep the relevant Troop-and Police-Contributing Countries informed
of the progress of such investigations and prosecutions;
4. Notes that peacekeepers are deployed in deteriorating and complex political
and security environments, and face asymmetrical and complex threats, underscores
the importance of ensuring that peacekeeping missions evolve their capacities and
systems to remain agile and effective in implementing their mandates in specific
operating contexts to enhance safety and security of peacekeepers and mission
protection, including through the provision of adequate medical facilities and critical
capabilities;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to take all appropriate
measures to enhance the safety and security of peacekeeping personnel, including
by strengthening, where necessary, peacekeeping missions’ situational awareness
through measures to improve their information acquisition and analysis capacities,
including surveillance and monitoring capacities, within the limits of their mandate
and area of operation;
6. Calls upon Member States and the United Nations to ensure safe, enabling
and gender-sensitive working environments for women in peacekeeping operations
and to address threats and violence against them;
7. Reaffirms its determination to take effective steps to further enhance
the partnership between the United Nations and regional as well as sub-regional
organizations in relation to safety and security of peacekeepers. Encourages
partnerships to support the African Union’s efforts to continue to develop policy,
guidance and training to ensure the safety and security of its peacekeepers;
8. Requests United Nations peacekeeping operations to enhance engagements
and communications with the host governments, the local authorities and the
population to build trust and mutual understanding and improve safety and security;
9. Calls for measures to enhance operational health support, including to
establish well-defined and practical medical standards for peacekeeping operations,
accelerate the ongoing efforts to improve the system of medical support and casualty
evacuation for injured peacekeepers, ensure adequate medical facilities and qualified
personnel are deployed to provide the essential 10-1-2 response at all times, within the
mission area and as close to deployment of Troop-and Police-Contributing Countries
as possible through the life of the mission;

20-052345/26

S/2020/268

10. Requests the Secretary-General to review and ensure uniformity of United
Nations standards on training and performance, thereby improving safety and security
of peacekeepers, and calls upon Member States to take action to help enhance training
for United Nations peacekeepers, including but not limited to countering improvised
explosive devices, mitigating threats from improvised explosive devices, health, and
basic first aid, with the support of the Secretariat as appropriate;
11. Reaffirms the critical link between safety and security and the performance
of civilian and uniformed peacekeeping personnel, and in that regard welcomes
the initiatives undertaken by the Secretary-General to standardize a culture of
performance in UN peacekeeping, recalls its requests in its resolution 2378 (2017) and
resolution 2436 (2018) that the Secretary-General ensure that performance data related
to the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations is used to improve mission operations,
including decisions such as those regarding deployment, remediation, repatriation and
incentives, reaffirms its support for the development of a comprehensive and integrated
performance policy framework that identifies clear standards of performance for
evaluating all United Nations civilian and uniformed personnel working in and
supporting peacekeeping operations that facilitates effective and full implementation
of mandates, and includes comprehensive and objective methodologies based on clear
and well-defined benchmarks to ensure accountability for underperformance and
incentives and recognition for outstanding performance;
12. Calls on the United Nations to further operationalize the Light Coordination
Mechanism, to facilitate and further coordinate improved training and capacity
building activities between Member States to include Troop-and Police-Contributing
Countries, providers of training and capacity building, and the United Nations, and
encourages Member States to engage with this mechanism, with the aim of improving
training on safety and security;
13. Takes note of the ongoing work of the Secretariat in developing a strategy to
better integrate the use of new technologies for the purposes of increasing safety and
security, improving situational awareness, enhancing field support and facilitating
substantive mandate implementation. Encourages Troop-and Police-Contributing
Countries and Field-Missions to support field-focused, reliable and cost-effective new
technologies that are driven by the practical needs of end users on the ground and in
this regard stresses the need for consultations with Member States and host countries,
as appropriate;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to report progress on improving safety
and security of peacekeepers, including on the issues set out in this resolution in his
comprehensive annual briefing mandated by its resolution 2378 (2017);
15. Decides to remain seized of the matter.

6/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

Annex II
Letter dated 27 March 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of sium to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to the letter dated 27 March 2020 by the President of the Security Council
relating to the draft resolution on the safety and security of peacekeepers (S/2020/240).
In accordance with the procedure set forth for the adoption of draft resolutions
under the current extraordinary circumstance caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, I
am pleased to indicate that Belgium votes in favour of this draft resolution. At this
stage, my delegation does not intend to deliver an explanation of vote.
(Signed) Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative
of Belgium to the United Nations

20-052347/26

S/2020/268

Annex III
Letter dated 27 March 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of China to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I would like to thank you and your team for the strong support in facilitating
the voting procedure.
Please be kindly informed that China votes in favour of the draft resolution
(S/2020/240) submitted by the People's Republic of China on the safety and security
of peacekeepers. Attached herewith is the explanation of vote.
(Signed) Zhang Jun
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative
of the People's Republic of China to the United Nations

8/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

Annex IV
Letter dated 27 March 2020 from the Representative of the
Dominican Republic to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
According to the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of the Security
Council for the month of March, in which it is informed on the agreement among
Council members, amid the current extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, to provide our vote in writing within a non-extendable period of
24 hours, and to the letter dated 27 March 2020 in which the President of the Security
Council is putting the draft resolution on the safety and security of peacekeepers to a
vote now (S/2020/240), the Dominican Republic would like to submit its vote.
In this regard, upon instructions from my Government, the Dominican Republic
votes in favour of the draft resolution on the safety and security of peacekeepers.
(Signed) José Singer Weisinger
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Special Envoy to the Security Council of the Dominican Republic

20-052349/26

S/2020/268

Annex V
Letter dated 27 March 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of Estonia to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I have the honour to inform, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations, that my delegation votes in favour of Security Council
draft resolution S/2020/240, on the safety and security of peacekeepers.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of Estonia to the United Nations

10/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

Annex VI
[Original: French]
Letter dated 30 March 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of the Security
Council in which he called upon the members of the Council to vote on the draft
resolution presented by China relating to the safety and security of peacekeepers
(S/2020/240).
France votes in favour of the draft resolution.
(Signed) Nicolas de Rivière
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of France to the United Nations

20-0523411/26

S/2020/268

Annex VII
Letter dated 30 March 2020 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Germany to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
It is my honour to write to you in response to your letter dated 27 March 2020
initiating a written voting procedure in line with the agreement reached between
members of the Security Council, which is to be assessed at the end of the month of
April 2020.
The vote of the Federal Republic of Germany on the draft resolution submitted
by the People's Republic of China on the safety and security of peacekeepers
(S/2020/240) is as follows:
The Federal Republic of Germany votes in favour of the above-mentioned
draft resolution.
(Signed) Jürgen Schulz
Ambassador
Deputy Permanent Representative of the Permanent Mission of Germany to
the United Nations

12/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

Annex VIII
Letter dated 29 March 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
the Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I write in reference to the letter by the Permanent Representative of the People's
Republic of China to the United Nations, in his capacity as the President of the
Security Council, dated 27 March 2020, regarding the draft resolution on the safety
and security of peacekeepers (S/2020/240).
I hereby indicate that Indonesia votes in favour of the draft resolution.
(Signed) Dian Triansyah Djani
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations

20-0523413/26

S/2020/268

Annex IX
Note verbale dated 28 March 2020 from the Permanent Mission of
the Niger to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
The Permanent Mission of the Niger to the United Nations in New York has the
honour to refer to the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of the Security
Council for the month of March, enunciating the agreed provisional procedure for the
adoption of draft resolutions during the COVID-19 pandemic.
On the draft resolution submitted by the People's Republic of China on the
safety and security of peacekeepers (S/2020/240), the Republic of the Niger votes
in favour.

14/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

Annex X
Letter dated 27 March 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 27 March 2020 on the
beginning of the voting procedure for the draft resolution on the safety and security
of peacekeepers (S/2020/240).
In accordance with the procedure for the adoption of draft resolutions of the
Security Council being in place during the duration of the restrictions on movement
in New York due to the COVID-19 pandemic outlined in your letter of 27 March 27
2020, I have the honour to inform you that the Russian Federation votes in favour of
the draft resolution.
(Signed) Vassily Nebenzia
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations

20-0523415/26

S/2020/268

Annex XI
Letter dated 30 March 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the draft resolution submitted by the People's
Republic of China on the safety and security of peacekeepers (S/2020/240).
In this respect, I wish to inform that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines votes in
favour of the above-mentioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Inga Rhonda King
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United
Nations

16/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

Annex XII
Letter dated 27 March 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council
I refer to your letter dated 27 March 2020 regarding the Security Council draft
resolution submitted by the People’s Republic of China on the safety and security of
peacekeepers (S/2020/240).
The delegation of the Republic of South Africa votes in favour of the abovementioned draft resolution.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of the
Republic of South Africa to the United Nations

20-0523417/26

S/2020/268

Annex XIII
Letter dated 28 March 2020 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
With reference to the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of China, in his capacity as President of the Security Council,
regarding the draft resolution on the safety and security of peacekeepers introduced
by the People's Republic of China under (S/2020/240), I would like to inform you that
Tunisia votes in favour of the draft resolution.
(Signed) Tarek Ladeb
Ambassador
Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Tunisia to the United
Nations

18/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

Annex XIV
Letter dated 30 March 2020 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council
With reference to the letter from the President of the Security Council of 27
March 2020, the United Kingdom votes in favour on the draft resolution (S/2020/240)
for safety and security of peacekeepers.
(Signed) Jonathan Allen
Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations

20-0523419/26

S/2020/268

Annex XV
Letter dated 27 March 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
the United States of America to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council
On the draft resolution submitted by the People’s Republic of China on the
safety and security of peacekeepers (S/2020/240), the United States of America votes
in favour.
(Signed) Kelly Craft
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of the United States of America to the United
Nation

20/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

Annex XVI
Letter dated 30 March 2020 from the Permanent Representative of
Viet Nam to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council
I refer to the letter dated 27 March 2020 from the President of the Security
Council relating to the draft resolution on the safety and security of peacekeepers
submitted by the People’s Republic of China (S/2020/240).
In accordance with the understanding and procedure for the consideration of
draft resolutions agreed upon by the members of the Security Council during the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, as reflected in the
letter dated 27 March 2020 by the President of the Security Council, I would like to
hereby inform you that Viet Nam has decided to vote in favour of the above-mentioned
draft resolution and does not intend to make any statement on this matter at this stage.
(Signed) Dang Dinh Quy
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam
to the United Nations

20-0523421/26

S/2020/268

Annex XVII
[Original: Chinese and English]

Statement by Mr. Zhang Jun, Permanent Representative of the
People's Republic of China to the United Nations
China thanks members of the Security Council for their active participation in
the consultations on the draft resolution, which reflects the importance they attach to
the safety of peacekeepers, and for their spirit of compromise. China hopes that the
Security Council will unanimously adopt the resolution on the safety of peacekeepers
and send out a positive message in unity. As this will be the first resolution on the
safety of peacekeepers adopted by the Council, we believe that it will be of great
significance for improving peacekeeping operations and ensuring effectively the
safety of peacekeepers.
This year marks the 75th anniversary of the United Nations. The implementation
of Secretary-General Guterres’ Action for Peacekeeping initiative has entered a critical
stage, and peacekeeping operations are at a new starting point. At the same time,
peacekeeping operations are faced with more complex and dangerous environment and
challenges. After all, peacekeeping mandates must be implemented by peacekeepers,
and the safety and security of peacekeepers should be treated with greater urgency.
This is our shared responsibility.
China promotes the adoption by the Council of the resolution on the safety of
peacekeepers in order to forge consensus and urge the international community to
scale up input in peacekeeping operations, take practical measures to improve the
safety of peacekeepers and enhance capacity-building, so that mandates can be better
fulfilled, peacekeeping operations can be improved and a greater role can be played
in resolving hotspot issues by political means. The resolution covers multiple aspects,
including training, medical care, partnerships, women and technology, among others.
We call on all parties to take practical measures to effectively safeguard the safety
of peacekeepers. The sooner we act, the better the safety of peacekeepers can be
guaranteed and the more hopeful regional peace processes are.
China is a major financial and troop contributor to the United Nations
peacekeeping operations. It is a firm supporter of, and participant in, United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The six-point commitment made by President Xi Jinping at
the 2015 United Nations Peacekeeping Summit has been followed through. Moving
forward, China will continue to adopt a responsible attitude and work with all
parties in delivering our commitment to multilateralism and improving peacekeeping
operations.

22/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

Annex XVIII
Statement by Mr. Dian Triansyah Djani, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations
Indonesia welcomes today’s adoption of resolution 2518 (2020) on the safety and
security of peacekeepers. We appreciate China’s efforts in facilitating the negotiations,
and we thank the members of the Council for their constructive engagement despite
the difficult situation related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Indonesia voted in favour of the resolution. For us, the safety and security of the
Blue Helmets will always be a top priority.
Peacekeepers are operating in increasingly complex and dangerous security
environments, which put their lives at risk. Just recently, Indonesia lost one of its
soldiers who was serving in the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. While acknowledging some progress in
reducing the number of peacekeeping fatalities, Indonesia is of the view that much
more remains to be done. Indeed, one peacekeeper lost is still one too many.
This resolution is an important step towards enhancing the safety and security
of peacekeepers. It calls for measures to enhance operational health support and to
ensure adequate medical facilities and qualified personnel, including for casualty
evacuation.
Indonesia also welcomes the resolution’s appropriate recognition of the
importance of training and capacity-building in the area of safety and security. We
believe that well-trained and well-equipped peacekeepers will be in a better position
to carry out their tasks professionally and safely.
The resolution also highlights the importance of avoiding caveats, promoting
community engagement, improving situational awareness, and the use of technology
to enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Indonesia believes that, in adopting this resolution, the Security Council is
sending a strong and clear message to all of our peacekeepers that we care and are
fully committed to improving their safety and security.
In conclusion, we salute the peacekeepers for their invaluable work in pursuing
peace while risking their lives. Let us honour their dedication and sacrifices by
ensuring improvement in safety and security for them.

20-0523423/26

S/2020/268

Annex XIX
Statement by Mr. Vassily A. Nebenzia, Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
I have the honour to address you, Sir, in your capacity as the President of the
Security Council for the month of March 2020, on your initiative on resolution 2518
(2020), on the safety and security of peacekeepers, and to assure you of the support of
the Russian Federation in this regard.
I also have the honour to inform you, Sir, about the decision of the Russian
Federation to co-sponsor the resolution. Let me express our profound gratitude for this
important and timely initiative. We are grateful that the provisions of the resolution
correspond to the comprehensive approach agreed during the latest session of the
General Assembly Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in March. We
highly appreciate your constructive role during the negotiation process and your
efforts to take into account key concerns of all members of the Security Council,
including the references to the Basic Principles of Peacekeeping as well as the primacy
of political solutions in conflict settlement, which remain imperative for the United
Nations peacekeeping.
We also support your approach, Sir, to highlight the importance of taking all the
appropriate measures to enhance the safety and security of peacekeeping personnel.
The resolution also calls for further enhancing the partnership between the United
Nations and regional as well as subregional organizations in relation to the safety
and security of peacekeepers. We are convinced that this resolution will make a
significant contribution to improving the safety and security of peacekeepers as well
as the overall effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

24/26

20-05234

S/2020/268

Annex XX
Statement by Ms. Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines voted in favour of resolution 2518 (2020),
on the safety and security of peacekeepers. Admittedly, we are neither a troop- nor a
police-contributing country. However, we acknowledge that peacekeeping remains a
central instrument in our collective struggle against the scourge of war. We wish to
reiterate that, while peacekeeping operations may facilitate a cessation of hostilities in
the short or medium term, moving from a ceasefire towards a lasting and sustainable
peace requires a multidimensional approach that addresses the root causes of conflict.
To that end, peacekeeping operations must always form part of a broader, nationally
led and inclusive political process in order to achieve those desired outcomes.
Uniformed and civilian personnel in the employ of these stabilization missions must
always be provided with adequate training to allow them to carry out their mandates
in accordance with these broader political objectives.
Peacekeeping engagements have become increasingly complicated as modern
globalization has produced an uncertain security landscape that continues to evolve.
The rise of non-traditional threats including, but not limited to, cross-border terrorism,
mass displacement of persons, epidemics, climate change and other forms of human
insecurity, add to this complex security landscape, while escalating tensions are
serving as key triggers for conflict.
Meanwhile, peacekeepers are tasked with carrying out their mandates in these
increasingly harsh political, security and environmental contexts. Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines extends its gratitude to all troop- and police-contributing countries
and to their uniformed personnel for their ongoing commitments and sacrifices. We
welcome any initiative designed to improve the safety and security of peacekeepers by
ensuring they have access to the necessary operational, logistical, medical, financial
and personal support.
A central aspect of promoting the safety and security of peacekeepers is
ensuring that they have the right mindset to carry out complex tasks under difficult
conditions. To that end, we welcome the ongoing thrust to improve performance and
accountability under the Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We
furthermore welcome the range of tools and instruments that are being progressively
rolled out under the initiative, such as the Comprehensive Performance Assessment
System and the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System. Our delegation
emphasizes, however, that peacekeepers themselves must be provided with the
requisite guarantees that they will be rewarded for their hard work and commitment.
That means that all Member States must make good on their obligations to provide the
necessary funding to the United Nations system through their assessed contributions.
Without those contributions, shortfalls emerge in the peacekeeping budget that may
hinder the delivery of mandates by creating delays in reimbursing troop- and policecontributing countries, generating a lack of necessary equipment and producing low
morale among uniformed personnel.
The environmental conditions under which peacekeepers are asked to carry
out their mandated tasks are increasingly impacted by climate change phenomena.
Unpredictable weather patterns, such as erratic precipitation and flooding, serve to add
further complexity to the navigational and logistical challenges facing peacekeeping
20-0523425/26

S/2020/268

missions and their personnel. Those factors also exacerbate the political and security
landscapes in many host States, putting further strain on peacekeeping operations,
while creating personal risks for peacekeepers themselves. We therefore consider it
absolutely necessary for the international community to mobilize sufficient financial
support to assist countries that are affected by climate change. From the Sahel to
the Horn of Africa, strategies to build resilience and mitigate the hazards of climate
change must be developed and implemented in order to strengthen our efforts to
achieve lasting peace and security.

26/26

20-05234
