S/PV.7438

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7438th meeting

Tuesday, 5 May 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Murmokaitė . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lithuania)

Members:

Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mrs. Kawar
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Taula
Mr. Laro
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. González de Linares Palou
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Ms. Chávez Colmenares

Agenda
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-ninth progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2015/275)

15-12989 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1512989*

S/PV.7438

The situation in Liberia

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of thanks to the outgoing President
The President: As this is the first public meeting
of the Security Council for the month of May, I would
like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf
of the Council, to Her Excellency Mrs. Dina Kawar,
Permanent Representative of Jordan, for her service
at the helm of the Security Council for the month of
April, as well as to her entire team. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Kawar and her delegation
for the great diplomatic skill and masterful navigation
of the waters of the Security Council that characterized
their stewardship last month, a very busy one indeed.
On a personal note, it is also a great pleasure to be
taking over from a woman ambassador. I believe the
fact that she is the first Arab woman ambassador ever to
preside over the Security Council is highly significant
and symbolic, and a true source of inspiration for all the
girls and women in the Middle East.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Liberia
Twenty-ninth progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (S/2015/275)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Liberia to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Benedict Sannoh, Minister of Justice and Attorney
General of the Republic of Liberia.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Karin
Landgren, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Liberia and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Chair of the Liberia configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission and Permanent
Representative of Sweden, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

2/8

05/05/2015

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2015/275, which contains the text of the
twenty-ninth progress report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Mission in Liberia.
I now give the floor to Ms. Landgren.
Ms. Landgren: As I speak to developments that
have occurred since the period covered by the report
of the Secretary-General that is before the Council
(S/2015/275), all of Liberia is anticipating this Saturday,
9 May. If no new case has been confirmed by then, the
World Health Organization expects to declare Liberia
Ebola-free. After almost 14 months spent under the
cloud of Ebola, this will be joyful news for the country.
And last week, on 30 April, the United Nations Mission
for Ebola Emergency Response in Liberia closed its
doors, transferring residual tasks to the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and United Nations
agencies. Liberians and their Government, with support
from the United Nations and international partners,
have gotten firmly ahead of the epidemic. Now all
Liberians must remain vigilant.
Even as Liberia launches its post-Ebola recovery,
the Government has taken steps towards full assumption
of its security responsibilities by 30 June 2016, as
mandated by the Council. On 6 March, the Liberian
National Security Council endorsed the Government
of Liberia Plan for UNMIL Transition, in line with
resolution 2190 (2014). This important plan was
developed under the leadership of the Minister of Justice
with UNMIL support, and through consultations with
national security agencies, ministries, the legislature,
the judiciary and civil society. Progress against its
benchmarks and timelines is being monitored by a joint
implementation group chaired by the Minister of Justice
and co-chaired by the UNMIL Special Representative,
the Minister of Finance and Development Planning, the
Minister of Defence, the United States Ambassador and
an associate justice of the Supreme Court. While the
security transition plan targets Liberia’s assumption
of tasks currently still performed by UNMIL, it also
addresses gaps across the security sector in areas
such as achieving greater operational effectiveness,
improving management skills, reducing corruption
and increasing public confidence through stronger
oversight, accountability and professionalization. The
plan recognizes that a successful security transition
requires a whole-of-Government undertaking, with
sustained political will at the highest levels.

15-12989

05/05/2015

The situation in Liberia

I have urged the Government to include the justice
and security sectors in post-Ebola recovery planning.
Liberia’s draft economic stabilization and recovery
plan acknowledges the need for greater resilience in the
security sector, but foresees the financing of security
needs as coming primarily from the national budget.
With the security transition plan currently estimated at
$76 million through June 2016 alone, this may prove
difficult.
The United Nations commends Liberia for meeting
its initial benchmarks under the security transition
plan. Since the report of the Secretary-General went to
print, further benchmarks have been met. On 21 April,
Liberia became the tenth African country to ratify the
Arms Trade Treaty. In March, the Liberian National
Commission on Small Arms, together with UNMIL,
delivered a first tranche of training on arms marking
and registration for more than two dozen staff from
a broad cross-section of the security agencies — the
armed forces, the national security agency, the executive
protection service, the Liberia National Police (LNP) and
the immigration service — ahead of the June timeline
envisaged in the security transition plan. I hope to see
the Government’s weapons-marking process begin
by the end of this month, and the new draft standard
operating procedure, containing minimum standards
for weapons-marking, to be formalized this week.
On 1 June, UNMIL’s Bangladeshi engineers
will start refresher training for the Armed Forces of
Liberia (AFL) on explosive remnants of war (ERW),
following previous training by the United Nations
Mine Action Service. That will equip the AFL to take
over responsibility on 1 July for ERW in 11 of Liberia’s
15 counties. UNMIL and the AFL will continue to work
closely on the hand-over in the remaining four counties.
On 16 April, a riot broke out in the Red Light area of
Paynesville, just east of Monrovia, when a motorcyclist
died following a confrontation with the National Police.
In a single 12-hour period, three motorcyclists died in
encounters in Monrovia allegedly involving members
of the security forces. That fresh tension followed
previous complaints of police brutality. The Paynesville
disturbances left civilians and police officers injured
and resulted in significant property damage, including
to five police posts, one of which was destroyed.
UNMIL, which placed a formed police unit on standby
and remained in close touch with the LNP, conducted
its own response review and proposed to the LNP a
joint review of how the situation was managed.

S/PV.7438

On 1 May, President Johnson-Sirleaf dismissed
three senior LNP officers, including some who had
been the subject of complaints of serious misconduct
and abuse of power. Their replacements, nominated by
the Minister of Justice, came up through the ranks of
the LNP. One benefitted from the management-training
programme at the Ghana Institute of Management and
Public Administration in 2014, facilitated by UNMIL
and funded by Irish Aid. The President also instructed
that the LNP’s dormant Change Management Committee
be reconstituted, a benchmark from the transition plan
ambitiously set for this past March. Those are steps
towards professionalizing and depoliticizing the LNP,
as UNMIL has consistently advocated.
On Armed Forces Day in February, keynote
speaker and former Minister Kofi Woods called
on the AFL to return to West Point, Monrovia, to
engage in civic works, as an act of reconciliation. At
the request of elders and other representatives of the
West Point community, unarmed AFL soldiers have
worked alongside community volunteers to rebuild and
transform the public school, which had been used as
an Ebola treatment centre before being badly damaged
during the disturbances last August. The LNP have
also joined the effort, which has been supported by
the United Nations and Liberian and international
non-governmental organizations. The school will
reopen next week.
Ebola highlighted Liberia’s underlying fragility.
Beyond the public health crisis, Liberians were angered
by the Government’s initial slow response and by
the rising cost of basic commodities, while the use
of the Armed Forces and the introduction of a State
of emergency also fuelled fears, as I described (see
S/PV.7260) to the Council on 9 September last year. It is
remarkable that, eight months later, it is Liberia, among
the three affected countries, that appears poised to be
declared Ebola-free.
Liberians came together and showed themselves
resilient. Now is the time to address factors that
contributed to Ebola’s spread, in particular weak
social-service delivery, the lack of accountability and
overly centralized Government. Liberia’s extractivesbased, enclave economy also proved highly vulnerable
to the shock of Ebola, compounded by the sharp drop in
global prices for iron ore and rubber.
The Government’s early steps towards security
transition at the county level, as part of the security

15-129893/8

S/PV.7438

The situation in Liberia

transition plan, are part of a historic reform in
deconcentrating service delivery; and, over the last
two months, more county security councils have been
activated. They are intended as an early warning
mechanism and a forum for local dispute-resolution.
Along with the existing and planned justice and security
hubs, the county security councils can strengthen
coordination between security agencies and local
authorities. There will of course be challenges for local
authorities in getting the councils to operate effectively
in the early period, but that will improve as support
grows for deconcentrated services and operations.
There are promising developments in addressing
corruption, with the Liberia Anti-Corruption
Commission undertaking major investigations in
respect of State-owned enterprises. Steady political will
is needed to support those processes, particularly as
investigations move into higher levels of Government.
Audits by the General Audit Commission, including of
the National Ebola Task Force, have drawn attention
to financial-management weaknesses. Other efforts
towards transparency include the Open Government
Partnership and the Liberia Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative. All can contribute to greater
confidence in the State and improved service-delivery
to its citizens.
Ebola threatened to deepen Liberia’s long-standing
societal divisions, still not healed from years of conflict.
Reconciliation remains a work in progress. As the
Secretary-General said recently, “Justice is essential ...
We have to address past violations to secure a stable
future.” The national dialogue about social exclusion
and about the crimes of the past, remains muted at best.
Liberia’s stability also depends on that of the
subregion. A recent border shooting incident reminds
us of the potential for tension along the border with
Côte d’Ivoire. In that regard, with the resumption of
the quadripartite and associated bilateral processes,
the cooperation between Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire is
encouraging. With presidential elections anticipated in
both Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire this October, there is a
particular need to maintain strong cooperation across
the subregion.
Domestically and within the diaspora, Liberia’s next
presidential election, in 2017 — a political milestone — is
already hotly debated. Much will be at stake in 2017, and
the political environment is increasingly intense. For its
part, the international community, including the United
Nations, must consider how to frame its own support,
4/8

05/05/2015

including its peacekeeping presence, in the post-Ebola
context in order to build on positive developments and
opportunities that arose from the crisis and to prevent a
reversal in Liberia’s gains. After 12 years of providing
support to Liberia, UNMIL remains a reassuring
presence to Liberians and investors alike, a deterrent to
potential violence and a mentor and standby support to
the Liberia National Police. As shown in Paynesville,
the country continues to harbour flashpoints of
intercommunal disputes and community dissatisfaction
related to land and concessions. And those are among
potential triggers that can adversely affect the political
climate.
As I prepare to step down as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in July, I would like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the Council
for the trust shown in asking me to head three peace
operations in succession — in Nepal, Burundi and
Liberia — over some six and a half years. It has been
an extraordinary privilege. Today is six years to the day
since my initial briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6119),
whose tremendous engagement has never wavered.
Sadly, Burundi and Nepal are both in the headlines,
each meriting our deep collective reflection on the pace
and impact of post-conflict stabilization.
I want to thank the Government of Liberia, and
Ambassador Marjon Kamara personally, for our
productive relationship. Not only with the Government,
but with Liberians in every walk of life, I have found
a welcome and an openness that has made living and
working in that country a rare privilege. I would like
to thank the Peacebuilding Commission, an invaluable
dialogue partner, and all UNMIL’s international
partners. Finally, my heartfelt respect and gratitude
goes to my colleagues across the United Nations, in
particular the national, international and volunteer
personnel in the field, without whose support, day after
day, none of this work would have been possible.
The President: I thank Ms. Landgren for her
briefing, and particularly for tailoring it to the crisis
at hand.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skoog.
Mr. Skoog: Congratulations to you, Madam
President. It is really a thrill to see you and Lithuania
acceding to the presidency of the Council this month.
I have a few points to make on behalf of
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Liberia
configuration.
15-12989

05/05/2015

The situation in Liberia

First, as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Karin Landgren just pointed to us with regard
to the very significant Ebola situation, if no new cases
are reported, Liberia will officially be declared Ebolafree this Saturday, 9 May. But this is not the time to
lower our guard. Focused efforts will still be needed to
ensure that Liberia stays at zero, including by improving
basic health-care services in rural communities. Highlevel international attention must also be maintained
to ensure that the broader recovery process can bring
tangible improvements to the people of Liberia as
quickly as possible.
Having been elected Chair in early March, I
travelled to Liberia from 5 to 7 April to get a first-hand
impression of the situation on the ground. The purpose
of that visit was to draw lessons from the crisis and
to see how the Peacebuilding Commission could best
support peacebuilding priorities in the Ebola recovery
and in the transition processes of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL). I have shared my report
with the Council in advance, but let me take this
opportunity to highlight three points.
First, there is an urgent need to improve the
socioeconomic situation in Liberia. This includes
increasing access to primary education, deploying social
safety nets and creating employment opportunities
for youth. The conditions were already dire before
the crisis, with 64 per cent of the population living
below the poverty line and only 34 per cent of children
attending primary school. The situation has now further
deteriorated as a result of the Ebola situation. The crisis
has increased the burden on households and destroyed
the livelihoods of many, in particular women and young
people engaged petty trade. Providing opportunities,
especially for young people and women, is a critical
priority for ensuring future peace and stability. The
swift recovery of the economy, including through
the resumption of cross-border trade, the return of
international flights and economic stimulus, will be
key to these efforts.
Secondly, there is a need to address State-society
relations and trust in State institutions. A major part of
this is to focus more on strengthening accountability,
legitimacy and institutional capacity, including through
empowering the various independent commissions.
This also includes enhancing State presence and
capacity to deliver basic services in the communities as
part of the decentralization process. As UNMIL draws
down and turns over security responsibility, targeted

S/PV.7438

efforts must be made to strengthen the justice and
security sectors, including the software of security, and
to improve civilian-security relations.
But State capacity is not enough to build trust;
continuing to deal with some of the outstanding
grievances from the civil war, including by accelerating
the implementation of the National Reconciliation
Roadmap in an inclusive manner, will also be critical.
This will be important not least in the context of
starting to prepare for peaceful and credible elections
in 2017. It is important in this regard to continue to
empower women and to guarantee their full and equal
participation in the electoral process, noting that the
percentage of women in the Legislature decreased in
the latest senatorial elections.
Thirdly, there is a need for a stronger regional
perspective and approach. The Ebola crisis has clearly
demonstrated that what happens in one country in the
region has a direct impact on the others. The crisis
has given new impetus to regional cooperation. The
decision of the Mano River Union leaders to join
efforts in a regional Ebola recovery plan should be
welcomed and supported. Such regional cooperation,
including at the highest level, will also be important for
the future maintenance of regional peace and security.
Relevant regional initiatives and organizations deserve
greater attention and support, and we should more
systematically consult and coordinate with these
organizations as we frame our own engagement.
The priority for the Peacebuilding Commission is
to safeguard that peacebuilding gains can be sustained
and strengthened. Close coordination with the Security
Council will be important in the coming months to
help ensure a responsible and seamless transition of
UNMIL, including by coordinating with relevant Ebola
recovery efforts and helping to mobilize support and
resources for the Government transition plan.
The Ebola crisis exposed how volatile the situation
in Liberia still is. But it also demonstrated the
determination and resilience of the people of Liberia.
The success that we hope to celebrate on 9 May is much
thanks to Liberian political, religious and traditional
leaders uniting in collective action. We should build on
this experience and seize the opportunity for change
as we take the next steps in support of a peaceful and
prosperous Liberia.
The President: I thank Mr. Skoog for his briefing.

15-129895/8

S/PV.7438

The situation in Liberia

I now give the floor to the Minister of Justice and
Attorney General of the Republic of Liberia.
Mr. Sannoh (Liberia): It is an honour and privilege
for me to address the Security Council as it considers
the twenty-ninth progress report (S/2015/275) of the
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL).
Liberia has come a long way since the end of the
conflict, forging ways and means to address the root
causes and consequences of the civil conflict in a
comprehensive and holistic manner so as to consolidate
peace, promote national reconciliation and create an
enabling environment for political, economic and social
development in Liberia. Significant progress has been
made in this regard under the leadership of President
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, but we must remain ever mindful
that Liberia would not be where we are today without the
tireless support of the international community. I should
therefore like to express my thanks and appreciation to
the Secretary-General, the successive members of the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission and
the members of the Liberia configuration, as well as all
other bilateral and multilateral partners, for the support
that they have given us over the years.
Let me also register the appreciation of the
Government of Liberia for the work of the United Nations
Mission in Liberia and the leadership demonstrated
by Ms. Karin Landgren, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, during her tour of duty. Both
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Ambassador Olof Skoog of Sweden, Chairman
of the Liberia configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, have commented eloquently and truthfully
on the situation in Liberia, the challenges that we face
as a nation and people, and the need for international
support. We could not agree more.
The Secretary-General’s report fairly represents the
situation in Liberia as of 15 April. However, some of the
concerns raised and the incidents reported do not give
a holistic picture of the situation in Liberia and appear
more to be isolated events, which the Government has
not condoned.
The first is the issue of corruption. The lapses
mentioned in regard to corruption and impunity in
Liberia are more a manifestation of capacity challenges
than a lack of political will to fight this menace. It
could be recalled that the President in her most recent
address to the Legislature urged it to amend the act
establishing the Liberia Anti-Corruption Commission

6/8

05/05/2015

so as to give the Commission full prosecutorial powers.
What is not being said is that prosecuting corruption
cases requires capacity and resources that are not
readily available. Hence the Ministry prioritizes cases
that have pervasive impact, such as the National Oil
Company case involving the bribing of legislators,
the illegal issuance of logging contracts involving
officials of the Forestry Development Authority, and
the National Drug Service of the Ministry of Health,
among others. An Anti-Corruption Division staffed by
experienced and seasoned prosecutors is in the process
of being established in the Ministry of Justice; when
fully operational, it will speed up the prosecution of
cases of corruption. New legislation is also being
drafted to establish an additional court dedicated to
cases of corruption.
The Government is currently working on
decongesting the police beyond Montserrado county
into the counties so that the level of deployment is
linked to population ratio. Concerns about police
brutality are troubling. The Professional Standards
Division of the Liberia National Police routinely
investigates acts of police misconduct and disciplinary
actions, including dismissals and prosecution, are
taken. The Transnational Crimes Unit, which includes
representatives from all the security agencies, is
functional although the meeting of its Board remains
erratic. The Minister of Justice has directed the Board
to meet regularly. The Government has also embarked
on vigorous steps to reform the Liberia National Police
and instil discipline and professionalism among its
rank and file. Four senior police officers were recently
dismissed by the President in this regard. Two separate
independent probes are currently in progress involving
allegations of police misconduct, which may warrant
criminal prosecution.
The review and reform of the laws relating to the
security sector is a dynamic and ongoing process. The
draft police act was recalled by my office with the view
to providing a clear direction on a number of policy
issues. This exercise is expected to be completed by
the end of this month, and thereafter submitted to the
President for onward transmission to the legislature.
The draft firearms act is still in the Legislature, and we
are informed that it will soon be passed into law.
On the human rights situation, the Government
does not condone violations by any of its institutions
and remains committed to fulfilling its obligations
under local and international law. The Government

15-12989

05/05/2015

The situation in Liberia

routinely investigates incidents of human rights
violations and abuses, and, consistent with due process,
brings those responsible to justice. The events referred
to in the report of the Secretary-General, including in
particular the use of excessive force in the violent clash
between the community of West Point and the Armed
Forces of Liberia (AFL) during the state of emergency,
was an isolated incident that the Independent National
Commission on Human Rights swiftly investigated.
The Commission’s findings did not conclude that the
AFL was responsible for the shooting, so no criminal
investigation was triggered.
We recognize the need to establish a military
tribunal consistent with the uniform code of military
justice, which the Government is working on, but the
fact that criminal proceedings did not result from the
incident was not due to the absence of such a tribunal.
Other procedures exist that allow for AFL soldiers to
be prosecuted in civilian courts if found responsible for
criminal misconduct involving civilians.
Regarding the media, there is no restriction on or
prior censorship of the press in Liberia. However, the
media are not above the law but remain subject to it,
so much so that where there is a clear and deliberate
violation of the laws of Liberia by journalists or media
institutions, the Government has a duty to bring those
responsible to justice in order to preserve the integrity
of the law and for the greater good of society.
Sexual and gender-based violence remains a
challenge, even in spite of an increase in prosecutions
and long prison terms. What is now clear is that
criminal justice alone cannot address the challenge.
In addition to prosecutions, we must now look at other
factors, including sociological and cultural dimensions,
and embark on concerted efforts through sensitization
to fight this scourge. The Government is committed to
this process.
The Government also remains committed to
concluding the constitution review process in a way
that further contributes to rather than undermines
Liberia’s peacebuilding efforts and respect for
freedom of religion. We recognize the slow pace of the
implementation of the Palava Hut programme as part of
the road map for national healing, peacebuilding and
reconciliation, but we nonetheless remain committed to
fully implementing the programme.
In response to resolutions 2190 (2014) and 2215
(2015), which call on the Government of Liberia to

S/PV.7438

assume fully its complete security responsibilities from
UNMIL no later than 30 June 2016, and for UNMIL
to resume its drawdown, the Government, in close
collaboration with UNMIL and partners, has formulated
a concrete plan, with timelines and benchmarks, for
building the capacity of the security sector to assume
those responsibilities.
However, the plan formulated by the Government
goes beyond the UNMIL transition. It is a peace
consolidation strategy designed not only to assume
responsibilities from UNMIL but also to consolidate
the gains made over the years, and to address the
remaining challenges that pose a threat to the peace and
security of the country in a more structured manner.
The plan has now been disaggregated along these lines.
The plan emphasizes, among other underlying
benchmarks, a holistic Government approach for both
ownership and implementation, focusing on State
and human security; efficiency, transparency and
accountability; democratic and civilian oversight; and
coordination, collaboration and partnerships within the
security sector and among Liberia and its regional and
law-enforcement partners.
The plan also calls for capacity-building and for
key legal and regulatory policies and frameworks to
be strengthened and established where they do not
exist, and calls for the review and enactment of legal
frameworks, including passage of the police act and the
firearms act, among others. The plan is incorporated
into the post-Ebola recovery programme.
The implementation of the plan is costed at
$104.8 million, spread over a period of three or
more years. While the plan recognizes that it is the
responsibility of the Government of Liberia to mobilize
the required amount, it also emphasizes the need for
increased donor support to the security sector, given
the enormity of the challenges.
In March 2014, the deadly Ebola virus disease
struck Liberia, revealing several vulnerabilities across
the service-delivery systems, especially the healthcare system. I would like to report that with the robust
support of the United Nations and the global community,
matched at the national level by strong leadership and
a resilient people, Liberia is now on the verge of being
declared an Ebola-free society.
Liberia has developed an economic stabilization and
recovery plan to address a number of the vulnerabilities
revealed by the Ebola virus and a subregional plan

15-129897/8

S/PV.7438

The situation in Liberia

with Sierra Leone and Guinea. The Government very
much looks forward to a continued partnership with
the United Nations and the global community, so as
to reach zero infections and to sustain an Ebola-free
Liberia and subregion.
The steep decline in the Liberian economy due to
the Ebola crisis remains the greatest inhibiting factor
for the Government in terms of delivering services
to its people. The situation will continue to have an
impact on all sectors, especially the justice and security
sector. The Government will continue to exert efforts to
improve socioeconomic conditions, especially among
restive youth; strengthen relations between the State
and society; and build trust and confidence among the
citizenry, the Government and its institutions.

8/8

05/05/2015

Finally, Liberia remains committed to its obligations
under the statement of mutual commitment with the
Peacebuilding Commission, and we will continue to
forge increased engagement with the members of the
configuration in order to solidify peace in Liberia,
especially given that the pace of resource mobilization
in support of Liberia has slowed considerably in recent
years. The Government emphasizes that support for
the peacebuilding architecture of the United Nations is
particularly critical during the process of transition in
Liberia.
The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

15-12989
