Re1olution1 adopted on the reporte of the }'ourth Committee

932 (X). ProgreH achieved hy the Non-Self-Governing Territorie11 in punuance of Chapter XI
of the Charter
The General Assembly,
Considering that Chapter XI of the Charter of th~
United Nations contains various provisions regarding
the advancement of territories whose peoples have not
yet attained a full measure of self-government,
Considering that, by virtue of Article 73 e of the
Charter, the Secretary-General bas, since 1946, receivcd
information on the economic, social and educational conditions in Non-Self-Governing Territories and that, in
some cases, Members administering such Territories
have voluntarily submitted information on the development of the free political institutions of the peoples of
these Territories,
Considering further that, under the resolutions
adopted by the General Assembly from 1946 onwards,
this valuable information transmitted by the Administering Members, indicating how and to what extent the
principle that the interests of the inhabitants of the NonSelf-Governing Territories are paramount has been implemented, has been analysed and summarized by the
Secretary-General and studied each year by the General
Assembly,
1. Expresses the opinion that an examination of the
progress achieved in the Non-Self-Governing Territories since the establishment of the United Nations,
based on the information received from the Administering Members under Article 73 e of the Charter, would
be highly desirable and should make it possible to ascertain the extent to which the peoples of the Non-SelfGoveming Territories are advancmg towards the attainment of the goals set in Chapter XI of the Chartér;

2. Considers that such an examination would require
careful preparation, with the assistance of the specialized agencies concemed ;
3. Invites the Secretary-General, after consultation
with the specialized agencies concemed, to submit to the
General Assembly, for consideration at its eleventh session, a report on the main points that might be useful in
such an examination.
541st plenary meeting,
8 N ovember 1955.
933 (X). Renewal of the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Goveming Territorie11
The General Assembly,
Having considered the work of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Goveming Territories constituted by resolution 332 (IV) adopted by the Gerieral
Assembly on 2 December 1949,
Recognizing the value of further constructive work by
the Committee in the interests of the advancement of
the peoples of Non-Self-Goveming Territories and the
attamment of the objectives set forth in Chapter XI of
the Charter,
1. Decides to continue the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Goveming Territories on the same
basis for a further three-year period;

2. Decides that, as provided in resolutions 332 (IV)
and 646 (VII) of 2 December 1949 and 10 December

19

1952 respectively, the Committee should be composed
of those Members of the United Nations transmitting information in accordance with Article 73 e of the Charter
and of an equal number of non-administering Members
elected by the Fourth Committee on behalf of the General Assembly on as wide a geographical basis as possible;
3. Invites the members of the Committee to continue
to attach to their delegations persons specially qualifi.ed
in the functional fields within the Committee's purview;
4. Invites the Administering Members to attach to
their delegations indigenous persons specially qualified
to speak on economic, social and educational policies in
the Non-Self-Governing Territories;
5. Instructs the Committee to examine, in the spirit
of paragraphs 3 and 4 of Article 1 and of Article SS of
the Charter, the summaries and analyses of information
transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter on the
economic, social and educational conditions in the NonSelf-Governing Territories, including any papers prepared by the specialized agencies and any reports or
information on measures taken in pursuance of the resolutions adopted by the General Assembly conceming
economic, social and educational conditions in the NonSelf-Governing Territories;
6. Instructs the Committee to submit to the reJU:lar
sessions of the General Assembly reports contaming
such procedural recommendations as it may deem fit and
such substantive recommendations as it may deem desirable relating to functional fields generally but not with
respéct to individual Territories;
7. Considers that the Committee should, without
prejudice to the annual consideration of all the functional fields enumerated in Article 73 e of the Charter,
give special attention to educational, economic and social
conditions in tum and should consider the information
transmitted in respect of these questions in the light of
the reports approved by the General Assembly on such
conditions in N on-Self-Goveming Territories;
8. Decides that, at its thirteenth session, the General
Assembly will reconsider the question of continuing the
Committee on Information from N on-Self-Goveming
Territories, together with the questions of the composition and terms of reference of this or any such future
committee.
541st plenary meeting,
8 N ovember 1955.

*

* *
At its 512th meeting on 17 Nwember 1955 the Fou,-th Committee, acting in the name of the General Assembly, in accordance with the terms of the above resolution, wa.s calletl .,,,,. to
fill the vacancies in the membership of the Committee on I,i/ormation from Non-Self-Governing Territories tf'eated by tM
expiration of the terms of office of BRAZIL, CHINA, INDIA and
IRAQ.

The following· States were ,Iected for a three-year p,riod:
CHINA, INDIA, IRAQ and VENEZUELA.

934 (X). Voting procedure on questlom relatlnar
to reports and petitlom eoncernlng the Terr&:
tory of South West Afrlca I advhory opinion of
the International Court of Ju1tlce
The General Assembly,
Having requested, in its re~olution 904 (IX) of 23
November 1954, an advisory opinion from the Interna-
