A /76/PV.60

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

60

th plenary meeting
Monday, 28 February 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)
of all — our responsibility, our opportunity’ and its
preparatory meeting”.

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 20 (continued)

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/76/L.38?

Sustainable development

Draft
decision
(decision 76/555).

Draft decision (A/76/L.37)
Draft decision (A/76/L.38)
The President: The General Assembly will
now take action on the draft decisions contained in
documents A/76/L.37 and A/76/L.38.

A/76/L.38

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 20.

We shall now proceed to consider draft decision
A/76/L.37 and draft decision A/76/L.38.

Agenda item 23 (continued)

The Assembly will now take a decision on
draft decision A/76/L.37, entitled “Participation
of non-governmental organizations, civil-society
organizations, indigenous peoples’ organizations,
academic institutions, the scientific community, the
private sector and philanthropic organizations in the
international meeting entitled ‘Stockholm+50: a healthy
planet for the prosperity of all — our responsibility, our
opportunity’”.

(a) Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries

May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft decision A/76/L.37?
Draft
decision
(decision 76/554).

A/76/L.37

was

adopted

The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft decision A/76/L.38, entitled
“Accreditation and participation of intergovernmental
organizations in the international meeting entitled
‘Stockholm+50: a healthy planet for the prosperity

Groups of countries in special situations

Draft resolution (A/76/L.39)
The President: The General Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/76/L.39.
I give the floor to the representative of Pakistan to
introduce draft resolution A/76/L.39.
Ms. Majeed (Pakistan): Pakistan, on behalf of the
Group of 77 (G-77) and China, is introducing draft
resolution A/76/L.39, entitled “Further modalities
of the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries”.
The Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries, originally scheduled to be held
from 23 to 27 January, was postponed owing to the
outbreak of the Omicron variant of the coronavirus
disease. The situation with the pandemic continues to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-27255 (E)

*2227255*

A/76/PV.60

evolve, and there remains a lack of clarity on how soon
an in-person conference could be convened.
At the same time, the Istanbul Programme of Action
for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 20112020 expired in 2020, and there remains a vacuum until
the adoption of the Doha Programme of Action for Least
Developed Countries, which had already been agreed
and recommended by the Preparatory Committee for
adoption at the conference.
Therefore, after consultations with the Group of
Least Developed Countries and the host country, the
G-77 and China, through draft resolution A/76/L.39,
is proposing that the conference be held in two
parts. The first part would be held at United Nations
Headquarters, in New York, on 17 March 2022. It would
consist of one plenary meeting to be held from 10 a.m.
to 1 p.m. and will consider, among other items, the
draft Doha Programme of Action. The second part of
the conference will be held in Doha from 5 to 9 March
2023. That arrangement will enable both the timely
implementation of the Doha Programme of Action in
2022 and reinforce the political momentum next year,
when the in-person conference will be held.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Secretariat.
Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): The present statement,
pertaining to operative paragraph 1 of the current draft
resolution, A/76/L.39, is made in the context of rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. The
present statement has also been distributed to member
States via the e-deleGATE portal.
It should be recalled that pursuant to operative
paragraphs 1 and 2 of resolution 74/232 B, resource
requirements in the amount of $158,700 were included
in the programme budget for 2022, under section 2,
General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management.
The request contained in operative paragraph
1 would constitute an addition to the meetings and
documentation workload for the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management in
2023 and entail additional resource requirements in the
amount of $171,500 in 2023. Detailed cost estimates
and their underlying assumptions for the requirements
are provided in the annex to this statement, available on
the e-deleGATE portal.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly
adopt draft resolution A/76/L.39, additional resource
2/3

28/02/2022

requirements estimated in the amount of $171,500
under section 2, General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council affairs and conference management,
would be included in the proposed programme budget
for 2023 for the consideration of the General Assembly
at its seventy-seventh session.
Unspent provisions in the amount of $98,300 from
the amount that was included in the budget as approved
for 2022 will be surrendered in the context of the
financial performance report for 2022, to be presented
at the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly.
This statement and its annex have been posted on
the e-deleGATE portal.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/76/L.39.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.39, entitled “Further modalities
of the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. Sharma (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/76/L.39, Canada has also become a co-sponsor of
the draft.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.39?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 76/251).

A/76/L.39

was

adopted

The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mrs. Chimbiri Molande (Malawi): On behalf of
the Group of Least Developed Countries, I should like to
thank all members of the General Assembly for adopting
rescheduled resolution 76/251 by consensus. That paves
the way for undertaking effective preparations for the
two parts of the Fifth United Nations Conference on the
Least Developed Countries. As the Assembly is aware,
the implementation period of the Istanbul Programme
of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the
Decade 2011-2020 came to an end in 2020. It is therefore
urgent to adopt and kick-start the implementation of the
new programme of action.
22-27255

28/02/2022

We are keenly looking forward to the first part of
the conference, to be held on 17 March 2022, for the
adoption of the Doha Programme of Action for the
Decade 2022 to 2031. We are grateful to all members for
their support and constructive engagement in reaching
consensus on the Doha Programme of Action. The
Preparatory Committee, at its meeting on 21 December
2021, already recommended its adoption. We must
thank once again the Permanent Representatives of
Bangladesh and Canada for their strong stewardship
in leading the work of the Preparatory Committee,
especially in facilitating the negotiations of the Doha
Programme of Action.
We also reiterate our appreciation to our development
partners and the members of the Group of 77 and China
for their full support, substantive contributions and
flexibility in finalizing the new Programme of Action
for the least developed countries. The Programme of
Action contains a number of commitments by least
developed countries and their development partners
that are expected to bring transformative changes to the
lives of millions of people in those countries to fight
the pandemic, build back better and be more resilient
to shocks.
The adoption of the Doha Programme of Action on
17 March will lead us to begin its implementation. As
we have been struggling to cope with the impacts of the
coronavirus disease as well as the financial and climate
crisis, we need scaled-up support from the development
partners, the United Nations system and other financial
organizations more than ever.
Let me also express our thanks and appreciation
to the Government of Qatar for its continued support
for the Fifth United Nations Conference on the Least
Developed Countries and its preparatory process.
Ambassador Alya Al-Thani deserves our particular
appreciation for her strong personal commitment and
support in all activities related to the conference.
In closing, let me urge Member States, the United
Nations system, international financial institutions
and all other stakeholders to attend the first part of
the conference at an appropriate level and to have
representation at the Heads of State and Government
as well as principals level at the second part of the
conference, to be held in Doha from 5 to 9 March 2023.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting.

A/76/PV.60

The State of Qatar welcomes the adoption by the
General Assembly of resolution 76/251, on the new
dates for holding the Fifth United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries.
The State of Qatar is honoured to be hosting that
Conference and will spare no effort to prepare well
for it, in cooperation with all partners, to ensure its
success. We look forward to convening the first part
of the Conference on 17 March and the adoption
of the Doha Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries.
In the light of the changing global scene and its
increased challenges, the upcoming adoption of the
Doha Programme of Action is extremely important
because it will allow its implementation without further
delay, given that this will be the first Programme of
Action that addresses the challenges related to the
consequences of the coronavirus disease for the least
developed countries. The Programme of Action will
also constitute a transformational means to achieve the
desired change and build resilient societies, especially as
it includes measures and initiatives as well as important
and ambitious commitments by all actors. Needless to
say, the success of the Doha Programme of Action for
the Least Developed Countries will require collective
work and support by all international partners.
The State of Qatar also looks forward to holding
the second part of the Conference in Doha from 5 to
9 March 2023 at the highest level possible, including
Heads of State and Government, while carrying out all
activities planned for that part of the Conference.
In conclusion, we stress that the State of Qatar
is committed to meeting all the requirements for the
success of the Fifth United Nations Conference on
the Least Developed Countries. We hope that it will
make a difference and constitute a transformational
event in supporting the expectations of the least
developed countries in terms of achieving sustainable
and comprehensive development. The State of Qatar
will remain fully committed to playing a significant
role in that important and vital world endeavour. We
welcome all participants during the second part of the
Conference in Doha, in 2023.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after the voting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda
item 23.
The meeting rose at 3.20 p.m.

22-272553/3
