United Nations

A/RES/58/134

General Assembly

Distr.: General
26 January 2004

Fifty-eighth session
Agenda item 107

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 22 December 2003
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/58/498)]

58/134. Follow-up to the Second World Assembly on Ageing
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/167 of 18 December 2002, in which it endorsed the
Political Declaration and the Madrid International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002, 1
and welcomed the preparation by the Programme on Ageing of the Division for
Social Policy and Development of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs
of the Secretariat of a road map for the process of implementing the Madrid Plan of
Action, as well as its resolution 57/177 of 18 December 2002, in which it stressed,
inter alia, the importance of mainstreaming a gender perspective,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 2003/14 of 21 July
2003, in which the Council invited Governments, the United Nations system and
civil society to participate in a “bottom-up” approach to the review and appraisal of
the Madrid Plan of Action,
Recalling further its resolution 57/270 B of 23 June 2003, in which it agreed to
the framework for an integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to
the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic
and social fields and reaffirmed the importance of regularly reviewing the progress
made in the implementation of the commitments undertaken at individual major
United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields,
Recognizing that the follow-up to and the implementation of the outcome of
the Second World Assembly on Ageing is an integral part of the integrated and
coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits,
Recognizing also that a tremendous global demographic change is to be
expected during the next fifty years, in both developing and developed countries, as
well as in countries with economies in transition, and that since this change will be
the most rapid in developing countries, where the older population is expected to
quadruple over the same period of time, it is imperative that ageing be integrated

_______________
1
Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I, resolution 1, annexes I and II.

03 50262

A/RES/58/134

into development policies for the attainment of internationally agreed development
goals, including those contained in the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 2
Aware that the lack of data disaggregated by age and sex is an impediment to
the consideration of ageing issues and the situation of older persons at both the
international and the national policy levels,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 3

2.
Also takes note of the road map for the implementation of the Madrid
International Plan of Action on Ageing, 2002, contained in the report of the
Secretary-General;
Invites Member States and the organizations and bodies of the United
3.
Nations system to incorporate ageing, as appropriate, into actions to achieve the
internationally agreed development goals, including those contained in the United
Nations Millennium Declaration,2 in particular the goal on the eradication of
poverty;
4.
Stresses the need for action at the national and international levels to
implement the Madrid Plan of Action, 4 including the need to set national and
international priorities and to select appropriate approaches to ensure that countries
achieve a society for all ages;
Encourages the establishment of institutional linkages at the national
5.
level between national machineries for the advancement of women and those
governmental entities responsible for the development, implementation and
coordination of ageing-related policies and programmes;
Stresses that the role of civil society, including non-governmental
6.
organizations, is important in supporting Governments in their implementation and
assessment of and follow-up to the Madrid Plan of Action;
Requests the Economic and Social Council to consider ageing when
7.
elaborating its list of cross-sectoral thematic issues common to the outcomes of
major United Nations conferences and summits for the establishment of the
multi-year programme of work for the coordination segment of its substantive
session;
Requests the Commission for Social Development to integrate an ageing
8.
perspective in its consideration of priority themes related to the follow-up to the
World Summit for Social Development;
Requests the Commission for Social Development and the Commission
9.
on the Status of Women to further coordinate and collaborate through their
respective bureaux on the issue of older women within the framework of their
respective multi-year programmes of work;
10. Recalls, in this regard, its request to each functional commission of the
Economic and Social Council to examine its methods of work in order to better
pursue the implementation of the outcomes of the major United Nations conferences
and summits, recognizing that there is no need for a uniform approach since each
_______________
2

See resolution 55/2.
A/58/160.
4
Report of the Second World Assembly on Ageing, Madrid, 8–12 April 2002 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.02.IV.4), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
3

2

A/RES/58/134

functional commission has its own specificity, while noting that modern methods of
work can better guarantee the review of progress made in implementation at all
levels, on the basis of a report containing recommendations to be submitted by the
Secretary-General to each functional commission and relevant subsidiary body of
the Economic and Social Council on its methods of work, in accordance with the
provisions defined by the respective outcomes and relevant decisions taken by each
body, bearing in mind the progress recently achieved in this regard by certain
commissions, in particular the Commission on Sustainable Development, and
recalling that the functional commissions and other relevant bodies of the Council
should report to it no later than 2005 on the outcome of this examination;
11. Requests the Commission for Social Development to take up the issue of
the periodicity and the format of the review of the implementation of the Madrid
Plan of Action at its forty-second session, taking into account the provisions of
resolution 57/270 B;
12. Stresses the importance of the collection of data and population statistics
disaggregated by age and sex on all aspects of policy formulation by all countries,
and encourages the relevant entities of the United Nations to support national efforts
in capacity-building, especially those of developing countries and countries with
economies in transition, takes note in this context of the establishment by the United
Nations of an Internet-accessible database on ageing, and invites States to submit,
whenever possible, information for inclusion in the database;
13. Requests the Statistical Commission to assist Member States in
developing modalities for disaggregating data by age and sex;
14. Requests the organizations and bodies of the United Nations system and
the specialized agencies to integrate ageing, including from a gender perspective,
into their programmes of work and to report on their progress to the Commission for
Social Development;
15. Invites the international financial institutions and the regional
development banks to take older persons into account in their policies and projects
as part of the effort to assist developing countries and countries with economies in
transition in the implementation of the Madrid Plan of Action;
16. Recommends that the institutional linkages between United Nations
gender focal points and focal points on ageing be strengthened in order to enhance
the integration of the gender aspects of ageing within the system;
17. Welcomes the progress made in the work of some of the regional
commissions in implementing the objectives and recommendations of the Madrid
Plan of Action, and encourages other regional commissions to make progress in this
regard;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to forward his report3 to the Commission
for Social Development at its forty-second session and to make available any other
relevant information related to this issue that may assist the Commission in its
deliberations;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its fifty-ninth session on the implementation of the present resolution.
77th plenary meeting
22 December 2003

3
