A /70/PV.79

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

79th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 16 December 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

In the absence of the President, Ms. Mejía Vélez
(Colombia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the
overall review of the implementation of the outcomes
of the World Summit on the Information Society
Agenda item 17 (continued)
Information and communications technologies
for development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/70/63)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.33)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 78th plenary
meeting, I now give the floor to Mr. Patrick Keuleers,
Director and Chief of Profession of the Governance
and Peacebuilding Bureau for Policy and Programme
Support of the United Nations Development Programme.
Mr. Keuleers (United Nations Development
Programme): The United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) is honoured to be part of this highlevel meeting to review the 10-year implementation of
the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society (WSIS). The review comes at an opportune
moment, capping a year of fundamental decisions made
by the global community on our shared future — the
Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, through
which we agreed to make the world safer from the risk of
disasters; the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development

(resolution 70/1), which commits us to ending poverty
and hunger, protecting the planet, fostering peaceful,
just and inclusive societies, enabling people to enjoy
prosperous and fulfilling lives and ensuring that no one
is left behind; and, just last week, the Paris Agreement of
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, which frames our resolve to strengthen our
collective response to the threat of climate change.
The role of information and communications
technologies (ICT) in achieving those global goals
and commitments is recognized by all stakeholders.
The 10-year review of the implementation of the WSIS
outcomes (WSIS+10) is therefore a distinct opportunity
to ensure that this role is concretized within those
global imperatives. UNDP congratulates the WSIS
community on its agreement on a draft outcome
document (A/70/L.33) that reaffirms a vision of
building a people-centred, inclusive and developmentoriented information society.
Building that information society requires us to
bridge the digital divide, and for UNDP that divide is
far more than a mere infrastructure issue. The era of
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is digital
and increasingly connected, and digital inclusion is
therefore particularly important, since many services,
access to information and the space for engaging
with Governments and the private sector are being
increasingly enabled or deployed through digital
tools and platforms. The digital divide therefore
implies inequalities in access to services, information,
opportunities and public processes where decisions that
affect people’s lives are being made. Those are divides

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-43217 (E)

*1543217*

A/70/PV.79

that cannot be bridged by technology or infrastructure
alone. They require policies and strategies aimed at
ensuring that ICT access and Internet connectivity can
have a meaningful impact on people’s lives, in particular
those of women, young people and marginalized
peoples.
UNDP is pleased that the WSIS+10 draft outcome
document encourages consideration of the outcome of
the 2025 WSIS review as an input into the review of the
2030 Agenda. A WSIS community closely engaged in
implementing the SDGs can do a great deal to advance
those development efforts, including the building of
peaceful, just and inclusive societies. To be effectively
implemented, the 17 Sustainable Development Goals
and 169 targets require harnessing a range of capacities,
robust resources and the sustained engagement of all
stakeholders. Partnerships are absolutely critical, and
we need all sectors to work together in innovative ways.
There should be no more business as usual, as Member
States made clear here in the Hall in September when
they agreed on the 2030 Agenda.
The Secretary-General noted in his remarks here
yesterday (see A/70/PV.76) that the agencies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations system are committed
to strengthening the coherence of their efforts in
support of Member States and partners in development.
Our UNDP country offices and United Nations country
teams have started working with partners at the national
and local levels on SDG implementation. Smart,
innovative approaches, on which this community has
much to offer, will be tremendously helpful to countries
trying to balance priorities as they address multiple and
complex development challenges. The WSIS community
is best positioned to lead the way in showing how
ICT can help achieve the 2030 Agenda, and with that
Agenda, we have an opportunity to truly transform our
world. UNDP looks forward to working closely with
everyone represented here to ensure smooth progress
on interlinked global agendas and priorities.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Also in accordance with the decision taken at
the 78th plenary meeting, I now give the floor to
Mr. Torbjörn Fredriksson, Chief of the Information and
Communications Technology Analysis Section of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
Mr. Fredriksson (United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development): I am honoured to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Secretary-General of the
2/14

16/12/2015

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD).
Ten years ago, at the conclusion of the World
Summit on the Information Society (WSIS), world
leaders set out a vision of a people-centred, inclusive
and development-oriented information society. Since
then, we have seen remarkable progress made in the
scope and reach of information and communication
technologies (ICT). Connectivity has improved
tremendously, and a wide range of new services and
applications has emerged that are influencing our
lives in many ways. As a result, today the scope for
ICT to contribute to sustainable development in all
its dimensions is much greater. Our concept of the
information society has consequently evolved, and we
stand on the verge of further rapid change as we move
into the era of big data and the Internet of Things.
Nevertheless, we are far from a world where
everyone, everywhere, regardless of status or
geography, can reap the benefits of ICT for development.
Approximately 4 billion people are not yet online, and
fewer still are benefiting from broadband access. Even
among those who are active online, the full potential of
the Internet is often not taken advantage of.
To make the information society people-centred
and inclusive, we must prioritize efforts to bridge
the digital divides that prevail between countries and
between rich and poor, men and women, younger and
older people, large and small enterprises and rural
and urban areas. Special attention must be given to
supporting the ability of least developed countries to
catch up. We also need to continue to ensure transparent
policy processes that are open to the participation of all
the relevant stakeholders.
To make the information society more developmentoriented, we must address the challenges of content and
capabilities as well as connectivity, and ensure that
ICT are fully harnessed in support of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs), which are rightly
emphasized in the draft outcome document (A/70/L.33)
to be adopted at this high-level meeting. UNCTAD
looks forward to working with our colleagues within
the United Nations Group on the Information Society,
and with other partners, to support the implementation
of WSIS outcomes and the SDGs. The joint statement
of the Chief Executives Board for Coordination on
the overall review of the implementation of the WSIS
outcomes is testimony to the strong commitment of the
15-43217

16/12/2015

A/70/PV.79

United Nations system as a whole to working together to
harness ICT for sustainable development. The lessons
learned over the past decade should help us further
improve our efforts to implement the WSIS outcomes
as we head towards the next milestone, in 2025.

and challenges will evolve that will require effective
responses from all the relevant stakeholders. It is by
working together that we stand the best chance of
achieving a people-centred, inclusive and developmentoriented information society.

A deeper understanding of the changes taking place
in our economies, societies and cultures is essential if
we are to maximize the opportunities and minimize
the challenges of the ICT-induced transformation of
economies and societies. Going forward, constructive
international cooperation will be even more vital to
addressing a host of emerging issues, from concerns
about cybercrime to questions of inclusiveness and
the fact that ICTs can magnify skill differences, with
potentially worrying effects on inequality.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
accordance with paragraph 3 of resolution 68/302 of
31 July 2014, we shall now hear from stakeholders of
the World Summit on the Information Society.

The Commission on Science and Technology
for Development, for which UNCTAD serves as
secretariat, has played a central role in analysing
the impact of the information society and following
up on the implementation of the WSIS outcomes. Its
10-year review of WSIS and comprehensive report
on implementing WSIS outcomes have served as a
valuable resource for the General Assembly’s overall
review. UNCTAD is fully committed to continuing its
support for the Commission’s work.
Rapid technological developments call for clear
targets and tools for measurement, both for WSIS
outcomes and on how they can support the SDGs. The
pioneering work of the Partnership on Measuring ICT
for Development, of which UNCTAD is a founding
member, has laid the groundwork. However, the work
has only just begun. We must build on that groundwork
to ensure that policymakers are equipped to measure
progress and assess the impact of the relevant policies
in support of the WSIS targets and the SDGs. The past
decade has demonstrated the value of cooperation
and dialogue among Governments, international
organizations, the private sector, the technical
community and civil society. The ability of diverse
stakeholders to work together in the common interest of
a people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented
information society has been inspiring. UNCTAD
shares the desire and determination to build on that
success.
We have come a long way since Tunis. Together,
we have seen great changes and achieved significant
progress. At the same time, new challenges have
emerged. In the next decade, still more opportunities

I give the floor to Mr. Parminder Jeet Singh,
Executive Director of IT for Change.
Mr. Singh (IT for Change): It is a great honour to
address this parliament of the world.
The Internet is fundamentally transforming our
world, producing changes that will be no less farreaching than those of the industrial revolution. The
question then arises as to whether the world today is
politically more mature than it was in that distant past
and therefore better able to guide this transformation
towards our common goals. More specifically, this
time around, can the ideals of equity, social justice,
human rights, democracy and sustainability be a part
of the intrinsic design of the social structures that
are emerging? Unfortunately, the early indications
in that regard are not too good. The post-millennial
period, during which the Internet began to underpin
most social systems, has also seen one of the fastestever increases in inequality all over the world, at a
time when the Internet is supposed to be a socially
egalitarian technology.
The Internet has been called the new nervous
system of our society. Data is variously referred to as
the new oil or the new currency. Today, just before I
came up here to speak, I read a report of the World
Economic Forum saying that data may become a new
ideology. Monopoly Internet platforms today mediate
crucial social activities, driven by algorithms serving
interests about whose nature and owners we know
nothing. Such vital elements of society cannot remain
ungoverned and left to unregulated market forces and
to the powerful.
But the decade that has passed since the World
Summit on the Information Society has regrettably
failed to provide an adequate governance response to
the many critical social, economic, political and cultural
issues associated with the Internet. As we move into the
next decade, I would like to appeal to this gathering to

15-432173/14

A/70/PV.79

address the urgent imperative that global governance of
the Internet represents. We can begin with three things.
First of all, we must give up the idea of Internet
exceptionalism, of seeing the Internet as somehow so
uniquely transnational, bottom-up, and private-sectorled that it cannot, and perhaps need not, be governed.
The Internet is no more transnational than climate
change, no more bottom-up than education, health and
livelihood practices, and no more private-sector-led
than are trade and intellectual property. All of those
areas have dedicated global governance mechanisms in
the United Nations system, and so should the Internet.
Next, the fully justified fear of possible State abuse
of the Internet must be addressed by putting robust
checks and balances into its governance mechanisms,
not by being in denial about the Internet’s myriad and
complex governance needs.
And thirdly, the so-called tension between
multilateralism and multi-stakeholderism must be
resolved through the test of democracy. The Internet
should indeed be served by evolutionary forms of
participatory governance, but the basics of democracy
do not change. It is the people alone, directly or through
their representatives, who can make public policy and
law. Neither business nor technical experts can claim
special, exalted roles in public policy decisions. Such
a trend, as sections of civil society have noted with
concern, is an unfortunate anti-democratic development
in Internet governance today.
The world urgently needs a well-defined democratic
mechanism for global governance of the Internet
that fully embraces the technical, social and political
opportunities of a new, networked world. Among
other things, we need such a mechanism as an anchor
point and meta-support agency for the governance of
the larger information-society changes that are taking
place across all sectors.
Left to itself, the digital network phenomenon will
undoubtedly be appropriated by the powerful and will
result in an even more unequal and unfair world, as the
early trends show. Our digital future depends on what
the United Nations does or does not do right now.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to Mr. Matthew Shears, Director of the
Global Internet Policy and Human Rights Project of the
Center for Democracy and Technology.
4/14

16/12/2015

Mr. Shears (Center for Democracy and Technology):
The Center for Democracy and Technology is a publicinterest advocacy organization devoted to promoting
fundamental rights and participatory processes in
Internet policy. We have been fully engaged in the 10year review of the implementation of the outcomes of the
World Society on the Information Society (WSIS), and
I can say that we are encouraged by the draft outcome
text (A/70/L.33). It is indeed an achievement, and the
co-facilitators and all the stakeholders who contributed
to the process deserve our thanks and congratulations.
There is a sense of optimism and direction. We
have a clear mission: realizing a knowledge society and
substantively contributing to achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). That is no small task, and
we are not going to be able to do it unless we work
together, innovate in terms of solutions, policies
and partnerships, and recognize the importance of
empowering individuals and communities so that they
too can contribute to achieving those goals.
Throughout the WSIS review there has been
resounding support for stakeholders working together.
The draft final text has captured the critical importance
of multi-stakeholder processes to the future of the
Internet and to the work we have to do related to the
SDGs.
That said, to build a knowledge society and
contribute to achieving the SDGs, we are going to have
to do more than talk about the value of multi-stakeholder
processes. We will have to live them, put them to work
and show how they can deliver, because we really do
not have any other choice. We cannot expect to build a
knowledge society or meet the SDG targets while stuck
in our respective stakeholder silos. We have no choice
other than to cooperate, collaborate, bring expertise,
skills and know-how together and address the very real
challenges through multi-stakeholder approaches. We
will be able to deliver on the promise of a knowledge
society and meet the SDG targets effectively only
if we do so together, crafting policies and delivering
solutions through processes that allow us to draw on the
expertise and contributions of all.
To achieve those goals by 2025 and 2030, the
community is going to have to be far more innovative
and ambitious in terms of solutions, policies, capacitybuilding, technologies and much more. We are going
to have to look at information and communications
technologies (ICT) and the Internet, and how they will
15-43217

16/12/2015

impact the SDGs, far more holistically. Yes, connectivity
is absolutely essential, but we also have to look at how
those who are most affected by development challenges
are equipped to address those challenges, locally and
nationally.
We must look at our policies and solutions and
ask whether they are the right ones for empowering
individuals and communities, creating opportunity and
jobs, spurring innovation and entrepreneurship. We
cannot harness the potential of ICT for development if
the policy environments do not encourage communities
and businesses to build networks, enhance skills and
create opportunity. And it is not just about technology.
At the end of the day, it is about ensuring that
individuals and communities have the tools and skills to
be able to contribute to their own social and economic
development.
Empowerment comes in different ways. It is not just
through connectivity and access. It is also through the
realization of one’s human rights and digital dignity.
There is excellent language on human rights in the draft
outcome text. In paragraph 41, it states that we have a
collective responsibility to work for the realization of
human rights and fundamental freedoms. But, much as
with the multi-stakeholder language, we are going to
have to do more than talk. What concrete measures are
we, the WSIS community, going to take to work towards
the realization of human rights and fundamental
freedoms and the recognition of the importance of
human rights to economic and social development?
Our work going forward is part of a bigger
tapestry and a greater ambition. In December 2014,
the Secretary-General issued a synthesis report on the
post-2015 agenda entitled “The road to dignity by 2030:
ending poverty, transforming all lives and protecting
the planet”. The very last words of that document read
as follows:
“we have an historic opportunity and duty to act,
boldly, vigorously and expeditiously, to achieve
a life of dignity for all, leaving no one behind.”
(A/69/700, para. 161)
I would ask us to consider that as our opportunity and
our responsibility.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to Ms. Deniz Duru Aydin, representative
of Access Now.

A/70/PV.79

Ms. Aydin (Access Now): I am speaking here today
as a 23-year-old Internet user from Istanbul, Turkey. I
have been told that I am the youngest person to address
this Hall in the past two days. My participation in the
information society started when I was 12, playing the
game Snake on my father’s mobile phone. Now I use
the free and open Internet on a daily basis to access
information, talk with my family and friends back
home and express my ideas. I am also proud to say that
I encrypt my e-mails.
I represent Access Now, an international
organization that defends and extends the digital rights
of users at risk around the world. When I was invited
to speak here, I asked Access Now’s global community
of Internet users to identify the biggest threats and
opportunities for the future of the Internet in the next
10 years. More than 1,000 people from over all over the
world have helped me to write this speech, so perhaps
this is the first crowd-sourced statement delivered at
the United Nations. Here is what we have to say.
Human rights must remain at the centre of the
development agenda for the Internet. As we take on
the important responsibility of bridging digital divides,
we must recognize that connectivity is not enough. We
have to measure progress through new benchmarks
for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and not
merely by cell phone subscriptions or bandwidth alone.
The Internet can empower the most vulnerable among
us to harness their potential. It is therefore inspiring to
see that today’s draft outcome document (A/70/L.33)
acknowledges the centrality of human rights to the
vision of the World Summit on the Information Society
(WSIS). And it is now the duty of the States assembled
in this Hall to realize that vision by protecting our
digital rights.
We must protect our privacy in the digital age. We
should end the practice of mass surveillance, because it
undermines the security of our communications, turns
citizens into suspects and lessens confidence in the
use of information and communications technologies
(ICT). As the draft outcome document notes, users
around the world should not be subjected to arbitrary
or unlawful interference with their privacy, and we all
agree with that.
A free and open Internet must be protected.
Net neutrality ensures end-to-end access to global
networks and provides a foundation for opportunity
and innovation. Citizens of the largest democracies

15-432175/14

A/70/PV.79

in the world are calling for net neutrality in public
consultations, sometimes submitting millions of
comments in support of a free and open Internet. It is
time to hear their voices and act on their call.
We must stop censorship and the blocking of content.
Barriers to participation in the information society
such as content filtering; shutting down networks; and
imprisoning lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
queer advocates, bloggers, human rights defenders and
climate activists should come to an end. Such violations
of rights directly obstruct the free flow of information
and knowledge. We want to acknowledge and stand in
solidarity with those who are detained, facing charges
or at risk as a result of exercising their basic rights.
We hope that the draft outcome document’s call for
the protection of journalists, media workers and civil
society space will help end the criminalization of
speech, both online and offline.
As a young Internet user, I congratulate everyone
involved in producing the draft outcome document. I
would also like to thank the 1,000 members of Access
Now’s global community who contributed to the writing
of this speech.
We hope that the future steps of the WSIS
process will become more inclusive, participatory and
transparent. We urge the General Assembly to include
more youth and civil society in the conversation, so that
we can continue to shape the future of the Internet and
ensure that our digital rights are defended and extended
for generations to come.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to Ms. Avri Doria, Researcher with
M17M.ORG.
Ms. Doria (M17M.ORG): I would like to thank
Member States for producing a draft outcome document
(A/70/L.33) that not only does no harm to the Internet
but offers opportunities for us to reinforce the global
Internet as a resource to be shared by all people.
Since I was young, I have had great love for the
United Nations in its role of bringing people together
to talk. Over the past decades, the multi-stakeholder
movement in Internet governance, as well as in other
areas, has contributed to participatory democracy within
international organizations and, in small measure,
within some intergovernmental organizations. I thank
the co-facilitators for having allowed a measure of
stakeholder participation and for giving us a peek into
6/14

16/12/2015

a largely opaque process. I thank those Governments
that have included stakeholder voices within their
delegations, allowing them to participate and to observe
the full process. When the time comes in 10 years to
review the work enabled by such outcomes, our hope
is that we will have a full multi-stakeholder process to
review — one that goes beyond giving us a peek behind
the curtain.
It is important to use the outcomes to create and
implement policies and practices that reinforce and
expand an open, people-centred Internet that serves
the achievement of the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). While the SDGs may not fully realize
the importance of information and communication
technologies and the Internet in their effort, those
involved in the process of the World Summit on the
Information Society are aware of what we can do to
help. It is up to us. I am heartened to see the focus
that was put on human rights in the draft outcome
docuemnt, at a time when so many organizations fear
implementing human rights policies and some Member
States violate them in their treatment of women,
indigenous populations and endangered populations. It
is good to see that when Member States come together,
they are still able to respect the importance of human
rights.
In dealing with human rights, I need to single out
two areas that need special attention: violence against
women — something that is already endemic in society
and that has found new expression on the Internet — and
the fact that the Internet is being used as a means to incite
violence against the gay community in many countries
around the world. When people talk about security on
the Internet, it is endangered populations that are of
great concern. Within their roles and responsibilities,
Governments and others must refrain from using the
Internet as a weapon against minorities.
It is good that the Internet Governance Forum
(IGF) has been renewed for at least 10 years. I am also
grateful that the barrier between enhanced cooperation,
as a goal, and the Internet Governance Forum as a
space for working on such goals, has been lessened
somewhat — perhaps a little. The IGF has already
been used for bilateral as well as multi-stakeholder
discussions. The IGF is part of the United Nations
system, and therefore can be used for multilateral
discussions on enhanced cooperation, as necessary.
While some decisions will continue remain in the hands
of Member States, I hope that, over time, Member States
15-43217

16/12/2015

will realize that inclusive and democratic stakeholder
participation, in both national and international
settings, is essential for developing public policy and
for implementing it.
In conclusion, I thank the United Nations for the
work that it has done to contribute to the continued
growth of an open, people-centred Internet. Now there
is much work for all of us to do together as participants
on an equal footing, despite our different roles and
responsibilities.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to Ms. Deborah Brown, Senior Project
Coordinator of the Association for Progressive
Communications.
Ms. Brown (Association for Progressive
Communications): It is an honour to be here today. I
speak on behalf of the Association for Progressive
Communications (APC), a global non-governmental
network with 70 members in more than 40 countries,
mostly from the global South. The APC has been
mobilizing the power of information and communications
technologies (ICT) for social justice and development
for the past 25 years and has participated in the World
Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) process
since its inception. We are pleased that the draft outcome
document (A/70/L.33) reaffirms the WSIS principles of
a people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented
information society.
We are particularly pleased about the emphasis on
human rights and gender equality. We would have liked
to have seen an explicit mention of economic, social
and cultural rights, but we believe that they are implicit
in the human rights frameworks mentioned in the draft
text. We strongly support the action plan to close the
digital gender gap launched yesterday by UN-Women
and the International Telecommunication Union and
their partners. But we must also remember that gender
justice cannot be achieved on the Internet alone. Social
values and practices that harm and marginalize women
exist everywhere, even in developed countries. For
women to feel safe and empowered on the Internet they
need more than access, they need respect, access to
justice and equality online and offline.
We hope that the draft outcome and the process
that produced it will serve to reinvigorate efforts
to create enabling policy environments to mobilize
ICT for development at all levels and encourage the

A/70/PV.79

collaboration and allocation of the resources needed to
bring about positive change.
We are pleased that the draft outcome document
links the WSIS process to the Sustainable Development
Goals. For the next WSIS review to provide meaningful
input into the review of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1), the integration of
the SDGs needs to be part of the follow-up and
implementation in both processes, and concrete steps
must be taken to ensure that such integration happens
at all levels, especially at the national level.
We very much value that the draft document
recognizes that multi-stakeholder and multilateral
approaches are not mutually exclusive. We believe
that that is precisely how the proposed working group
of the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development should approach its task. But cooperation
and multi-stakeholder approaches to governance are
needed not only at the global level but at the national
level as well. Governments need to put into place
processes that reflect the WSIS principles at that level
as well.
We appreciate the emphasis on the multi-stakeholder
approach in the draft document, but we would have
liked it to look at the private sector not just as a partner,
but as an actor with human rights responsibilities.
Some Internet business models pose a threat to human
rights and to the Internet as a public resource, and they
increase inequality. We are disappointed that the draft
outcome document failed to assert what was so clearly
stated in NETmundial — that the Internet is a global
resource and that it should be managed in the public
interest.
We urge Member States, which worked so hard to
reach agreement on the draft outcome document, to
uphold their human rights commitments set out within
it. That means ending mass surveillance both within and
between countries and releasing journalists, activists
and bloggers who have been persecuted as result of their
use of the Internet for human rights and social justice.
We call for the dropping of charges and release of Alaa
Abdel Fattah, Bassel Khartabil, Khadijah Ismayilova
and Hisham Almiraat, among too many others.
Finally, we must stop pitting human rights against
security. It is a false dichotomy. When talking about
security, we must ask — security for who? Approaches
to cybersecurity must be truly people-centred and
underpinned by human rights. Efforts to build trust,

15-432177/14

A/70/PV.79

security and confidence in the use of ICT can be done
only through open, inclusive and transparent processes.
It is only once users have trust in the technology that
they are using that they will feel secure.
Today, while we mark the conclusion of the
WSIS+10 review, it should not be seen as end. All
stakeholders must renew their efforts to build a free and
open Internet. If not, we are going to lose it.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to Ms. Kathryn Brown, President of the
Internet Society.
Ms. Brown (Internet Society): On behalf of the
Internet Society, an organization of 80,000 members,
145 organizations and 112 volunteer chapters in 92
countries dedicated to an open, globally connected
Internet, I congratulate the General Assembly on the
successful conclusion of the review of the World Summit
on the Information Society 10 years on (WSIS+10).
The Internet Society evolved from the belief of
our founder, Vint Cerf, that a society would emerge
from the idea of the Internet. Today, we see that not
only has an information society emerged, but also that
the Internet has woven itself into the very fabric of
our whole society and is now a critical part of how we
connect, communicate, create and collaborate.
We are encouraged by the positive outcome of the
WSIS+10 review, resulting from years of cooperation
and shared dialogue. The draft final outcome document
(A/70/L.33) is an endorsement of the agreement that we
all made 10 years ago to allow the Internet to grow and
flourish through bottom-up, distributed, collaborative
processes. We enthusiastically support the unequivocal
recommitment to the multi-stakeholder model, first
adopted in Tunis, the renewal of the mandate of the
Internet Governance Forum and the central focus on
creating a digital enabling environment for achieving
the Sustainable Development Goals. Moreover, the
Internet Society has continually called for a sharper
focus on development and human rights in order to
build a people-centred information society. WSIS has
delivered by putting the building blocks into place to
continue to champion those two crucial imperatives.
Importantly, the co-facilitators have shone a light on
the value of the collaborative, multi-stakeholder model
by striving to be as open, transparent and inclusive
as the United Nations process would allow. By their
actions they have acknowledged that there is only one
8/14

16/12/2015

way to build the Internet future, and that is by working
together.
I would like to thank those who have made such
an agreement possible. I thank the Secretary-General,
the President of the General Assembly and our two
excellent co-facilitators. But most of all, I thank all of
those stakeholders who contributed with their passion,
ideas and advocacy to this positive outcome.
We know that the draft outcome document reflects
a series of compromises — but we have a concern, and
it is not an insignificant one. In our view, the draft
outcome falls short by failing to fully recognize the
transnational nature of the Internet as a borderless
network of networks, comprised of millions of
individual networks that connect around the globe. It
seeks to apply national solutions to global problems,
particularly those related to safety and security. That
shortfall is compounded by an unfortunate misbelief
by some that cooperation among Governments alone is
sufficient to solve issues that require the expertise and
commitment of all of us.
Our able and perceptive co-facilitator from
the United Arab Emirates asked the opening panel
yesterday how we could improve United Nations
processes, which have historically been multilateral, to
better address the governance issues of the Internet. By
nature, such issues are multi-stakeholder, transnational
and distributed. We agree that further progress must
be made to fully embrace a changing digital world that
knows no boundaries, has no borders and has no single
decision-maker.
As more people — and things — come online,
many challenges, known and unknown, lie ahead.
Government-centric processes are only one of the many
ways that solutions can be crafted and implemented.
Solving twenty-first century problems will require
the collaboration of stakeholders through twenty-first
century mechanisms. We at the Internet Society stand
ready to join with everyone in this Hall, and with all
stakeholders around the world, to reach a common
vision of an open, global, trusted Internet for everyone,
everywhere. Once again, I thank the Assembly for its
dedication to a better world.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the Vice-President of the Internet
Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers.
15-43217

16/12/2015

Mr. Markovski (Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers): I am honoured and delighted to
make a statement on behalf of the Internet Corporation
for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) on what
is an important and historic discussion of the World
Summit on the Information Society (WSIS)+10 review.
I would like to thank the President of the General
Assembly, the co-facilitators — the Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates, Mrs. Lana
Zaki Nusseibeh, and the Permanent Representative of
Latvia, Mr. Jānis Mažeiks — their Permaent Missions
to the United Nations and their staff, United Nations
agencies and all stakeholders, many of whom are here
today, for the excellent preparatory work that has
allowed us to reach this important stage. It has been
a supremely collaborative effort. I would especially
like to thank the President of the General Assembly,
the co-facilitators and the Department of Economic
and Social Affairs and its staff for making the process
as open as possible within the framework of the
United Nations and for providing all stakeholders with
opportunities to send comments and participate in the
discussions.
ICANN and its community have been engaged
in WSIS since the first Summit, in 2003 and, more
recently, in the review preparation process, working
with other stakeholders at events organized by
UNESCO, the International Telecommunication
Union, the Commission on Science and Technology
for Development of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development and the Internet Governance
Forum. We are glad that the draft WSIS+10 outcome
document (A/70/L.33) builds on the foundations of
the Tunis Agenda, while also addressing a number
of different and important new issues. As the draft
outcome document recognizes, we all face many
challenges. But considerable positive progress has been
made since 2005. Our ICANN community hopes to
have contributed to bridging the digital divide — for
example, by increasing Internet multilingualism through
internationalized domain names, a programme on
which we have been working in cooperation with our
global community and UNESCO.
We are also pleased that the draft outcome document
extends the mandate of the Internet Governance Forum
for another 10 years. That is very important for this
unique bottom-up dialogue, which is now taking
place at the regional and international levels as well.
I also want to take this opportunity to recognize the

A/70/PV.79

broader Internet community, whether here in New York
for today’s meeting or elsewhere, for its continuous
engagement in the WSIS review process.
ICANN is happy to have been part of such a robust
and vital technical community, including the Internet
Society, Regional Internet Registries and others, whose
work has been recognized and reflected in the draft
outcome document. The NETmundial Conference,
held in April last year, showed us all that by working
together we can address issues of substance and mutual
concern. I would like to thank Brazil for that. That must
be our challenge for the future as we continue to work
for the common good.
Let me finish by justifying the word “historic”
when describing today’s General Assembly meeting,
as we should not use that word lightly here at the
United Nations. We are at a turning point. We
have the opportunity to collectively make a real
difference with the adoption of the 2030 Sustainable
Development Agenda (resolution 70/1), the successful
and significant agreement in Paris on climate change
and now with this draft agreement to adress the use of
information and communications technologies for the
common good. Fadi Chehadé, our President and Chief
Executive Officer, said yesterday that we must grasp
this opportunity to harness the goodwill and positive
spirit shown during the negotiations and discussions
over the past few weeks to tackle the challenges we all
face. For its part, ICANN is committed to working with
all stakeholders, including the United Nations and the
Permanent Missions to the United Nations, in a truly
multi-stakeholder and inclusive manner in order to
make sure the Internet continues to develop as a global
facility that is single, secure, stable and resilient for the
good of all people.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the Vice-President for Public Affairs
of the Telenor Group.
Mr. Søndergaard (Telenor Group): First, let me
congratulate members on the World Summit on the
Information Society 10-year review draft outcome
document (A/70/L.33), putting in place ambitious goals
and frameworks on how to govern and ensure universal
access to the Internet.
An urgent priority for us all must be to address
the growing broadband connectivity gap. Studies show
that the poor, the rural, the illiterate and, regrettably,
women are those least likely to be online. This is of

15-432179/14

A/70/PV.79

concern because the opportunity lost through not being
connected has never been greater, and it is growing.
Being connected means being included. Today, mobile
connectivity is within reach of almost everyone. The
next challenge is to make the Internet accessible to
everyone.
Telenor’s contribution is our ambition to have
200 million active Internet users by 2017. At Telenor,
we have seen the benefits of mobile and Internet
connectivity at first hand. Look at Myanmar. When
Telenor launched service in Yangon, we signed up
514,000 new customers in one day. Now, after a year of
operations we have 12 million customers. In a country
that has been cut off from the outside world for more
than 60 years, over 50 per cent of the population now
use their mobile phones to access the Internet regularly.
In Pakistan, we are banking the unbanked through
Easypaisa. When we launched in 2009, fewer than 1 in
10 Pakistanis had access to a bank account, but 60 per
cent had a mobile subscription. Today we conduct more
than $4 billion in transactions every year.
Telenor is a proud supporter of the Sustainable
Development Goals. In our markets, we see how
mobile connectivity is an enabler for people,
reducing inequalities and securing inclusion. Mobile
connectivity fosters economic growth, better health,
quality education and better protection of our planet.
Achieving these ambitious goals will require joint
effort from Governments, civil society, international
organizations and industry. It will also require massive
and continuous investements. To help us make those
investments, I would like to stress the following.
Governments must provide more certainty for
investors. Frameworks and policies should be put in
place that are future-oriented, open and transparent.
Governments must not put up barriers to mobile
connectivity. Taxes and fees can make up a significant
portion of the cost of owning and using a mobile device.
Governments must respect freedom of speech, access
to information and a democratic dialogue. Far too often
we have seen efforts to block services or clamp down
on content. Finally, Governments must maintain an
equal approach to all operators, irrespective of whether
the company is public or private, foreign or national.
We are pleased to have the opportunity to be part of
this event, as we seek a common goal to empower the
many, not just a few.
10/14

16/12/2015

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
now give the floor to the Secretary General of the
International Chamber of Commerce.
Mr. Danilovich (International Chamber of
Commerce): I am John Danilovich, Secretary General
of the International Chamber of Commerce, the world’s
largest and most representative business organization,
with over 6.5 million members in some 130 countries.
In September, I spoke in this building to
underscore the global business community’s strong
and unequivocal commitment to the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). It is clear that the decisions
taken by Governments as part of the review of the World
Summit on the Information Society (WSIS) will have a
significant bearing on the success of these new global
Goals. I am grateful for the opportunity to set out the
business community’s vision for outcomes of the WSIS
review that will help us all to deliver on the potential
and promise of the SDGs.
Information and communication technologies
(ICT) are clearly central to each of the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals. Simply put, if we want people
to find employment and to feed, heal and educate
themselves, then we need to ensure that they can benefit
from the Internet, and that they are able not just to use
but also to create related technologies and services that
are relevant to themselves, their communities and their
countries.
Despite the significant advances in the last 10
years, more needs to be done to ensure that everyone
has access to the Internet so that all people can be
empowered to transform their lives and their economies.
The challenge of connecting the world will require us
to better understand persistent barriers and to focus
actions on overcoming them in the years ahead. The
emphasis placed by the draft WSIS outcomes on
briding the variety of digitial divides, including the
gender divide, in many countries and regions reflects
the importance of this to all of us. In addressing these
issues, we urge everyone present to recognize that the
engagement of business, with its own unique voice,
will be vital to connect, unleash and leverage the full
potential of technology to achieve our common goals
in the development of vibrant digital economies and
to have inclusive information societies that deliver
benefits to all.
Connecting the world is a vital first step, but we
also need to take common action to build a secure and
15-43217

16/12/2015

trustworthy Internet. As business, we fully recognize
that a global architecture of cybersecurity needs to be
promoted, further developed and better implemented,
in cooperation with all stakeholders and international
expert bodies. We encourage Governments to note
the growing number of multi-stakeholder initiatives
dedicated to cybersecurity capacity-building at the
local, the national, the regional and the global levels
and their significant potential to enable a new global
culture of cybersecurity.
Finally, we commend the outcome of this review
for reaffirming the importance of cooperative and
collective action in managing the global governance
of the Internet. We applaud the fact that the review
recognizes that it is crucial that the future of the
Internet be shaped through an open, inclusive and truly
multi-stakeholder process. The Internet Governance
Forum (IGF) has become a unique means for identifying
issues and solutions relevant across stakeholders and
economies, with a special focus on those delivering
on developing-world concerns through a collaborative
approach on an equal footing and in an unfettered
and open environment. We therefore fully support the
proposed renewal of the IGF mandate for 10 years.
Business remains engaged in implementing
improvements to the IGF to build on its important
strengths and to enhance the community’s ability
to continue addressing complex problems and the
challenges of the future. In particular, we strongly
support the call to increase participation of business
representatives from developing countries, and
we encourage the International Monetary Fund’s
Multistakeholder Advisory Group to prioritize working
collectively on proposals for addressing this in 2016,
building and strengthening links on existing national
and regional IGF initiatives and enabling the sharing
of information globally on the practices that have
successfully addressed these challenges.
In conclusion, we strongly encourage any future
review of the implementation of the WSIS outcomes to
maintain the important principles of an open, inclusive,
multi-stakeholder Internet, and we commend the
decision to align with the review of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1). We
stress that all reviews of WSIS should be undertaken
in an open and fully inclusive manner, with all
stakeholders participating. To support this, we request
the Secretary-General and international organizations
with a role in WSIS to intensify their efforts to develop

A/70/PV.79

effective mechanisms for the full participation of
non-governmental stakeholders to more fully integrate
their activities into development frameworks and
processes.
The Internet, underpinned by earlier Summit
decisions, has already had a transformational affect on
our societies. This review can provide a footing that
will enable us to work collaboratively to help deliver a
brighter and more prosperous future for all by 2030. We
urge the General Assembly to seize the opportunity in a
true spirit of cooperation at the very heart of WSIS and
the Sustainable Development Goals.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
now give the floor to the Chief Executive Officer of
Telefónica Internacional USA.
Mr. Timmermans (Telefónica Internacional USA)
(spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for me to address
the Assembly today. I speak on behalf of Telefónica,
which is a digital telecommunications company and
broadband provider in Europe and Latin America.
We have been involved in the World Summit on the
Information Society (WSIS) process since its beginning,
and we very highly value the efforts made by the United
Nations and its Member States to strengthen an open
and inclusive process.
All our societies, including the most disadvantaged,
have changed for the better thanks to the Internet and
the new digital economy. However, no one can be left
behind in this new industrial revolution. I think I can
say that all private companies fully agree that we must
connect everyone to the Internet. To achieve that goal,
public-private collaboration is essential, as is some
private sector investment that will make it possible to
extend and improve Internet connectivity.
To provide an idea of ​​the scope of this endeavour,
Telefónica alone, just in Latin America, has invested
€120 billion over the past 25 years to improve Internet
connectivity. Those efforts must be supported by
national Governments, whose public policies must
attract private investment. That includes everything
from spectrum policies to assistance with the rollout
of networks.
Secondly, it is essential that we keep the Internet
open. Open standards and interface established an
Internet that everyone could connect to. It is essential
that the open nature of the Internet be maintained, now

15-4321711/14

A/70/PV.79

that conventional computers and browsers are being
replaced by smartphones and applications.
Finally, Internet users must maintain the confidence
that enables them to make their lives digital realities.
The Internet must be secure and there must be adequate
protection of the privacy of its users. Those objectives
can be achieved only through the cooperation of all
stakeholders. That is why it is fitting that the mandate
of the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) be extended
for another 10 years. There is no other forum that
can match the IGF in its diversity, openness and the
inclusiveness of its debates.
The Internet as we know it today exists thanks to
the enthusiasm and participation of all parties, to the
investments of many private companies and to the
energy and dedication of many talented people. We
must not forget that this is the best foundation on which
to base our work for the future.
Mr. Mende Omalanga (Democratic Republic of
the Congo) (spoke in French): Please excuse our late
arrivial to this discussion.
At the outset, I would like to express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General and the entire international
community for having accorded this importance to
issues related to information and the progress of new
and traditional information and communications
technologies.
We are convinced that these technologies can be a
true accelerator for development because they have the
advantage of developing integrative global citizenship
and facilitating democratic governance in all our
countries, specifically due to a participatory approach
to governance in various aspects of public action. They
play a major role in the competitiveness of businesses
and the effectiveness of administrations and public
services, as well as health, education and security
services. They also constitute a privileged space for
the production and distribution of goods and materials,
such as culture, in a country like ours, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The advent of the Internet and
especially the Web as a means for mass communication
and the success of social networks mean that these
technologies have an important social dimension and
a major impact on the functioning of our societies, in
particular of our young countries.
The growth of products stemming from the
Internet, in areas that were previously separate and
12/14

16/12/2015

now overlap, has created a host of innovative services.
That evolution accelerates humankind’s progress from
a global perspective, but, from another perspective,
it brings with it some inconveniences to which we,
as decision-makers, cannot turn a blind eye. They
are problems we encounter in everyday life in the
spaces we navigate through in social networks and
instant messaging, which often harbour traps such
as multiple user names and passwords, cyberfraud,
attacks on private life, violent content, cybercrime
and disinformation. Many colleagues spoke of that
yesterday, according to information provided to us. A
leader of a country recalled in this very Hall that we
must avoid giving a blank check to those who produce
those tools when they refuse to collaborate with State
authorities seeking more security for their citizens. It
is important that we, as decision-makers, can guard
against such excesses.
This illustrates the need for a collective and
objective approach, based on solidarity, to preventing
those anti-social actions that one can see in the Internet
sphere. We still remember the terrorist acts that
destabilized certain countries, especially in Europe and
Africa and even here in the United States. In that regard,
my country, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
takes this opportunity to call for joining efforts by our
respective countries, Governments and representatives
of civil society, because that action must be coordinated.
It is possible to succeed if we act together, but if we act
alone success is simply an illusion.
To sum up, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1) in the specific framework
of the global information society will be able to achieve
its goals only if it takes into account all the challenges
attached to it. In that regard, my Government would
like to urge everyone to work with both tools: on the one
hand, the implementation of the progress made possible
by the opportunities offered by the new information and
communication technologies and, on the other hand, the
certainty that any abuse of it will be dealt with by State
authorities and civil society no matter at what level it
occurs. It is only in that way that humankind will be
able to benefit as much as possible in its search for a
comprehensive and shared development, which is made
possible to us by the Internet.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker inr the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly on the overall review of the
15-43217

16/12/2015

implementation of the outcomes of the World Summit
on the Information Society, under agenda item 17.
The Assembly will now proceed to consider draft
resolution A/70/L.33.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Zhang Saijin (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): In connection
with draft resolution A/70/L.33, entitled “Outcome
document of the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on the overall review of the implementation
of the outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society”, I wish to put on record the following statement
of financial implications on behalf of the SecretaryGeneral, in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Paragraph 65 and 71 of the outcome document
contained in draft resolution A/70/L.33 read as follows:
“65. We note, however, the divergent views
held by Member States with respect to the process
towards implementation of enhanced cooperation
as envisioned in the Tunis Agenda. We call for
continued dialogue and work on the implementation
of enhanced cooperation. We accordingly request
the Chair of the Commission on Science and
Technology for Development, through the Economic
and Social Council, to establish a working group
to develop recommendations on how to further
implement enhanced cooperation as envisioned in
the Tunis Agenda, taking into consideration the
work that has been done on this matter thus far. The
group, which shall be constituted no later than July
2016, will decide at the outset on its methods of
work, including modalities, and will ensure the full
involvement of all relevant stakeholders, taking
into account all their diverse views and expertise.
The group will submit a report to the Commission
on Science and Technology for Development at
its twenty-first session for inclusion in the annual
report of the Commission to the Council. The report
will also serve as an input to the regular reporting
of the Secretary-General on implementation of the
outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society.”
“71. We recognize that, in the preparation
of this review, a number of challenges and
opportunities have been identified, requiring

A/70/PV.79

longer-term consultations to determine appropriate
responses, and that the pace of the development
of information and communications technologies
necessitates higher-level consideration of progress
achieved and future action. We accordingly request
the General Assembly to hold a high-level meeting
on the overall review of the implementation
of the outcomes of the World Summit on the
Information Society in 2025, involving the input
and participation of all stakeholders, including in
the preparatory process, to take stock of progress
on the outcomes of the World Summit on the
Information Society and identify both areas of
continued focus and challenges. We recommend
that the outcome of the high-level meeting be an
input into the review process for the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development.”
Pursuant to the request contained in paragraph
65 of the draft outcome document, the Chair of
the Commission of Science and Technology for
Development is requested through the Economic
and Social Council to establish a working group to
develop recommendations on how to further implement
enhanced cooperation as envisaged by the Tunis Agenda,
taking into consideration the work that has been done
on this matter so far by the previous working group on
enhanced cooperation. Furthermore, the Commission
on Science and Technology for Development, at its
nineteenth session in May 2016, will prepare the draft
resolution on the World Summit on the Information
Society follow-up that will contain the request of the
Chair to establish the aforementioned working group.
The draft resolution will be considered by the
Economic and Social Council in its July 2016 session.
Subsequently, the working group on enhanced
cooperation, which shall be constituted no later
than July 2016, will decide on its methods of work,
including modalities and so forth, and the working
group on enhanced cooperation will submit a report
to the Commission on Science and Technology for
Development at its twenty-first session in 2018.
Accordingly, at this time, there are no financial
implications with regard to paragraph 65. However,
should the Economic and Social Council endorse the
request of the Chair of the Commission on Science and
Technology for Development to establish the working
group in its July 2016 session, the Secretariat will at
that time, and in line with the established procedure
and rule 53 of the rules and procedures of the Economic

15-4321713/14

A/70/PV.79

and Social Council, inform the Council of any financial
implications.
Pursuant to paragraph 71, all issues related to a
high-level plenary meeting, including the date, format,
organization and scope, on the overall review of the
implementation of the World Summit on the Information
Society outcomes in 2025 are yet to be determined.
Accordingly, in the absence of the modalities for the
meetings, it is not possible at the present time to establish
the potential cost implications of the requirements for
meetings and documentation. Upon the decision on the
modalities, format and organization of the meeting,
the Secretary-General would submit the relevant costs
of such requirements, in accordance with rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
Furthermore, the date of the meeting will have to be
determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft resolution A/70/L.33
would not give rise to any financial implications under
the programme budget.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): There
are no requests to speak in explanation of vote. The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/70/L.33, entitled “Outcome document of the high-

14/14

16/12/2015

level meeting of the General Assembly on the overall
review of the implementation of the outcomes of the
World Summit on the Information Society”. May I take
it that the Assembly wishes to adopt it?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 70/125).

A/70/L.33

was

adopted

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to express my sincere thanks to Ambassador
Jānis Mažeiks, Permanent Representative of Latvia,
and Ambassadir Lana Zaki Nusseibeh, Permanent
Representative of the United Arab Emirates, who
so ably and patiently conducted the discussions and
complex negotiations in the informal consultations on
resolution 70/125, which we have just adopted. I am
sure the members of the Assembly join me in extending
to them our sincere appreciation.
The High-level Meeting of the General Assembly
on the overall review of the implementation of the
outcomes of the World Summit on the Information
Society is now concluded.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 17.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

15-43217
