S/PV.7129

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7129th meeting

Friday, 7 March 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Asselborn/Ms. Lucas/Mr. Maes/Mr. Flies . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Timerman
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Germanas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Gasana
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Children and armed conflict
Letter dated 1 March 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2014/144)

14-25583 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1425583*

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Children and armed conflict
Letter dated 1 March 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Luxembourg
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2014/144)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the following
countries to participate in this meeting: Armenia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Croatia, Cyprus,
the Czech Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Malaysia, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, Myanmar, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Norway, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Uganda and Uruguay.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict; Mr. Anthony
Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF; and Mr. Alhaji
Babah Sawaneh.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2014/149, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Canada, Chad, Chile, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,

2/79

07/03/2014

I also wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2014/144, which contains a letter dated
1 March 2014 from the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, and I now give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank Foreign Minister
Jean Asselborn of Luxembourg for organizing this
important thematic debate.
I have just returned from Sierra Leone. That
country is an important case study in the value of our
engagement. Under the guidance of the Security Council,
with the solidarity of the international community and
the strong engagement of the Sierra Leonean people,
we are seeing a remarkable transformation.
The Council took a series of wise and timely
decisions to deploy successive peacekeeping and
political operations, along with support for longterm development. The United Nations also helped
the Government to set up the Special Court for Sierra
Leone, which helped the country and contributed to
international jurisprudence. The Special Court and our
peacekeeping and political missions have closed, but the
United Nations country team will continue to support
Sierra Leone on the road to peace and development.
Not long ago, Sierra Leone was engulfed in war and
synonymous with the tragic plight of children in armed
conflict. As the former child soldier Ishmael Beah said,
“Somebody being shot in front of you, or you
yourself shooting somebody, became just like
drinking a glass of water. Children who refused to
fight, kill or showed any weakness were ruthlessly
dealt with. Emotions weren’t allowed.”
We have another successful young man, Mr. Alhaji
Babah Sawaneh, with us today. The first former child
soldier to address the Security Council (see S/PV.4422)
is back to address us today.

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

Those transformative examples attest to the fact
that, given a chance, former child soldiers can rebuild
their lives and help to build peace in their countries.
(spoke in French)
Fifteen years have passed since the Security
Council adopted resolution 1261 (1999), its first
thematic resolution on the plight of children in armed
conflict. By means of that resolution, the international
community sent a clear signal: the suffering of children
in armed conflict is unacceptable, whether they be child
soldiers, sex slaves, victims in schools and hospitals or
affected in any way. Such attacks violate the most basic
human rights. They also threaten the achievement of
lasting peace and development.
I thank the Security Council for having taken
decisive action in establishing a solid framework to help
children affected by armed conflict. The Council has
developed practical tools to prevent serious violations
against children, combat them and put an end to them.
The monitoring and reporting mechanism shows how
tragic the situation of children who are victims of
armed conflict is.
The special teams working at the country level
and supported by United Nations bodies promote
dialogue with the parties to conflict, which is essential.
Those teams are monitoring the situation closely and
contribute to implementing action plans.
It is also important that child protection be
an integral part of the activities of peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, which means
that members of those contingents must be trained
prior to deployment and that the necessary resources be
systematically established.
Yesterday, at the launch of the campaign “Children,
not soldiers”, which is supported by my Special
Representative, UNICEF and other partners, the
Member States concerned renewed their commitment
to the action plan. I welcome that initiative. I ask the
international community to provide assistance to those
States and make that a priority. The United Nations
system will seek to mobilize other non-State actors to
put an end to the recruitment of children.
(spoke in English)
All children deserve and are entitled to protection,
not exploitation. They belong in school, not armies and

S/PV.7129

fighting groups. Children should be armed with pens
and textbooks, not guns and grenades.
That brings me to the question of schools and
hospitals. Those should be places where children
can learn and receive care in safety. That is why our
peacekeeping policy prevents any military use of
schools by peacekeepers. In too many war zones around
the world, schools and hospitals have been targeted or
caught in the cross-fire. Those are egregious violations
of the rights of the child to education, health and life.
In Syria today, some 40 per cent of public hospitals
have stopped functioning. Many more are damaged. In
some areas, more than half the doctors have left. More
than 2.25 million children are out of school. One in
five schools has been damaged or occupied by families
made homeless by the conflict.
I am heartened that the draft resolution to be
adopted by the Council today seeks to encourage the
development of voluntary guidelines to prevent the
military use of schools in conflict areas. I urge Member
States to commit to greater protection for those essential
facilities in conflict zones by all parties.
Let us also intensify efforts to ensure that
perpetrators of grave violations against children are
brought to justice. That includes assisting affected
States to hold perpetrators accountable.
The draft resolution before the Council provides
valuable new impetus to the Council’s work to protect
children in armed conflict. I count on the Council to
use all the tools at its disposal to protect children on the
front lines of conflict and to prevent a new generation
from having to endure the same privations. Let our
children be children — safe and secure, living lives of
dignity and opportunity.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Zerrougui.
Ms. Zerrougui: Let me start by thanking the
delegation of Luxembourg for hosting this open debate
during its presidency and for its invaluable work as
Chair of the Security Council Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
This open debate comes at a crucial time when
there is an upsurge in conflict in many places around
the world. Roughly two months have passed in the year

14-255833/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

2014. Taking stock of what this year has brought for
children so far yields a dire conclusion.
In South Sudan, a new nation’s horizon darkened
in December 2013. Even today we have not yet grasped
the extent of the grave violations against children
committed in the renewed violence. Not only have tens
of thousands of children been displaced, deprived of
education and separated from their families and social
networks, they have also recruited, used in horrific
fighting, maimed or killed or forced to kill and maim.
Initial reports I have received on raids on hospitals,
including summary executions of the sick and old,
leave me without words. When we think of South
Sudan, we have to bear in mind that more than half
of the population are children. A whole generation that
should be entrusted with building a new nation is about
to be deprived of a fair chance to do so.
As the Security Council was briefed in-depth
yesterday (see S/PV.7128), the situation in the Central
African Republic remains tragic. Its impact on children
continues to be devastating. Resources are too limited
to address the challenge of providing assistance and
protection to thousands of children, including those
recruited and used by parties to the conflict. I hope that
the Security Council will address this situation with a
robust response providing the actors on the ground with
the necessary means and capacity.
In Syria, despite all the efforts of various actors,
armed violation has intensified. The killing and
maiming of children and attacks on schools and
hospitals continue unabated. Children are recruited and
used by various armed groups, and are often lured into
battle, where they are among the first to die. Reports
of organized sexual violence as a tactic of humiliation
persist. While humanitarian access in limited areas is a
glimmer of hope in the darkest of times, the hardships
of children have barely improved. We cannot afford a
lost generation in Syria.
These first two months of 2014 have revealed once
again that we must not rely on hope when children
suffering in armed conflict are calling upon us to be
heard. Only action and concrete measures will ultimately
make a difference; only action and concrete measures
will allow us to look back at 2014 and conclude that we,
together, had made a difference for children this year.
Since the creation of my mandate by the General
Assembly, we have seen such concrete action. The
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict has

4/79

07/03/2014

adopted a number of conclusions over the past year,
urging parties to conflict to end and prevent grave
violations and calling for country-specific action. The
Working Group has also visited Myanmar to assess
the situation and advocate for the plight of children.
The Security Council has continued to mainstream the
children and armed conflict issue into both thematic
and country-specific agendas, addressing new trends
when and where they arise with new and innovative
measures. I hope that the Council will do so again if the
draft resolution before it is adopted.
I dearly welcome the endorsement of the “Children,
not soldiers” campaign. It was before the Council that
I first expressed my intent to work towards child-free
Government armed forces by the end of 2016. It is my
firm belief that this goal is an achievable one. Eight
national Government forces remain on the SecretaryGeneral’s list for this violation. Yesterday, I had the
honour to welcome representatives from each of these
Governments at the launch event for the “Children, not
soldiers” campaign. The commitment shown by the
Member States concerned is a powerful message to the
international community and parties to conflict — State
and non-State actors alike — all over the world. It is
time to make child soldiers history. I want to stress here
that the “Children, not soldiers” campaign is not only a
joint effort of my Office and UNICEF; it must be a joint
effort of all of us who have gathered here today.
We have already begun to establish road maps to
expedite the implementation of action plans with parties
listed. Road maps are set up jointly with the concerned
Government to tackle priority issues and are based on a
joint assessment of achievements made and existing gaps
in the implementation of agreed action plans. In Chad,
the road map was agreed last year and is the basis for
action taken. In Afghanistan, the road map has already
been drafted jointly with Government representatives.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, too, we are
close to the establishment of such a document. The
sustained implementation of commitments agreed upon
by the signatories to the action plan will ultimately lead
to the better protection of children and the delisting of
the concerned party from the annexes of the SecretaryGeneral’s annual report.
In the course of the campaign, we have been able to
benefit from the expertise of a variety of Governments,
United
Nations
agencies,
non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), and child protection experts,
giving us a better understanding of challenges and

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

solutions alike. This enables us to even better protect
children in unique cultural, economic, political and
social contexts.
New partnerships and the strengthening of existing
ones also lie at the heart of the implementation of
resolution 1998 (2011). By taking the lead with UNICEF
in drafting a guidance on how to monitor and report
attacks on schools and hospitals, threats and attacks
against education and health-care-related personnel,
and the military use of schools, we have reached out
to specialized United Nations agencies and NGOs that
in turn will adopt the children and armed conflict
agenda in their own programmes and projects. New
stakeholders are thereby won for our cause, and we
learn to understand how our cause can strengthen theirs.
The guidance on the implementation of resolution 1998
(2011), which we intend to launch in the coming weeks,
will mark another important step forward.
I am heartened by the fact that the Security Council
has strengthened the language on the military use of
schools in today’s draft resolution. As members know,
military use puts schools and school children in danger.
We would like to see schools not become potential
battlefields. Seeking ways to better prevent attacks on
schools calls for efforts to incrementally prevent their
military use by parties to conflict.
My Office and all other child protection actors at
the United Nations Headquarters level — including
UNICEF, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and the Department of Political Affairs — will continue
to stand ready and support the task forces with all
means possible. However, it is impossible to monitor
and report on violations against children in conflict
and to address such violations appropriately without the
necessary capacity on the ground. Almost weekly, task
force members approach my Office and plead for the
continued support in advocacy for enhanced capacity
in child protection. We must be able to respond to their
pleas with adequate resources and innovative models
drawing from past experiences.
It is also important to mainstream child protection
into peacekeeping and special political missions
through the predeployment training of troops. I cannot
stress enough in this regard the importance of knowing
that the Security Council stands behind this. We owe
it to the children affected by armed conflict and to the
dedicated men and women putting their own lives at
risk to ensure that the voices of these children reach
our ears.

S/PV.7129

I began my statement with a grim picture in
three situations of conflcit. But children face similar
atrocitiets in many other conflicts. We must not leave
them in despair. Today we know that measures can be
taken successfully to end and prevent grave violations
against children in armed conflict. Dialogue with
non-State actors, engagement with Governments,
capactiy-building on all levels and the mainstreaming
of our agenda into all aspects of peace and security
continue. Those activities would be unthinkable without
the framework developed by the Security Council in
the past years. Hundreds of thousands of children have
their eyes upon the Council as it continues to lead the
way in protecting children from armed conflict.
The President (spoke in
Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing.

French):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Lake.
Mr. Lake: Let me begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral, my friend and colleague Leila Zerrougui and
you, Sir, for your leadership on this issue. Let me also
commend and thank the Security Council for its nine
resolutions to help end the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict and for giving voice to those
children through this debate. I look forward to hearing
from Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, who in 2001, at the age of
14, became the first-ever former child soldier to brief
the Council (see S/PV.4422), and who now supports
former child soldiers in Sierra Leone. My remarks will
be as brief as they are heartfelt.
When children are killed in indiscriminate attacks
on schools or hospitals, when a boy is maimed by
a landmine, when rape is both a weapon as well as a
crime — the world is rightly outraged. But what of
the atrocity of a boy being recruited at gun-point into
an armed group; of a girl kidnapped from her school,
traumatized by abuse and then given a gun and made to
fight; or of any armed force sending children to battle
to kill and die? In that regard, too, our outrage must
be matched by action to end the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict anywhere and to support
survivors while giving them the tools they need to
rebuild their own lives and the future of their societies.
In recent years, the world has made real progress:
better documenting and responding to grave violations
against children; holding perpetrators accountable
through investigations, prosecutions and disciplinary
measures such as those imposed by national authorities
in Colombia, Myanmar and Siena Leone; and developing

14-255835/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

effective responses, including counselling and
vocational training, to help children break the physical
and psychological bonds that have imprisoned their
lives and threatened their futures. But more must be
done. Just as the global community has a responsibility
to end grave violations against children, each nation,
too, has a responsibility to keep children from entering
the ranks of its armed forces in the first place, as does
every armed group.
Focused national action is at the heart of our new
advocacy effort entitled “Children, not soldiers”,
through which United Nations agencies are working
in partnership with eight Governments to prevent and
end the recruitment and use of children in Government
forces. Six of those countries — Afghanistan, Chad,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Myanmar,
Somalia and South Sudan — have signed action plans
with concrete, time-bound steps to make that happen.
Yemen is finalizing its plan, and the Sudan is now
in discussions with the United Nations to develop its
plan. But Governments cannot be asked to act alone. To
translate those plans into measurable action, the United
Nations must continue to provide resources, advice
and technical assistance to help Governments identify
and release children from their ranks and establish
measures to prevent children from ever entering those
ranks again.
Verifying the ages of soldiers is an important first
step. With United Nations support, Chad accelerated
efforts to screen its troops last year, and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has been working closely with
United Nations agencies to identify and release children
from its security forces. Birth registration, a child’s
passport to protection, is also essential. The action plans
developed by both Chad and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo include national birth registration campaigns
to register every child.
Prevention also requires greater awareness at the
community level. The Government of Myanmar joined
forces with the United Nations to invest in a television,
radio and billboard campaign to inform communities
that child recruitment was prohibited, along with a
phone number to report cases.
Beyond prevention, we cannot forget the specific
needs of child soldiers who are emerging from conflict
and need help in reintegrating into society. A country
that invests in counselling, educating and training
those children is not only investing in their futures,
but in its own future as well. That is why UNICEF is
6/79

07/03/2014

working closely with countries to support their efforts
to educate and train those children, helping them find a
place in their communities.
On a recent visit to the Central African Republic a
few weeks ago, I met a young woman who was 14 years
old when she joined the Séléka. Without training, she
was thrust directly into battle, fighting on the front
lines against Government forces and witnessing acts of
violence and atrocities no child should ever see. I asked
her about her hopes for the future now that she was
free. She told me that she wanted to be reunited with
her parents, who remained missing. With the support
of social workers, that young woman will soon begin
professional training, still haunted by the nightmare
that she has endured, but dreaming, too, of a better
future for herself, her family, when she finds them,
and, indeed, her country. Her story personifies horror
but also hope: the horrors faced by children associated
with armed forces and groups but also the hope that,
with support, investment and encouragement, we can
help these young men and women rebuild their lives,
transform themselves and their societies and help their
countries emerge from the shadow of conflicts that have
included the horror of children losing their childhoods
and even their lives.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Mr. Lake
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Sawaneh.
Mr. Sawaneh: My name is Alhaji Babah Sawaneh.
I have come from Sierra Leone. I want to thank the
Luxembourg Mission to the United Nations and
the Minister for Foreign and European Affairs of
Luxembourg, His Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn,
for inviting me to participate today in this open
debate. I also want to thank UNICEF and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, as well as the United States
Government for helping me to travel here. And I want
to thank my own country and the Government of Sierra
Leone. Most especially, I want to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his recent to Sierra Leone, as well as for all
the help provided.
In 2001, I was 14 years old when I was given an
opportunity to come to New York to address the
Security Council about my experience as a child
soldier, and also about the status of children in armed
conflict, especially in Sierra Leone. In my statement
in 2001 (see S/PV.4422), I pleaded with the United

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

Nations to act firmly against those state actors that were
in the habit of recruiting and using children in armed
conflicts. I now serve as an example of a child who
was forcefully abducted and conscripted into an armed
group, at the age of 10. I was robbed of my youth by
the Revolutionary United Front for two years. This was
one of the most brutish and turbulent civil wars in the
history of armed conflict, which was declared over in a
ceremony entitled “War don don” — by then President
Alhaji Ahmad Tejan Kabba in year 2002. I therefore
draw the attention of the United Nations, especially that
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
not only to hold accountable the individual actors who
recruit and use children, but also to put an end to the
recruitment and use of children in all armed conflicts.
Thirteen years ago, I stood before the Security
Council, in this very Chamber, and I told my story about
the war and how the children of Sierra Leone suffered.
I asked the United Nations, on behalf of the children
of Sierra Leone, to do everything possible to bring our
sad story to an end, to help us find our way back to
our communities and schools and to build a better life
and a better future. The children and young people in
countries affected by armed conflict need a future. We
need education and jobs.
I stand here again today by the grace of God, again
asking for the Council’s help. Now after 13 years, I
would like to tell the Council what happened to me. The
story is not easy. I was able to return to school. With the
help of my foster family and friends, I worked hard and
did not give up. In 2011, two years ago, I finished my
bachelor of social science degree in peace and conflict
resolution in Fourah Bay College at the University of
Sierra Leone. I chose to study those subjects. My thesis
was about good governance and public sector reform. I
learned about civil society and how to prevent conflict.
I want to dedicate my life to this work and to speak on
behalf of children and young people so that our story is
known and our voices are heard.
In Sierra Leone, I was lucky to meet with people who
were also dedicated to this work. Last year in Freetown,
I met General Romeo Dallaire, the founder of the Child
Soldiers Initiative, and participated in training for the
security sector — the police, the military and other
officials — to prevent the recruitment of children in
armed conflict. I helped to organize the training and
assisted the children who came to tell their stories. The
aim was to build knowledge in the security sector to
protect children and prevent recruitment.

S/PV.7129

The story does not stop there. There is much more
that we need to do and to accomplish. Really, we are
still at the beginning of our work. Today there are many
children in desperate need of our help. In countries,
regions and around the world children are experiencing
violence and conflict. We need to work hard to protect
them.
I want to continue my work in peacebuilding when
I return to Freetown. It is partly about the security
sector, but it is also about our communities and our
Government and about finding real opportunities for
the future. Today, many children are not in school and
many young people are not able to find work. I call on
Council members to please use the microphones they
have before of them to speak out to help solve those
problems. We need to speak out, and we need to take
action to change the equation. We need to stop war
and the violations against children, especially the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflicts.
Yesterday, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and UNICEF launched a campaign entitled “Children,
not soldiers”. The campaign will end the use of child
soldiers by Government armed forces. It is a huge job,
but it is possible. However, even that is not enough.
We also have to stop armed groups from recruiting
children. Based on my personal experience, I know it
is a long story. Today there are many children in many
countries who have similar stories.
Fifteen years ago there were child soldiers in Sierra
Leone. I was one of those children. Today Sierra Leone
is child-soldier-free. Therefore, it is possible to change
one country at a time.
Looking back on the 13 years since I was last here
speaking to the Security Council (see S/PV.4422), I can
tell members that it has been really a struggle for me. I
have achieved a lot, but still there is so much we need
to do. No one can do this work alone. We have to come
together in order to succeed.
I thank all members for inviting me to participate
in this important open debate. I hope to see the end of
child recruitment by armed forces by 2016, and then the
end of all child soldiers. That is what we must do. I am
asking for the Council’s help on behalf of all children
affected by armed conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Sawaneh for his moving and very inspiring briefing.

14-255837/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it. I
shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, Australia, Chad, Chile, China, France,
Jordan, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Nigeria, Republic
of Korea, Russian Federation, Rwanda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President (spoke in French): There were
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2143 (2014).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Luxembourg.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the Executive Director of UNICEF and
Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for their briefings and
testimony.
What makes the suffering of a child revolting,
Albert Camus wrote, is the fact that the suffering is not
justified. The suffering is all the more revolting and the
less justified when it does not result from the misfortunes
of human life but from the hatred of humankind. Each
of us instinctively feels that every child maimed or
wounded by war wounds our own innocence and shakes
our faith in humankind. That is why the international
community now unanimously shares the conviction
that children deserve to be protected from the impact of
conflict. Yet instances of violations against children are
unfortunately far too numerous and revolting.
When the Security Council turned its attention to
the issue of children in armed conflict 15 years ago,
all attention was focused on what was then commonly
called “child soldiers”, an ambiguous and simplistic
term. Today, the campaign launched by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, in cooperation with UNICEF
and other United Nations partners, reminds us, by the
simplicity of its title — “Children, not soldiers” — that
children are not meant to be soldiers, even if an assault
rifle is placed in their hands. I very much hope that the
campaign, which was officially launched yesterday at
United Nations Headquarters, will be supported by all
Member States. Only a true collective commitment will
make Governments’ recruitment of children and their
use on the battlefield become part of history.

8/79

07/03/2014

But Governments are not the only ones recruiting
children to bolster their armed forces. The vast majority
of the parties listed in the annexes of the reports of the
Secretary-General are non-State armed groups, like the
rebels who abducted Alhaji Babah Sawaneh and forced
him to fight in Sierra Leone. It is therefore important
that the international community does not lose sight of
the abuses committed by such armed groups against
children and tackles them with equal determination.
Recruitment is not the only danger to which children
are exposed. Violations and abuses committed against
children in armed conflict can take many forms. But
whether they become victims of bombings or crossfire,
are subjected to sexual violence or are recruited to serve
in the ranks of armed forces or groups as combatants,
or are held as sex slaves, each fate tells the story of a
life shattered.
In the Syrian refugee camps in Turkey, I met the
haggard look of orphans — it was a blank stare, hinting
at all of the horrors they had seen. The Syrian conflict
has forced close to 2.5 million people, half of whom
are children, to seek refuge in neighbouring countries.
More than 10,000 children have died; more than 10,000
lives have been crushed by the Syrian conflict without
any chance of flourishing. And how many hundreds of
thousands more children will be affected, until the end of
their days, by wounds to their hearts and bodies, as well
as their souls, that were inflicted by the conflict — the
wounds of those who witnessed unspeakable atrocities,
were tortured by Government forces or were forced to
fight in armed groups.
Given the urgency of the humanitarian situation,
one is tempted to diminish the importance of children’s
rights such as the right to education or the right to
health. That would be a mistake. Thousands of schools
are closed, as they are being used for military purposes.
With nearly 3,000 schools damaged and school
attendance in a downward spiral, an entire generation of
Syrians risks illiteracy, seriously jeopardizing chances
of the country’s socioeconomic recovery.
Hospitals and other health facilities have been
targeted and the medical staff threatened and decimated.
Currently, it is estimated that 60 per cent of all public
hospitals have been affected by the conflict, with almost
40 per cent of them out of service. Childhood diseases
that were thought to be eradicated, like poliomyelitis,
have reappeared and pose a danger to public health.

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

Attacks against schools and hospitals, as well as
the denial of humanitarian access, are among the six
grave violations subject to systematic monitoring by
the Security Council through its Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict, which Luxembourg
is honoured to chair. All violations against children
deserve to be condemned with the same conviction.
The perpetrators of atrocities against children must
answer for their actions. There can be no impunity for
those responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The International Criminal Court plays an
important role in that respect, as shown in the cases
of Thomas Lubanga, Germain Katanga and Bosco
Ntaganda.
I cited the Syrian example but other situations
also deserve our full attention. Violence in the Central
African Republic has reached unprecedented levels of
cruelty and brutality in recent months. Children have
paid a very heavy price. Some have been decapitated,
intentionally mutilated or wounded in crossfire. The
number of children recruited has almost doubled since
the upsurge in violence of 2013, thus obliterating the
earlier progress made in demobilizing and reintegrating
children.
It is estimated that 6,000 children are currently
serving as soldiers in the Central African Republic.
The Lord’s Resistance Army, the most notable armed
group in terms of child recruitment and barbaric war
tactics, remains active in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. And its leader, Joseph Kony, remains free.
Strengthened efforts are necessary to fully
implement the children and armed conflict agenda. We
must build upon the shared conviction that children
should not be recruited as soldiers, or killed or
maimed, or sexually abused or abducted. Their right
to humanitarian assistance, education and health care
must guaranteed, as our goal will never be truly realized
until we have ended all violence against children. All
efforts must aim to ensure that their rights are fully
respected, in times of war as in times of peace.
Resolution 2143 (2014), just adopted, reflects our
shared determination to put an end to the violations and
abuses committed against children in armed conflict.
I thank the members of the Council for supporting
our initiative as well as the many Member States that
demonstrated their commitment by becoming sponsors
of the resolution.

S/PV.7129

Children embody the hope and future of any society.
Destroying children destroys such hope. Protecting
children will therefore protect the future.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.
Mr. Timerman (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I wish to congratulate your country, Sir, on
its presidency of the Security Council during the month
of March and to thank you for inviting me to participate
in today’s open debate on children and armed conflict.
I also acknowledge the presence of the Deputy Minister
of Lithuania and the other Permanent Representatives.
Allow me first to mention something of which
we are proud. Next Tuesday, in the fraternal Republic
of Chile, the democratic President, Sebastian Piñera
Echeñique, will hand over the presidency to another
democratically elected president. That is now a tradition
in Latin America that fills us with pride and satisfaction.
I therefore wish to acknowledge that publicly, before
the Council and the entire Chilean people.
I also wish to express our absolute solidarity with
the Government and people of the People’s Republic of
China, who recently suffered a dreadful attack.
I welcome Luxembourg’s initiative to convene this
debate on an issue on which the delegation of Argentina
appreciates Luxembourg’s leadership in the Council
through Ambassador Sylvie Lucas. We also welcome
the statements of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, and
Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, whose dreadful history and
moving words serve to challenge us to act urgently and
with genuine conviction.
My country, Argentina, is firmly committed to the
protection of children in armed conflict. That can be
seen by the fact that we were one of the first States to
ratify, in 2002, the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the participation of
children in armed conflict.
Similarly, we are committed to defending and
ensuring respect for the rights of children and
adolescents in every area, as is demonstrated in our
Government’s initiative, unanimously approved by

14-255839/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

Argentina’s Congress, enacting a law stipulating a
minimum age of 18 for recruitment into our armed
forces, thereby observing the highest standards on
children’s rights.
In August we will mark the fifteenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999), the first on
the issue of children and armed conflict, supported
by Argentina as a member of the Security Countil
at the time. In 2005, resolution 1612 (2005), also
firmly supported by my country, as a non-permanent
Council member, represented substantive progress in
recognizing, guaranteeing and protecting the rights of
children in situations of armed conflict. That resolution
clearly defines acts that constitute serious violations
of children’s rights and establishes a monitoring and
reporting mechanism that, in conjuntion with child
protection advisers, is a fundamental tool for ensuring
the protection of children in armed conflict.
Besides such advances in formulating standards,
it is important to emphasize the goals that have been
achieved in preventing attacks on and protecting
children’s rights, through coordinated action by the
Council’s Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, the monitoring and reporting mechanism and
the efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, working together with UNICEF and other
United Nations bodies. We certainly all believe that
lessons well learned and good practices established not
only apply to legal standards and effective mechanisms
but also to the decision to implement action plans in
a coordinated way that can have a positive impact on
children’s living conditions and their future in specific
situations.
Such steps on the part of the international
community to protect children from serious crimes and
prevent such crimes being committed go hand in hand
with the importance of ensuring that impunity does not
prevail and that the perpetrators of serious violations of
rights are held accountable for their actions. Fighting
impunity for serious violations, war crimes and crimes
against humanity is unquestionably the responsibility
of individual States. It should be recalled, however, that
the international system has provided supplementary
mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court
(ICC) for cases where States are unable or unwilling
to exercise their primary jurisdiction. The ICC is an
essential body for ensuring that accountability is the
standard and ethic for an international community that
respects the rule of law.

10/79

07/03/2014

Recognizing the progress that has been made
does not imply in any way that we ignore or minimize
the horrifying realities that daily attest to the fact
that children and women are the primary victims
of many types of violence and abuse in situations of
armed conflict. From a human rights perspective, the
protection of children must remain our priority, and must
therefore be taken into consideration when defining the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, special political
missions and Security Council peacebuilding efforts,
which should include the integration of experts into its
various missions. It is equally important for States and
the Organization that training and capacity-building on
children and armed conflict not be limited exclusively
to staff with direct responsibility for protecting children
in the field.
It is also essential that we incorporate into training
programmes for military, police and civilians destined
for United Nations missions a human rights perspective
and a thorough acquaintance with the rights of
children and young people, as well as knowledge
and understanding of strategies and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes for them
in situations of armed conflict. Careful analysis of the
various tactics for recruiting child soldiers and how to
prevent their joining armed groups and conflicts, as
well as the capacity to act to change violent cultural
practices and traditions that perpetuate discrimination
against children, is imperative. We must discard models
of tutelage and recognize children as possessors of
rights. In the area of potential specific measures we
should also emphasize the importance of preventive
measures that every State can adopt, including the
implementation of a legal framework that ensures that
children cannot be recruited as soldiers; in that instance,
a proper registry of births is extremely valuable.
It is equally important to ensure recognition,
within the framework of reintegration and reparation
programmes for children who have been victims in
situations of armed conflict, of their status as possessors
of rights and of the fact that they are entitled to be actors
and participants in decision-making processes — not
only as regards their personal plans for their lives but
also within their families, communities and societies.
It is also essential that we overcome interventions
and processes that solidify or reproduce patterns of
victimization.
Argentina believes that the Convention on the
Rights of the Child must inspire and guide our decisions

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

both in peacetime and in situations of armed conflict.
In peacetime, our primary responsibility is to promote,
protect and ensure children’s rights through public
policies and legal guarantees. In situations of armed
conflict, we must strengthen protection mechanisms,
generate effective tools for prevention and ensure that
specific action is taken to provide comprehensive care
for children who are victims of armed conflict.
In that regard, and in conclusion, I would like
to pay special tribute to the human rights movement
in my country, and in particular to the Asociación
Madres e Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo, who, through
their unwavering commitment to human rights, were
the principal movers of the Argentine proposal that
formed the basis for the inclusion of articles 7, 8 and
11 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. With
the requirement that children should be registered
immediately after birth and the commitment of States
parties to the Convention to respect the right of a child to
preserve his or her identity — measures that States must
take to avoid children’s illegal transfers abroad — the
substance of those articles enshrines the rights of and
for children that those women with their white scarves
have sorrowfully and courageously handed down as a
historical mandate and ethical commitment to political
consistency and a legal obligation for humankind as a
whole.
Lastly, I would like to assure the Council of my
country’s support for today’s resolution 2143 (2014), of
which Argentina is a sponsor.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I would like to thank you
and your delegation, Mr. President, for organizing this
important debate, and in particular for your ambassador
and Permanent Representative’s unwavering dedication
to promoting the rights and protection of children in
armed conflict. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement, as well as his Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the Executive Director of
UNICEF, our friend Mr. Anthony Lake, for their
briefings.
I would also like to thank our young brother and
son, Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, for sharing with us his
moving story about what he endured as a child soldier
with the rebel forces in Sierra Leone. Indeed, his story
resonates well with our own tragic past in Rwanda,
where, in 1994, hundreds of thousands of children were
arbitrarily killed, abducted or maimed, and others were

S/PV.7129

forced to join the militia by the very same Government
that was supposed to protect them.
It is unfortunate that today, millions of children are
still caught in conflicts around the world, in which they
are mere bystanders but targets. Some fall victim to a
general onslaught against civilians. Others die as part
of a calculated genocide, as was the case in Rwanda
20 years ago. Evidence of the plight of children is the
death toll of civilians, which include a high number of
children in places such as Syria, the Central African
Republic and Afghanistan, to name a few. That is a
gruesome reminder that children are the first victims,
and that more remains to be done. Still more children
suffer the effects of sexual violence of the multiple
deprivations of armed conflicts that expose them to
hunger or disease. As the Secretary-General correctly
said, “Let our children be children”.
I think that we are equally concerned with the
persistent reports of widespread and deliberate atacks
against schools, teachers and students as a tool of war.
Whatever the causes of those attacks or occupation of
schools, we call on belligerents to halt such inhumane
acts and to publicy announce that children simply have
no part in warfare and should therefore be in schools,
not in the bushes.
Although adequate protection of children in
situations of armed conflict should be the primary
responsibility of Governments, we believe that all
parties to conflict must deploy the necessary and
sustained efforts in protecting children and abide by
the relevant international obligations to desist from
recruiting and attacking children. That is why we call
for the universal ratification and implementation of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Rwanda
was one of the first countries in the world to ratify
that Convention, which contains the core principles of
helping children to meet their basic needs and ensuring
that that they are protected from violence, abuse and
exploitation and can reach their full potential.
Those principles are reflected in our national
development programmes and are also evident in the
Government’s strong legal and policy framework, as
well as the practical measures to protect children. We
also welcome other positive developments, including
the signing of action plans and some listed State and
non-State parties as a unique tool that can successfully
improve the situation in armed conflicts.

14-2558311/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

The signing of action plans by a number of
Governments, in addition to the progress made by
other parties in releasing children, is a good step in that
regard. Rwanda strongly supports the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his recent report (see
S/2013/245), especially his call on the donor community
to enjoy a discussion to address the funding gaps for
the implementation of the action plans and associated
monitoring and to call on the Security Council to tackle
the issue of persistent perpetrators of grave violations
against children.
We take the opportunity to reiterate our call
on concerned Member States to prioritize the
implementation of those action plans. As the adopted
resolution 2143 (2014) puts it, the important step
is the development of national capacity-building
as well as close cooperation with States for such
implementation to materialize. In that context,
post-conflict peacebuilding should include, among
other priorities, issues of security sector reform and
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the
establishment of an adequate birth registration system
that would help prevent future underage recruitment,
as well as institutions of accountability, and the fight
against impunity. The process of integration must help
children to establish new foundations in life based on
their individual capacities. Recovery and reintegration
should take place in an environment that fosters the
health, self-respect and dignity of the child, as outlined
in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Before I conclude, I pay homage to the role played
by regional and subregional organizations in meeting
the challenges associated with the issue of children and
armed conflict. Specifically for the African Union, we
commend the aggressive protection mandates exercised
in its peacekeeping missions, including under the
African Union Mission in Somalia, the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. Furthermore, we welcome the
ongoing discussions on the alignment of the national
legislations of African States with international
instruments on child rights and training to troopcontributors to the African Union and United Nations
peacekeeping missions. We also take this opportunity
to call for the deployment of an adequate number of
child protection advisers thoughout United Nations
peacekeeping missions to cover child protection
functions.

12/79

07/03/2014

Finally, let me take this opportunity to affirm
Rwanda’s unequivocal support for the advancement of
the child protection agenda both at home and regionally
through our engagement with international community.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Ms. Zerrougui for her briefing
and her tireless efforts on behalf of the world’s young
people. I also thank Executive Director Mr. Lake for his
remarks and distinguished service. Special thanks go
to the Foreign Ministers of Luxembourg and Argentina
and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Lithuania for
travelling here today and for lending his weight to
addressing this critical issue.
I especially welcome Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, whose
knowledge of the challenge that we are discussing
today is so deeply personal. The events in Sierra Leone
in the late 1990s did much to awaken the world to
the dimensions of the tragedy of children and armed
conflict. As a former child soldier abducted when he
was just 10 years old, Alhaji’s presence is a reminder
that the principles that we refer to here are not abstracts.
In fact, their implementation can spell the difference
between hope and trauma and between life and death.
My colleague’s few issues are of a graver
humanitarian concern than the impact of armed
conflict on civilians. The horror is especially acute
when the victims or the perpetrators are boys and girls.
In recent years, the tragic connection between children
and war has assumed a prominent place on the global
agenda. In 2008, the United States appoved the Child
Soldiers Protection Act, which curtails United States
military assistance, licences and sales to Governments
that recruit or use child soldiers and which has given
our diplomats leverage to engage constructively with
Governments on the additional steps that they need to
take.
In 2012, as one example, the United States withheld
security assistance that the Democratic Republic of
the Congo needed to develop a second light infantry
battalion until the Government there signed an action
plan with the United Nations to address the use and
recruitment of child soldiers. Within just a couple of
weeks, the Government signed the action plan and is
now working with the United Nations in a sincere effort
to address the challenge. In 2012, the International
Criminal Court sent a welcome message when it found
Thomas Lubanga guilty of forcibly conscripting child
soldiers in Democratic Republic of the Congo.

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

Meanwhile, the United Nations has launched a
systematic campaign to help Governments and armed
groups develop action plans to end the use of child
soldiers, 18 of which have now been signed. Chad and
Yemen are among the countries that have recently
made a commitment to further progress. To that end,
I commend Ambassador Lucas for leading a Security
Council working group trip to Burma to review the
country’s effort to fulfil its action plan.
Rescuing children from armed conflict is not
always a simple process, especially when they have
experienced the trauma of direct involvement in
violence. Reintegration requires careful planning,
money and the recognition that some scars, whether of
body or mind, will heal slowly, if at all
Yet for all the helpful activity, too many children are
still being exploited, and some leaders have not thrown
their weight behind eliminating this scourge. No State
or armed group has yet been delisted by the SecretaryGeneral and 28 of the 52 listed parties are persistent
perpetrators, who have been listed for more than five
years. The Sudan is the one listed Government that
still has not signed an action plan. But even when plans
are developed, they have value only if implemented.
Donors can help by sharing resources, and the United
Nations must provide assistance and monitoring.
The United States encourages the deployment
of child protection advisers in all relevant United
Nations missions. Further, we urge the United Nations
to develop standardized training on child protection
responsibilities so that United Nations peacekeepers
who encounter violations respond effectively. These
training standards should be shared with Member States,
the African Union and other regional organizations
involved in peacekeeping activities. All of us must
press for the creation of birth registration systems in
order to verify that a child is a child. As resolution 2143
(2014) does, we must each urge greater protections for
schools, which are too often militarized.
Today, Syria is at ground zero of the most appalling
humanitarian catastrophe of our era, and children,
Syria’s future, are among the principal victims. Since
the civil war began, more than 10,000 boys and girls
have been killed, more than 1.2 million have become
refugees, and more than 3 million are unable to attend
school. The United States is part of the United Nationsled “No lost generation” initiative that is striving
to shield children from the fighting, reunite broken
families and deliver opportunities for education. One

S/PV.7129

four-year-old refugee in Turkey told UNICEF that he
wants to become a surgeon so that he will be able to
save his brother, who is still in Syria, should he get hurt.
According to the Secretary-General’s report of
27 January (S/2014/31), the Government and extremist
groups have inflicted direct and unspeakable violence
against children, including kidnapping, torture,
maiming and murder. Pro-Government forces have
detained children as young as 11 for alleged association
with the Opposition and subjected them to beatings and
other brutal mistreatment in order to extract confessions.
Both sides have prevented injured children from
receiving medical treatment and both, but especially
the Government, have launched indiscriminate attacks
in which children and other civilians have been killed.
Babies, some killed and others barely breathing, have
been pulled from the rubble caused by barrel bombs.
On 22 February, the Council demanded a halt to
such attacks and to the sieges that have forced many
Syrians to choose between the certainty of starvation
and the false promise of safety through surrender. The
Al-Assad regime may be sure that our scrutiny of its
actions as well as those of any who would recruit or
target children will not let up until our demands are met
and the savagery is stopped.
In recent months, the Central African Republic has
also been the scene of horrific violence. The cycle of
vengeance between the Séléka and anti-Balaka militias
has been singularly repulsive in that nearly all of the
victims on both sides have been unarmed. Children
have been attacked, beaten, maimed, raped and killed,
some by beheading. An estimated 6,000 young people
have been recruited and trained to kill by armed groups,
and in some cases girls have been forced into marriage.
In addition, the outlawed Lord’s Resistance Army
(LRA) remains a threat in the Central African Republic
and parts of South Sudan and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is heartening that, in December,
19 soldiers, including six young boys, defected from the
LRA, and that they cited radio broadcasting produced
by invisible children as giving them the courage to take
that brave step. It is encouraging as well that the LRA
has been forced to break up into small groups and that
in 2013 the number of their attacks went down. The
level of deaths and abductions attributable to those
attacks, however, remains far too high. The world must
not rest until Joseph Kony and his clique have been held
accountable and the LRA has become just a horrible
memory.

14-2558313/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

Finally, in South Sudan, children are once again
being made subject to all the ravages of war because the
country’s leaders have failed to settle their differences
peacefully. Scared youngsters are wandering among
the thousands of displaced persons, searching for their
mommies and daddies. Our hearts go out to Mangok
Bol, a former lost boy now living in Boston, who has
returned to his home village in South Sudan to try to
find his nieces and nephews who have been abducted
by militants from a competing ethnic group.
When the 14 year-old Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
testified before the Council in 2001, he said “taking
my gun from me was a vital step” (S/PV.4422, p. 8). In
that context, I commend the Special Representative for
her “Children, not soldiers” campaign. Boys and girls
belong in playgrounds, not battlegrounds. Around their
young shoulders, they should have school backpacks,
not ammunition belts. Their hearts should be filled with
optimism and hope, not terror at what the next day may
bring.
To make matters right for all of the world’s children
is a daunting mission, but none could be more worthy of
our resources, our dedication or our time.
Mr. Germanas (Lithuania): Lithuania aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union.
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
hosting today’s debate on children and armed conflict.
I also thank all briefers for their extensive statements.
Ambassador Lucas deserves particular recognition for
her brilliant leadership. I also note with appreciation
the work of the Special Representative and her team.
The 1996 study by Graça Machel entitled “Impact
of armed conflict on children” (A/51/306) gave strong
impetus to the strengthening of the United Nations
system for the protection of children in armed conflict.
The United Nations has made significant progress
over the past decade and a half in protecting children.
However, in nearly all recent conflicts, we are facing
the horrific impact of conflicts on children.
Let me refer to just a few examples. The conflict
in the Central African Republic has resulted in than
2 million children lacking basic services and hundreds
of thousands with no access to education. In Syria,
over 10,000 children have been killed and many more
injured since March 2011. Nearly 3,000 schools have
been destroyed, and 1,000 used as detention and torture
centres. An estimated 2.26 million children were not
14/79

07/03/2014

attending school or attending irregularly. In the latest
incident in Nigeria, 59 children were shot and burned,
in the fourth school assault in less than a year.
The Security Council has undertaken many
measures to end such grave violations against children.
But as we see, they have not been enough. This shows
that we must take more active action against these
crimes. Our agenda should be further developed and
our instruments sharpened. In this regard, I welcome
the new language of the resolution responding to the
changing dynamics on the ground.
I would like to touch on three specific issues:
attacks on schools, the implementation of action plans,
and combating impunity.
Firstly, the growing use of schools for military
purposes and increase in attacks on schools have
not only severely disrupted children’s right to access
to education but are a violation of international
humanitarian law. Schools must enjoy immunity from
war. Impunity for violence against children at schools,
as well as the lack of access to education due to fear of
attacks, must be addressed by the Council. Monitoring,
assessment and reporting are crucial in this regard.
Some progress has been made, but we need to do more
to strengthen monitoring and reporting partnerships
to improve data collection and verification. Dialogue
between local community leaders, armed groups and
Government forces and officials is also very important,
as is strengthening legislation, in this regard.
We welcome the development of guidelines for
protecting schools and universities from military
use during armed conflict. These could guide States
to improve their domestic legislation and military
doctrines. Some countries have already introduced
legislation and relevant practices restricting and
prohibiting the military use of schools. The Philippines
restricted the use of schools by their armed forces. Most
recently, South Sudan prohibited its armed forces from
using schools.
Secondly, I would like to underline the significance
of action plans as a key tool for ending the recruitment
and use of children. Signing a plan is only the
beginning. Implementation will require political will
as well as resources. The deployment of United Nations
child protection advisers and assistance for national
capacity-building are very important. On the other
hand, we also encourage the Special Representative to
continue her engagement with non-State armed groups

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

to conclude action plans. Attacks on schools must be
included in action plans.
Yesterday, the Office of Special Representative,
in cooperation with UNICEF, launched the “Children,
not soldiers” campaign. It is essential that the initiative
find its practical application in respective national
action plans. Regional and subregional organizations
have a role to play in that regard. The agreement signed
between the United Nations and the African Union will
help to strengthen the protection of conflict-affected
children.
Thirdly, accountability for the perpetrators of
violations against children should be strengthened.
Ending violations does not necessarily mean the end
of impunity. The criminalization of child recruitment
under national laws, with the capacity to prosecute
those responsible, would send a signal that crimes
against children will not be tolerated. Where national
authorities are unwilling or unable to bring perpetrators
to justice, international justice mechanisms, including
the International Criminal Court, should play a role.
Targeted measures against persistent perpetrators
of grave violations against children remain an important
tool at the Council’s disposal. Violence against children
should be included in targeted sanctions designation
criteria. The need to consider targeted measures against
perpetrators in situations where a dedicated sanctions
committee does not exist is also very important.
The late President Nelson Mandela said that we
owe our children, the most vulnerable citizens in our
society, a life free of violence and fear. We have to act
for all those children, and we must follow those wise
words.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank you,
Mr. President, for having organized this open debate. I
also thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Mr. Anthony Lake and Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for
their statements today.
I align myself with the statement to be made by the
observer of the European Union.
I take this opportunity to once again congratulate
Luxembourg on its outstanding work on children in
armed conflict, which led to the adoption of resolution
2143 (2014) today.
For 15 years, the Council has been mobilized
for the protection of children in conflict. From that
mobilization a global system has been born and has

S/PV.7129

led to the demobilization of tens of thousands of child
soldiers. Today, Ms. Zerrougui and Mr. Lake have
provided evidence that that mobilization continues
apace. Their “Children, not soldiers” campaign
offers us hope for a world where national armies no
longer recruit child soldiers. To achieve that, the full
cooperation of the States concerned will be crucial.
The United Nations has a powerful instrument in that
regard, and one that has shown its effectiveness. The
action plans allowed two States to be removed from the
list of infamy in 2012. In the near future, other States
will hopefully follow the same path. Our procedures
are therefore working.
Children are, unfortunately, still the first victims
in today’s conflicts when they are forcibly enlisted as
combatants. In the Central African Republic, as we
know, the armed groups, including the ex-Séléka and
anti-Balaka, have more than 6,000 children among their
ranks. France will shortly present a draft resolution
for the deployment of a peacekeeping operation in
that country. But the seriousness and urgency of
the situation require that the resources of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic be enhanced as of now, especially for
the protection of children, as provided for in resolution
2134 (2014).
Children are also at risk when their education is
threatened. Schools are increasingly the target of
intolerable attacks. They are burned, destroyed and
caught in the middle of crossfire. Yet international
humanitarian law sets out a clear rule: schools cannot
be military objectives.
In Syria, this has been the sad reality for children
for three years. The regime’s indiscriminate aerial
bombings, which were recently unanimously denounced
by the Security Council in resolution 2139 (2014), have
deprived an entire generation of their right to education.
More than 3,000 schools have been destroyed. More
than 2 million Syrian children no longer attend school.
We also condemn all violations by the armed groups
against children. There is an ongoing dialogue between
the Free Syrian Army and the United Nations on the
issue of child recruitment. We encourage Ms. Zerrougui
to continue that dialogue with a view to signing an
action plan.
The Council recently held an open debate on the
rule of law (see S/PV.7113). Our debate today allows us
to lay out in a concrete manner an essential aspect of
the rule of law — the need for States to keep rigorous

14-2558315/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

birth records, which is essential to eliminating the
phenomenon of child soldiers as it sheds light on that
practice and allows it to be fully understood. We must
also have in mind the situation in the Central African
Republic, where Séléka fighters have systematically
destroyed the country’s archives, thereby depriving all
citizens, first and foremost children, of access to the
rule of law.
In the fight for child protection, the fight
against impunity plays a vital role. The fact that the
International Criminal Court issued its first conviction
against Thomas Lubanga Dyilo, who was found guilty
of conscripting and enlisting children under 15 years
of age, was a decisive step. France welcomes the fact
that the resolution adopted today highlights the role of
justice, in particular that of the International Criminal
Court. We all recognize the complementary role of
national courts and want them to further strengthen
their efforts against the most serious crimes. But when
the courts fail, the International Criminal Court is our
guarantee that an independent and permanent remedy
exists.
Our tireless efforts must continue. In that regard, I
would highlight several issues.
First, on the role of the Secretariat, we are aware
of Mr. Ban Ki-Moon’s commitment to the Organization
being irreproachable. Security sector reform and
demobilization and reintegration efforts must fully
include the issue of child soldiers. In that respect,
Lieutenant-General Dallaire has become an advocate
of training programmes, and we commend him for that
new commitment, which is reflected in our resolution.
Secondly, on the protection of education in
conflict, France follows with interest the work of
non-governmental organizations to develop guidelines
on the military use of schools. States must be encouraged
to work alongside civil society to develop best practices
that are adapted to the operational realities on the
ground to improve the protection of education in times
of conflict.
Finally, France continues to call on all States to
endorse the Paris Principles, which complement the
work of the Security Council. We want to suggest, along
with Ms. Zerrougui, UNICEF and non-governmental
organizations, that a regional seminar on the Paris
Principles be held this summer in Africa to support
Ms. Zerrougui’s campaign in the region.

16/79

07/03/2014

Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the initiative taken by
Luxembourg to convene today’s meeting. I would
like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Luxembourg, His Excellency Mr. Asselborn, who
has come to New York to preside over our meeting. I
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Zerrougui; and
the Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Lake, for their
briefings. China also listened carefully to the statement
by Mr. Sawaneh.
Children represent our future and our hope. Ensuring
their safe growth is the common responsibilty of
national Governments and the international community.
In recent years, the international community has made
tremendous efforts and achieved positive progress in
protecting children in armed conflict. However, with
the increasing complexity of conflict situations, in
many regions of the world, children still bear the brunt
of armed conflict, and their overall situation is still
worrisome.
China opposes and condemns all violations against
children in armed conflict and urges all parties to
conflict to abide by the relevant international laws,
fulfil their obligations and respect and protect the
rights of children. The Security Council’s unanimous
adoption of resolution 2143 (2014) clearly demonstrates
the international community’s strong commitment
to strengthening the protection of children in armed
conflict. We support the international community
in continuing its common effort in providing
comprehensive protection of children in armed conflict.
In that regard, I wish to underscore the following
three points. First, the Governments concerned bear
the primary responsibility for the protection of children
in armed conflict. The key to the implementation of
Council resolutions on the protection of children lies in
the active support and cooperation of the Governments
concerned. On the basis of full respect for the ownership
of the countries concerned and through in-depth
communication and coordination with them, the
international community should support the countries
concerned in strengthening their capacity-building
and help them to resolve their practical financial and
technological difficulties. The international community
should also do its utmost to put an end to violations
against children by armed groups.

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

Secondly, in order to protect children in armed
conflicts, the various bodies within the United
Nations system should work on the basis of their own
responsibilities and strengths, fulfil their respective
mandates and generate synergy. The Security Council
should effectively fulfil its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security and reduce
and curb conflicts through good offices, negotiations
and mediation so as to create a safe environment for
the growth of children. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should act in accordance with the Council’s
mandate and increase their protection for children.
We welcome the “Children, not soldiers” campaign
launched yesterday jointly by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts and UNICEF. We hope that by
2016 we will reach the goal of complete elimination of
child soldiers in national armies.
Thirdly, in order to protect children in armed
conflict, we should address both the symptoms and
the root causes. The international community should
make the protection of children an integral part of
its overall effort to address conflicts and give it its
full attention in political negotiations and peace
agreements. In promoting post-conflict reconstruction
and implementing peacebuilding strategies, the
international community should prioritize children’s
return to school and reintegration into society and
strengthen the institution-building of countries
concerned in terms of protecting children, providing
adequate resources and increasing development
assistance. It should actively support countries
concerned in their efforts to eliminate poverty, realize
universal education and protect children’s rights so as
to eliminate the root causes of conflicts.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I would like to thank
Luxembourg and you personally, Madam President, for
your decisive leadership on the compelling challenge of
children in armed conflict. I thank the Secretary-General
and Executive Director Lake for their statements,
and Special Representative Zerrougui for her tireless
exemplary efforts. I would particularly like to thank
Alhadji Babah Sawaneh for his personal account. We
so often talk in the abstract in this Chamber. We need to
hear from individuals like Alhadji — powerful beacons
of a better future — much more often.
We know that armed conflict continues to have
a horrific impact on children, so many of whom are
recruited or used by armed forces and armed groups.

S/PV.7129

There are reportedly some 6,000 child soldiers in the
Central African Republic. Thousands of children are
killed in deliberate attacks on civilian areas or caught
in the crossfire. Over 10,000 have already lost their
lives in the Syrian conflict. Many children are abducted
and subjected to sexual violence. Attacks on schools
and hospitals continue to deny children an education
and desperately needed health care. The denial of
humanitarian assistance is depriving children of food
and basic necessities. That is a terrible stain on our
efforts for peace and security.
I would like to touch on three areas where greater
efforts are needed to protect children during armed
conflict: ending recruitment by Government forces
and non-State armed groups, addressing the military
use of schools, and ensuring accountability. As Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui
has noted, eight Government armed forces are listed
in the Secretary-General’s most recent report (see
S/2013/245) as having recruited or used children. Six
of those Governments have committed, through the
signing of action plans, to ending that practice. The
aim of ending child recruitment by Government forces
therefore appears achievable, and we strongly support
the “Children, not soldiers” campaign, launched
yesterday, to reach that goal by 2016. We welcome the
restatement of commitment to that aim made by the
eight States affected yesterday. In our own region, we
are pleased to be supporting UNICEF’s efforts to help
the Myanmar Government implement its action plan to
end the recruitment and use of children by the armed
forces.
While we welcome efforts to end recruitment by
Government forces, we must not lose our focus on
violations against children committed by non-State
armed groups. In fact, the majority of groups listed in
the Secretary-General’s report as having recruited or
used children — 46 groups out of 55 — are non-State
actors. Many of those non-State armed groups have
recruited children persistently for more than five
years. It is crucial that the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General continue her efforts to conclude
action plans with non-State armed groups, difficult
though that is to achieve. However, in order for her to
do so, Governments must allow United Nations access
to those groups to address child protection concerns.
The Council must keep a very close eye on progress
with that.

14-2558317/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

In many conflict situations around the world,
schools are attacked or used for military purposes.
In Syria, almost a quarter of all schools have been
damaged, occupied or destroyed. It is essential that
all parties implement resolution 2139 (2014) on
humanitarian access in Syria, which was adopted by
the Council two weeks ago and which demanded that
all parties to conflict in Syria demilitarize schools. It
was a unanimous and powerful demand by the entire
Council.
In so many conflict situations, schools have
been used as military barracks, detention facilities,
interrogation centres and weapons storage facilities.
Using schools for military purposes gravely endangers
the lives of children and is contrary to international law.
We cannot deny generations of children an education
through the destruction or misuse of school premises.
We must work decisively on that.
It should be axiomatic, as Alhadji has reminded us
today, that those responsible for serious international
crimes committed against children during conflict
be held to account. Where national authorities are
unable or unwilling to investigate and prosecute such
crimes, the International Criminal Court can play a key
instrumental role. The International Criminal Court’s
unanimous conviction of Thomas Lubanga for the war
crime of enlisting and conscripting children under the
age of 15 years and using them to participate actively in
hostilities was a landmark decision. Only by ensuring
accountability can we deter future crimes.
In conclusion, we must never just accept the risk
to children during armed conflict. We know they are
the most vulnerable and least able to withstand its
ravages. As Ambassador Gasana has just reminded
us, they are often the first victims. Their protection
must remain central to our efforts in the Council to
protect civilians — the primordial core of the Council’s
work. We cannot do enough to achieve that. As Leila
Zerrougui has said this morning, hundreds of thousands
of children have their eyes on us.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Our delegation would like to thank the
delegation of Luxembourg for its initiative to convene
today’s meeting and its very professional chairmanship
of the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
We thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Executive Director of the United

18/79

07/03/2014

Nations Children’s Fund Mr. Anthony Lake, and
Mr. Alhadji Babah Sawaneh for their participation in
this meeting and their useful contributions to today’s
discussion. Separately, we would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflicts, Ms. Zerrougui, for her
commitment to assisting children and for her active
work in various regions of the world.
As one of the most vulnerable groups of the
population, children continue to suffer the horrors of
war, despite all the measures undertaken at the national
and international levels and the existence of a broad
international legal basis. The approach to considering
the issue of children and armed conflict must be
comprehensive, as established in resolution 1612 (2005)
and subsequent documents of the Security Council.
This requires equal attention to be accorded to all six
categories of grave violations against children in armed
conflict, both within the framework of the monitoring
and reporting mechanisms in place and during the
activities of the relevant thematic Working Group of
the Security Council.
These mechanisms need above all to engage in the
most pressing and widescale situations of armed conflict
on the agenda of the Security Council. Unfortunately,
the Security Council periodically reviews the issue of
children in situations that are not only not on its agenda
but also cannot be described as armed conflict. While
this subject is of the utmost importance, we believe
that it is incorrect in this context for the Council to
focus on issues that are not related to the maintenance
of international peace and security. These are the
prerogatives of other entities, whose work should not
be duplicated. Only by maintaining a balanced division
of labour can we ensure the greater effectiveness of all
bodies engaged on the issue of children and achieve
synergies between them.
The Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict, headed by Luxembourg, has done a great deal
to establish, in an atmosphere of trust, accommodations
on specific situations and to structure dialogues with
countries affected by armed conflict. In order effectively
to implement existing plans, close cooperation must be
developed with the Governments of those countries,
which ultimately should help to improve the situation
of children on the ground. National Governments play a
paramount role in protecting and rehabilitating children
in armed conflict, while the actions undertaken by

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

the bodies of the United Nations system must seek to
support and complement national efforts.
Preventing crimes against children is an important
component of the set of measures developed to promote
post-conflict settlement and recovery. Russia condemns
all violations against children, above all the most
serious, whosoever perpetrates them, and advocates
bringing their perpetrators to justice. Crimes against
children should not go unpunished. We are particularly
alarmed by the killing and wounding of children in
premeditated attacks and as a result of indiscriminate
or excessive use of force, including as a result of the
use of unmanned aircraft. The rapid development of
military technologies has seen such instances take
place with tragic regularity. This issue calls for ever
heightened attention.
The report of Mr. Emmerson, Special Rapporteur
on the promotion and protection of human rights and
fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,
prepared for the twenty-fifth session of the Human
Rights Council in Geneva, cites 37 cases in which
unmanned aircraft have carried out attacks leading to
civilian casualties. According to the data of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, in 2013 19
confirmed uses of drones led to 59 civilian casualties,
45 of which were deaths. As a result of 54 combat air
operations carried out by the International Security
Assistance Force, there were 182 casualties, of which
118 were killed. Women and children comprised some
45 per cent of civilian victims of such operations.
Last year’s thematic report provided by
Ms. Zerrougui to the Security Council (S/2013/245)
cites specific information on the use of drones in
Pakistan that have killed or wounded children.
Information is available on reports of child victims of
United States air strikes in Yemen. One such case was
an attack by unmanned aerial vehicle on 2 September
2012 in the region of Rada, as a result of which there
were 12 civilian deaths, including those of three
children and one pregnant woman. We should also
recall the civilian deaths occasioned by NATO military
operations in Libya. We do not accept attempts to
categorize civilian victims, above all children, as socalled collateral damage. That contravenes, inter alia,
the provisions of international humanitarian law. We
advocate scrupulous investigation of such incidents and
the punishment of their perpetrators.
Slightly less than a year ago, in a Security Council
debate on children and armed conflict, several

S/PV.7129

delegations advanced the priority idea of exerting
pressure on so-called persistent perpetrators. While we
do not dispute the importance of approaching this issue
in the framework of the appropriate context, in each
case we need to understand who such perpetrators are
and why a number of parties to conflict have remained
so long on the lists contained in the annexes of the
Secretary-General’s reports, despite efforts to remedy
the situation. We believe that the establishment of clear
procedures and criteria for the listing and delisting
of parties to armed conflict in the annexes to the
reports of the Secretary-General would enhance the
transparency of existing procedures and strengthen
trust in the objectivity of the functioning of the entire
range of instruments. Unfortunately, that issue is not
duly reflected in resolution 2143 (2014), adopted today.
We believe that the “Children, not soldiers”
campaign, launched yesterday to end the recruitment
and use of children in Government armed forces by
2016, is an important step in the right direction. We
believe that openness with respect to that issue will not
only lead to tangible results to prevent the recruitment
by Government armed forces, but also set an example to
be followed forthwith by many armed groups. We hope
that the campaign, having demonstrated its balanced
and impartial nature, will enhance the attractiveness
and effectiveness of the engagement of parties to
conflict with the United Nations in the prevention of
violence against women.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by expressing our appreciation to you, Madam, for
convening this important debate. We should like
to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui, Executive Director
Anthony Lake and Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for their
participation and statements.
In recent years, the theme of children and armed
conflict has been firmly placed on the international
agenda. The Security Council has demonstrated its
strong commitment to ensuring the protection of
children in armed conflict, most notably by adopting
resolutions 1539 (2004) and 1612 (2005). Progress
has been made in relation to dialogue with parties to
conflicts and the signing of action plans on the ground.
However, children remain the most vulnerable
group in many ongoing armed conflicts around the
world. As noted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2013/245), children in Syria are facing a dire
situation in which they have been killed, injured,

14-2558319/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

displaced and tortured. There are many accounts of
violations against children in conflict areas, such as in
the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Mali. Much more needs to be done
with a view to enhancing the protection of children
affected by armed conflicts. Against that backdrop, I
should like to make a few observations about where
greater efforts could be made.
First, we welcome the fact that all Government
armed forces listed in the Secretary-General’s report
have entered into an action plan process. Meanwhile,
we also note that non-State armed groups constitute
the vast majority of listed parties. Children in armed
conflict cannot be protected completely unless all
parties to conflicts abide by their obligations under
international law. As such, it is imperative that all
parties listed in the report develop and implement
action plans.
Secondly, the protection of children should be
ensured throughout the fulfilment of United Nations
peacekeeping mandates. In particular, child protection
advisers currently deployed in six United Nations
peacekeeping missions and four political missions
play crucial roles in mainstreaming child protection.
Specific provisions for the protection of children
should continue to be included in all relevant mandates
of United Nations missions.

07/03/2014

supports resolution 2143 (2014), which was adopted
earlier here in the Chamber.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): The Nigerian delegation
thanks you, Madam President, for convening this
important debate on children and armed conflict and
for the concept note (S/2014/144, annex), which sheds
light on the topic and serves as a useful guide for
our discussions here today. We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his statement. We also thank his Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui, UNICEF Executive
Director Anthony Lake for their briefings, as well as
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for sharing his experience with
us.
We welcome the adoption by consensus of
resolution 2143 (2014), of which Nigeria was a sponsor.
The resolution comprehensively addresses the issue
of children and armed conflict and underscores the
Security Council’s continued concern about the subject.
In the interests of time, my comments will focus
on two aspects of the children and armed conflict
agenda, that is, the role of regional organizations
in implementing the agenda and the “Children, not
soldiers” campaign of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNICEF.

Last but not least, it is noteworthy that several
Security Council Sanctions Committees include
violations against children in their sanctions designation
criteria. Such a linkage between the perspective of
child protection and the work of the relevant sanctions
regimes can serve as a practical tool to put pressure on
perpetrators.

Nigeria acknowledges and applauds the valuable
contributions of regional and subregional organizations
to the children and armed conflict agenda. In that regard,
we take note of the agreement signed on 17 September
2013 by the Office of the Special Representative and the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Department,
which aims at strengthening protection mechanisms in
collaboration with UNICEF. The agreement outlines
the following areas of collaboration among the three
entities: first, the protection of children in all African
Union peace and security activities; secondly, the
deployment of child protection specialists in the Peace
and Security Department; thirdly, the joint development
of a programme of work including the alignment of
domestic legislation with internationally recognized
rights of the child; fourthly, the joint development
of guidelines to protect children affected by armed
conflict; and, fifthly, the development of training
programmes on child protection for troop-contributing
countries to AU peacekeeping missions.

Children represent our collective future. Saving
the children affected by armed conflict is saving the
very future of humankind. The Republic of Korea fully

In terms of the legal framework at the regional
level, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare
of the Child, which the Organization of African Unity

Thirdly, perpetrators of grave violations against
children must be held accountable. Ending impunity is
vital in the prevention of violations against children.
In that regard, we recognize the International Criminal
Court’s contribution to ensuring accountability for the
most serious crimes against children, as demonstrated
in the Thomas Lubanga Dyilo case. At the same time,
national legislation and judicial systems should be
strengthened in order to investigate and prosecute such
perpetrators.

20/79

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

adopted in 1990, came into force in 1999. The Charter
prohibits the recruitment or direct participation in
hostilities or internal strife of anyone under the age of
18. It calls upon States parties to respect and ensure
respect for rules of international humanitarian law
applicable in armed conflicts that affect the child.
The Charter requires that all the necessary measures
be taken to ensure that no child takes direct part in
hostilities and, in particular, requires States to refrain
from recruiting any child. It enjoins States parties, in
accordance with the obligations under international
humanitarian law, to protect the civilian population
in armed conflict and take all feasible measures to
ensure the protection and care of children affected by
armed conflict. Forty-seven of the 54 States members
of the African Union have ratified the Charter, which
indicates the near universalization of the instrument on
the continent.
We welcome the “Children, not soldiers”
campaign, launched by the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and UNICEF in collaboration
with other United Nations partners with a view to
ending and preventing by 2016 the recruitment and use
of children by Government armed forces in conflict.
The concept note asks how best the campaign can be
supported. We believe that one effective way to do
so by States, civil society, international and regional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
other stakeholders launching a sustained drive towards
the universalization of the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict. The General Assembly
adopted that instrument in May 2000, and in entered
into force in February 2002. There are currently 154
States parties to the Convention and 129 signatories to
the Protocol prohibitting the compulsuory recruitment
into the armed forces of States parties of persons below
the age of 18 as well as their direct involvement in
hostilities. A total of 42 African countries have signed
or ratified the Protocol. Nigeria signed it in September
2000 and ratified it in September 2012. We would
like to see all States ratify this important instrument
in the children and armed conflict agenda. As Special
Representative Zerrougui stated in September 2013 at
the annutal Treaty event, “The universal ratification of
the Optional Protocol would take us one step closer to a
world without child soldiers.”
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank you, Madam President, for convening today’s
important open debate to discuss progress towards the

S/PV.7129

full implementation of the children and armed conflict
agenda. I also thank Foreign Minister Asselborn for his
personal presence in the Council and for Luxembourg’s
strong and consistent leadership on this issue,
including through its chairmanship of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. Let me also
warmly thank the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative Leila Zerrougui and the other briefers
for their statements. I was particularly struck by the
testimony of Mr. Sawanah, which brought to life for all
of us why this issue is so important.
Fifteen years ago, the Security Council recognized
children and armed conflict as an issue of international
peace and security with the adoption of resolution
1261 (1999). While we have since seen the release,
reintegration and protection of thousands of children,
nonetheless violations continue: in Syria, where well
over 10,000 children have been killed, 3,000 schools
damaged or destroyed and 3 million children are in dire
need of humanitarian assistance, and in Africa, where
the Lord’s Resistance Army has blighted the lives of
thousands of children, terrorizing and displacing them
from their homes as well as recruiting them to torture
and kill. As long as children’s lives continue to be torn
apart by conflict, our work and commitment must also
continue. We therefore welcome the adoption of today’s
resolution 2143 (2014), which adopts practical steps for
combating violations against children. The resolution
draws attention to devastating attacks on schools in
armed conflict. Schools are protected civilian objects
under international humanitarian law, and yet the
Council has heard in briefings by Valerie Amos of
the continued militarization of schools in conflict,
especially in Syria. Schools should be a place of safety,
learning and peace, not violence and conflict.
It is high time that Member States upheld their
responsibility to protect children. We warmly welcome
the campaign “Children, not soldiers”, aimed at ending
the recruitment and use of children by Government
armed forces in conflict by 2016. The United Kingdom
recognizes that this is an ambitious undertaking.
Special Representative Zerrougui and UNICEF
Executive Director Tony Lake have led the campaign,
but that is not enough. We ask the Secretary-General to
ensure that the campaign is mainstreamed throughout
the United Nations work, from peace processes to
peacebuilding, including in the work of country teams.
We look to Mr. Ladsous and Mr. Feltman to empower
child protection advisers in United Nations field
missions.

14-2558321/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

When it comes to children’s lives, no effort can
be spared. It is also in our hands as Member States
to support the implementation of the United Nations
framework on children and armed conflict. The United
Kingdom is doing its part. Foreign Office Minister Mark
Simmonds has personally committed himself to work
to release child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Somalia, South Sudan, Chad and Burma. He
has urged those Governments to implement their action
plans with the United Nations to end the recruitment
and use of child soldiers. He has also highlighted the
need to prevent and protect children from other grave
violations, including sexual violence.
The United Kingdom believes that regional
organizations can also make important contributions,
as we have just heard from my Nigerian colleague. That
is why we are funding a child protection adviser in
the African Union (AU), who will help implement the
AU-Special Representative joint declaration.
All parties to armed conflict, State and non-State
parties alike, must abide by international law. Those
who violate international law must be prosecuted. With
verified information on violations against children from
United Nations country task forces and Ms. Zerrougui’s
commitment to concluding action plans, compliance
with international law can now be measured. We call
on all parties to sign action plans, and we call on those
that have already signed to honour their commitments
in full. We urge the Secretary-General to strengthen
monitoring, reporting and response, and the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict to increase
pressure on persistent perpetrators.
I want to highlight today the invaluable contribution
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in the fight
against impunity for crimes against children. Two years
ago, the ICC found Thomas Lubanga guilty of the war
crime of using children to participate in hostilities.
Today, the ICC found Germain Katanga guilty of
war crimes. Although he was acquitted of using child
soldiers, the Trial Chamber found that children were
used as combatants. No matter who is responsible, that
is an appalling violation of those children’s rights. The
fight against impunity must continue. We also welcome
the fact that Bosco Ntaganda will be held to account by
the ICC for the alleged recruitment of child soldiers in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We have an obligation to the next generation in
countries affected by conflict. It is no exaggeration to

22/79

07/03/2014

say that violations of children’s rights compromise a
country’s future prosperity and ability to build lasting
peace. We must commit to doing everything we can to
prevent abhorrent violations and rise to the challenges
to protecting the world’s children.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me, Madam President, to thank you for
your efforts in presiding over the Security Council this
month. We wish you and the delegation of Luxembourg
every success. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Ban Ki-moon; the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; and the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake, for their
valuable briefings. Furthermore, I thank Mr. Alhaji
Babah Sawaneh for his very moving statement.
I would like to take this opportunity to express
our appreciation for the role of Luxembourg in
mainstreaming the prespective of children and armed
conflicts in the Council’s deliberations through its
chairmanship of the Working Group dedicated to this
goal and by raising awareness of the six grave violations
of the rights of the child, as defined by the SecretaryGeneral and explained in in the monitoring and
reporting mechanism. It is also evident in Luxembourg’s
leadership of the efforts of the Council and the adoption
of resolution 2143 (2014) today, which is one of the
most advanced Security Council resolutions in terms
of protecting the rights of children and reflects the
political will of the Council ms to promote action on
this issue.
Despite the noticeable progress in international
humanitarian law and human rights instruments in
recent years, the rights of the child are still subject to
continued violations in armed conflict, especially in
fragile areas and environments where children live.
Children are subject to recruitment, killing, kidnapping,
violence torture, threats caused by arbitrary attacks on
populated areas, as well as the dangers of landmines
and unexploded ordinance. Attacks on schools and
their use as detention camps, weapons depots, training
grounds and bases for launching military operations
are also grave violations that deprive children of their
rights, and reduce the the possibility for ensuring their
rehabilitation.
Jordan is of the view that we should adopt concrete
short-term measures to guarantee the commitment of
all parties concerned to human rights and international

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

humanitarian law through eandevours aimed at
activating or establishing mechanisms to ensure that
instruments and conventions, especially the four Geneva
Conventions and their Protocols, are implemented,
integrated into national legislation, and subject to
monitoring and control. Parties to armed conflicts in
the most fragile areas must also be compelled to develop
and implement time-bound action plans to stop grave
violations against children. In this context, we believe
it is important to support a strategies to promote efforts
aimed at ending the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces, as contained in the concept
paper (S/2014/144, annex), by the end of 2016. We look
forward to promoting the efforts of Member States and
the United Nations system in that respect.
Combating grave violations of the rights of children
also requires supporting long-term programmes to
reintegrate children who were previously associated
with armed groups and mainstreaming child protection
issues in the training programmes for peacekeepers
and in the work of peacebuilding commissions. It also
requires promoting the presence of child protection
advisers in peacekeeping operations in order to support
the implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism, and to participate in dialogue with parties to
conflict. In that regard, we urge international bodies to
continue closely monitoring violations and developing
the instruments, guidelines, training materials and
information management systems necessary to
strengthen the monitoring and reporting mechanism,
as well as strengthening the capacities of relevant
States by providing them with technical assistance,
in cooperation with non-governmental organizations,
civil society, and the donor community.
Ensuring the protection of the rights of children
in armed conflict requires us to use all available tools
in order to provide a complete child protection system
by activating mechanisms to guarantee that those who
commit crimes against children in armed conflict will
not enjoy impunity, and by emphasizing the need to
implement relevant Security Council resolutions with
regard to pursuing children with the aim of forcing
them into military action.
In addition to reaffirming the ban against using
schools for military purposes, we affirm the need
for the Council to implement punitive, deterrent
and effective measures against those who violate the
rights of children in armed conflict and to hold them
accountable.

S/PV.7129

The Council can take further measures by
supporting sanctions regimes against the perpetrators
of gross violations against children, based on its
resolutions and strengthened cooperation among its
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
Sanctions Committees.
Jordan urges the development of a mechanism to
monitor the recruitment of children in armed forces, as
well as concerted measures to guarantee accountability
and an end to impunity for those responsible for gross
violations against children. As the prosecution of
perpetrators is the primary responsibility of the States
concerned, there is a need to adopt the necessary
legislation, thereby requiring implementation and
compliance mechanisms as well as cooperation
among States and the Council and the mainstreaming
of international efforts to guarantee justice. In that
vein, the international legal system, including the
International Criminal Court, has an important
role to play in promoting justice by prosecuting the
perpetrators of grave violations against children.
Jordan was among the leading Middle East States
to ratify the relevant international commitments on the
protection of children, which we have implemented.
In 2006, we ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, the provisions of which
were widely distributed to all relevant States.
Jordan’s legislation now includes provisions
specifying that individuals under 18 years of age are
prohibited from involvement in military actions. Jordan
has also ratified the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their Destruction,
including its Optional Protocol, as evidence of our
commitment to providing children with comprehensive
protection.
Clearly, the Middle East suffers from a vacuum in
the area of the protection of children in armed conflict
and under foreign occupation. Israel’s construction of
the separation wall in the occupied Palestinian territory,
its refusal to provide permits for the construction
of schools and its placing of obstacles to providing
educational services for the Arab population of East
Jerusalem, along with its continued illegal blockade,
have all led to depriving Palestinian children access
to educational services. Nearly 30,000 Palestinian
children have been deprived of the opportunity to take
part in the official education system.

14-2558323/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

Resolution 2139 (2014) addressed the humanitarian
catastrophe inside and beyond Syria, where the victims
are mostly children. Implementing the resolution will
alleviate the catastrophe involving children. We call
upon all parties to implement the resolution, as well as
for enhanced efforts by the international community in
that regard.
Jordan takes this opportunity to mention specifically
paragraph 15 of the resolution, which “[e]mphasizes that
the humanitarian situation will continue to deteriorate
in the absence of a political solution”. That has increased
the humanitarian and economic challenges confronting
the States of the region, including in particular Jordan,
which has received continuous flows of Syrian refugees,
a large number of whom are children.
Jordan has opened its education system to Syrian
refugee children, which has led to overcrowded
classrooms and a 41 per cent increase in the attendance
rate. It has also led 80 per cent of the Kingdom’s schools
to provide two sessions per day. Estimates indicate that
86,000 Syrian students have enrolled in public schools
in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan throughout the
various governorates, and that 21,000 Syrian students
have enrolled in schools in the refugee camps since
the Syrian crisis started in March 2011. As a result, the
Government of Jordan is now shouldering the financial,
economic and social burdens of hosting the refugees.
The cost of hosting a refugee child now exceeds $3,500
annually, the large portion of which is borne by the
Jordanian treasury.
In cooperation with UNICEF, Jordan has provided
social and psychological support programmes to
more than 111,000 Syrian students. The programmes
aim to alleviate the stress of being a refugee and to
rehabilitate them. In addition, Jordan hosts more than
42 per cent of the total number of Palestinian refugees
worldwide — more than 2 million refugees — yet
Jordan receives only approximately 20 per cent of the
budget of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA).
We note that, in the past 65 years, Jordan has
provided direct and indirect services to refugees,
despite its limited resources, including education.
Estimates indicate that nearly 150,000 children are
enrolled in UNICEF’s schools, as compared to the more
than 491,000 refugee children enrolled in public schools
throughout the Kingdom. That has cost the country’s
treasury over $190 million annuallly, over and above
the education services provided by UNRWA.
24/79

07/03/2014

Jordan will continue its cooperation with the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict. My country
commends the role of the United Nations and its efforts
to alleviate the suffering of the refugee children in the
Kingdom. However, the international community must
assume its responsibility with regard to children and
continue to play a leading role in protecting their rights.
Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank Luxembourg, Minister Asselbourn and you,
Madam, for convening this open debate and for your
country’s leadership of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict.
My country welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2143 (2014), proposed by Luxembourg and
sponsored by Chile at a critical time, as highlighted
by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. We value and
welcome the statements delivered by the SecretaryGeneral; his Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; the Executive
Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake’ and especially
by Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, whose testimony has urged
the Council to take decisive action on the issue before
it.
My delegation endorses the statement to be
delivered later by the representative of Greece on behalf
of the Human Security Network, of which my country
is a member.
On the international scene today, the vulnerability
of children in situations of armed conflict contributes an
element of urgency, dedication and strong commitment
to global efforts to protect children — efforts that
should certainly not be selective. The situations in the
Syrian Arab Republic, the Central African Republic
and South Sudan, among others, remind us of our
responsibilities. In that regard, Chile would like to
emphasize the challenge implicit in the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict.
Our reflections here will be based on some issues
raised in the President’s concept note (S/2014/144,
annex). As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its Optional Protocols, to Convention
No.182 of the International Labour Organization and
to the Paris Principles on children associated with
armed forces or groups, Chile welcomes the campaign
“Children, not soldiers”, launched yesterday by the
Special Representative and UNICEF and aimed at

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

preventing and eradicating the recruitment and use
of children by armed Government forces by 2016.
We would like to stress how important it is that the
campaign not divert attention from action designed to
eradicate this practice by armed groups. We believe
the campaign could benefit from forming coalitions
and holding regional meetings, as was done in the
framework of the conferences on the use of children as
soldiers held in Maputo and Montevideo in 1999.
States bear the primary responsibility both for
ending impunity and for trying and punishing those
responsible for atrocities committed against children.
In cases where States are unable or unwilling to
bring the suspects to justice, responsibility lies
with the International Criminal Court to prosecute
crimes covered under the Rome Statute. International
commissions of inquiry must tackle this issue and
redouble efforts to preserve the evidence of such highly
serious crimes.
The registration of births, including delayed
registration, not only makes it possible to verify the age
of child recruits and ensure that they are demobilized,
it also constitutes evidence that can be used to punish
those responsible for their recruitment, thus helping
to end impunity. We welcome the fact that today’s
resolution 2143 (2014) covers this issue. The Council
should consider taking more forceful action against
those who commit serious and persistent violations
against children and imposing sanctions on persistent
perpetrators. We would welcome recommendations
on the subject from the groups of experts on the
Sanctions Committees and hope that resolutions on
new committees and mandate renewals will take due
account of the situation of children in armed conflict.
In connection with the implementation of
resolution 1998 (2011), of which Chile was a sponsor,
we emphasize the importance of respecting the civilian
nature of schools and condemn attacks and threats of
attacks contravening international humanitarian law on
schools and hospitals and on those protected through
their connection to them. We are also concerned about
closings of schools and hospitals in situations of armed
conflict, undermining the right to education. We urge
parties to armed conflicts to refrain from such actions
and hope that the Secretary-General will continue to
monitor and report on military uses of schools and
hospitals. We are in favour of drafting and implementing
guidelines to reduce the use of schools and universities
by parties to armed conflicts in support of their military

S/PV.7129

actions and thus minimize the adverse effect of armed
conflicts on the safety of students and education. In that
connection, we note with interest guidelines formulated
by civil society that could be a basis for Government
action in this area. We believe that this issue should
be covered in ceasefire agreements and in post-conflict
agendas.
It is essential that mandates for peacekeeping
operations and important United Nations political
missions make specific provisions for the protection of
children, the ongoing deployment of child protection
advisers and training in the area for contingents and staff,
and ensure that we be kept informed on these issues in
the Council’s consultations on those mandates. In that
context, we appreciate the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations regarding the matter. Based
on my country’s experience in peacekeeping missions,
we have incorporated into the police sections of such
missions policewomen from Chile’s Carabineros and
Policía de Investigaciones, whose experience in the area
can contribute concretely to implementing mandates as
they relate to the protection of children.
We stress that more decisive and systemic efforts
are needed to end impunity and find a lasting solution
to the issue of eradicating and preventing illegal
violations of children’s rights. Two years before the
twentieth anniversary of Graça Machel’s report on
children and armed conflict (A/51/306), Chile reiterates
its commitment to making an active contribution to
preventing and eliminating all forms of violence that
affect the children of the world, from armed conflicts
to urban violence.
I will conclude with the watchwords of Chile’s
Nobel Prize laureate Gabriela Mistral: the future of
children is always today. Tomorrow will be too late.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank Luxembourg for organizing this meeting
on children and armed conflict and to congratulate it on
its leadership and continued commitment to protecting
children. I would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, his Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF
for their briefings. I also welcome the presence and
testimony of Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, a former child
soldier in Sierra Leone.
Children are often the most vulnerable and most
exposed victims in armed conflicts. They remain

14-2558325/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

scarred for life by the atrocities and consequences of
war.
That is why protecting them in war time remains
and will remain an ongoing concern of the international
community. Despite the adoption of the international
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols, as well as such regional legal
instruments as the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child, we are far from being able to
protect children during armed conflicts. The atrocities
to which children are subject in Syria and the Central
African Republic unfortunately corroborate that sad
reality.
In the Central African Republic, children are
increasingly targeted because of their community
or religious affiliations. The violence perpetrated
against them is unprecedented. Some are killed and
disemboweled, or even have limbs amputed. Such
barbarous acts in the Central African Republic
and elsewhere are grave human rights violations.
Investigations should be launched and prosecutions
undertaken so that the perpetrators of those terrible
crimes are punished.
The frequency, intensity and new warfare strategies
emerging today test the framework for prevention
and the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict. In various areas, children are the targets
of indiscriminate bombing, sometimes in schools.
They are recruited into armed forces willingly or
by force. Given the many unacceptable situations,
the international community unfortunately remains
powerless or reacts too late to prevent a disaster. At any
rate, the international community needs to step up its
efforts and commitment to ensuring implementation by
States of the engagements undertaken in the context
of protecting children in armed conflict. Similarly, we
need to strengthen the monitoring tools and mechanisms
in areas of armed conflict to better prevent violations of
the rights of children.
In my country Chad, as is known, owing to a
long civil war and the many outside aggressions that
it has suffered, children have been recruited and used
for years in the ranks of numerous groups and armed
forces. However, with the restoration of stability and
the strong political will of the highest authorities, Chad
has resolutely undertaken to establish a professional
army by putting an end to the recruitment of children
in its ranks and by demobilizing all those who were
there. Achieving that object was a major challenge
26/79

07/03/2014

to meet, but thanks to to the tireless political will of
His Excellency the President of the Republic, the wise
advice of Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflicts, to whom I would like to pay tribute, and the
consistent assistance of UNICEF, Chad succeeded in
that goal, to the satisfaction of all.
As I said yesterday at the launching of the joint
“Children, not soldiers” campaign, Chad has fully
implemented the plan of action agreed with the United
Nations and now no longer has children in its armed
forces. That has been confirmed by independent external
verification in the eight military regions, 11 areas of the
national gendarmerie and six national guard groupings.
Chad reaffirms its commitment to working with the
United Nations office and UNICEF to further strengthen
cooperation at the regional and subregional levels with
a view to promoting the protection of children, as we
have undertaken in the framework of the so-called
N’Djamena Declaration, adopted and signed on 9 June
2010 by the representatives of Chad, the Central African
Republic, the Sudan, Nigeria, Niger and Cameroon. We
are aware that our gains need to be consolidated daily
in order to be sustainable and to avoid a backsliding,
but the progress and results obtained are tangible and
should be taken into account in appraising the situation.
At the international level, we believe that the
international community needs to mobilize in order to
support the agenda of the United Nations system with
a view to putting an end to the recruitment and use of
children by 2016. In that regard, it would be desirable
to take action at the national and the regional levels in
order, inter alia, to evaluate international legislation
on the rights of the child so as to ensure harmony
and consolidate prevention and protection measures;
expand the number of parties to the instruments on the
rights of the child through well-targeted programmes
and robust incentive measures with respect to certain
States; support the efforts of affected States in order
to develop or adapt their legislation to better deal with
violations of the rights of the child; and, lastly, promote
cooperation on prevention and the protection of children
in armed conflict at the regional and subregional levels
through seminars and workshops.
Lastly, I would like once again to thank the United
Nations system, in particular Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
UNICEF, whose support has been very useful to Chad
in the implementation of the commitments undertaken

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

within the framework of its plan of action. Chad will
remain open to their advice and suggestions with regard
to what remains to be done.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Slovenia.
Ms. Vonta (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
Luxembourg presidency for convening this important
open debate. I also wish to thank Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon; Ms. Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict; Mr. Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
and Mr. Sawaneh for their comprehensive briefings.
Let me align our statement with the statements to
be delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the representative of the Human Security Network.
My country welcomes the recent developments
in the Security Council discussions on children and
armed conflict, such as the focus on sexual violence, in
particular on justice and accountability, the increased
attention to the issues of child protection when setting
up or renewing United Nations mission mandates and
the attention of children in fast-changing situations
on the Security Council agenda. We also welcome the
regular briefings by Special Representative Zerrougui
to the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
as well as other activities for the greater accountability.
We would encourage all actors to continue with those
efforts and to enhance the efficiency of the tools at their
disposal.
We are deeply concerned that, although much
has been done since 1996, when the Machel report on
the impact of armed conflict on children (A/51/306)
shocked the international community, children still
suffer in situations of armed conflict, such as in Syria
and the Central African Republic, as well as in too
many other places.
Slovenia remains concerned over the fact that
more than half of the parties listed in the annexes to
the Secretary-General’s annual report on children
and armed conflict are persistent perpetrators. The

S/PV.7129

Security Council needs to address that issue urgently by
imposing targeted measures and by considering ways to
increase pressure on such persistent perpetrators in the
Working Group.
We also believe that there is an urgent need to
identify ways to approach non-State armed groups
and to conclude action plans with them, since the vast
majority of the parties listed in the annexes to the
annual report are armed groups. An important role is
played by the authorities in the countries concerned
that should allow unconditional access of the United
Nations to those armed groups.
As a strong believer in the power of education,
Slovenia remains greatly concerned over the increasing
reports of attacks on schools and about the military use
of schools. Attacks on schools and the military use of
schools put children and teachers at risk while denying
children their right to education. We welcome the
drafting of the Lucens guidelines for protecting schools
and universities from military use during armed
conflict and support their finalization, which should be
followed by broad endorsement by States.
My country also strongly believes in the importance
of accountability and the fight against impunity. The
primary responsibility for the prosecution of conflictrelated crimes, including violations committed against
children, lies with States. Greater effort is therefore
needed to improve criminal justice at national levels.
Among other actions, we need to strengthen the
international legal framework for judicial assistance,
including extradition, between States in order to
support effective prosecution of international crimes
at a national level. Having recognized that legal gap,
Slovenia, the Netherlands, Belgium and Argentina
are working together on the initiative to consider the
possibility of adopting a new international instrument
on mutual legal assistance and extradition for the
effective investigation and prosecution of the most
serious crimes of international concern by domestic
jurisdictions. We intend to continue with activities in
that respect in the framework of the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,
and we invite other States to join the initiative.
The international community has been working on
the issue of child soldiers for a long time, yet children
are still recruited and used by parties to conflict. In that
regard, my country welcomes the campaign “Children,
not soldiers”, launched yesterday not far from here.

14-2558327/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

Its goal, to prevent and eliminate child recruitment by
national security forces by 2016, should not be missed.
Let me conclude by stressing the need for
preventive measures in order to achieve our common
goal. We recognize birth registration as one of the most
important measures. In December 2013, a professional
training programme was carried out on a system of
civil status and migration for Afghanistan, co-financed
by Slovenia. That programme included training on
civil registration. The main goal of that development
assistance programme was to present and share
Slovenia’s experience in that field.
Finally, I welcome the adoption of resolution
2143 (2014), on children and armed conflict, and its
aim to reinforce the implementation of the normative
framework that has been gradually developed in
the Security Council since the adoption of the first
resolution on this topic 15 years ago.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to take the
floor on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
States members. The candidate countries Montenegro
and Serbia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
First, let me thank today’s briefers for their
presentations. In particular, I wish to recognize the
tireless work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Leila Zerrougui in the interests of
children affected by armed conflict. Her mandate is as
relevant today as ever, given disturbing reports of grave
violations against children committed in many ongoing
conflicts, such as in Syria, the Central African Republic
and South Sudan. I would also like to thank specifically
Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for the very moving and
important statement that he made here today.
The European Union fully supports the
campaign “Children, not soldiers”, which the Special
Representative initiated yesterday with UNICEF and in
collaboration with other United Nations partners with a
view to ending and preventing the recruitment and use
of children by Government armed forces in conflict by
2016. We are extremely grateful for the strong emphasis

28/79

07/03/2014

that the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg has placed on all
of these issues, including through its initiative to hold
today’s meeting.
I would also say that it is particularly important
that the Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict continue to make good use of
the various instruments in its toolbox to respond to
all types of grave violations, whenever they occur,
including those committed by non-State groups. It is
essential that Member States afford the United Nations
unconditional access to armed non-State actors and that
the issue of children and armed conflict be addressed in
peace negotiations.
We concur with the worrying assessment of the
Secretary-General in his reports on the increasing use
of schools for military purposes, which may render
them more vulnerable to attacks and put more children
out of school or in risk of injury, abduction or other
violations. We therefore strongly welcome the efforts
of Luxembourg as the chair of the Working Group to
agree at the Council level on concrete measures that
could prevent such misuse and ensure accountability.
We urge all parties to conflicts to stop attacks on
schools and hospitals and on protected staff, and to
respect their civilian character. In the meantime, as a
mitigating measure, the European Union will continue
to pay attention to the education and wellbeing of
children affected by conflict. As Council members
will recall, the EU’s Nobel Prize money has been
used for the Children of Peace initiative. Through that
programme from 2012 to 2014, the EU has reached out
to approximately 108,000 children in countries such as
Syria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Pakistan
and Colombia. Protecting and promoting child rights
everywhere, especially in conflict-affected countries,
is an earmarked priority of the European Union’s
human rights funding instruments.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) continues
to play a crucial role in fighting impunity. Serious
crimes of international concern should be dealt with by
national judicial systems but, when they are unwilling
or unable to do so, States parties to the Rome Statute
should consider referring those situations to the ICC. It
is also important that the Security Council use its power
to refer situations to the ICC. Further institutional
dialogue between the Court and the Security Council
and the effective follow up of referrals made by the
Security Council to the ICC could assist in ensuring
accountability.
14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7129

All States members of the European Union are
parties to the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of
children in armed conflict and adhere to the same
international child-protection standards. That is also
an important milestone in the light of the European
Union’s role in crisis management and peacebuilding,
with approximately 7,000 civilian and military staff
deployed in various conflict zones.

civilians. We hope to develop partnerships with other
organizations as well.

Equally important is the need to train peacekeepers
on child protection issues and to ensure the inclusion
of child protection provisions in the mandates of
crisis-management operations, in standard operating
procedures and in rules of engagement.

Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you, Mr. President,
for providing this opportunity to Member States to
share their views on this important subject. We also
thank your delegation for the very useful concept note
(S/2014/144, annex).

The European Union has made serious efforts
over recent months to strengthen its capacity in child
protection in headquarters and in operations. In
June 2013, in cooperation with UNICEF and several
non-governmental organizations, the European Union
organized the first regular training for its staff on
children and armed conflict. The course will be given
on annual basis. In October 2013, with the help of
Belgium and Save the Children, the European Union
tested its predeployment child protection training
module for civilian and military personnel.

In one of the many religions that we have in India,
God himself is depicted as a child. The child is indeed
divine. Notwithstanding that divinity, child soldiers
have been used in wars since time immemorial. In
contemporary times, it was drummer boys who led
Napoleon’s initial attack in the battle of Waterloo on
18 June 1815, only to be shredded to pieces by gunfire
from the other side. Large numbers of women and
children were also wilfully killed in concentration
camps and by indiscriminate air raids in the Second
World War.

As of February 2014, a toolkit aimed at integrating
child rights in development cooperation had been
finalized for use, not only by European Union staff but
also by all other donors and civil society organizations.
The toolkit was developed in cooperation with UNICEF.

We have heard from Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh of
Sierra Leone today. There was a battle associated with
the United Nations peacekeeping force in that country.
On 10 September 2000, the British special forces
launched Operation Barras to rescue British soldiers
who had been captured by the West Side Boys. While
the operation was successful, it led to casualties.

In 2013, the European Union was careful to
mainstream the promotion of human rights, child
protection and international humanitarian law in the
mandate of the EU Training Mission in Mali. This
year, we incorporated child protection in the ongoing
planning for the European Union operation in the
Central African Republic.
We believe that regional and subregional
organizations have an important role to play in the
promotion and protection of the rights of the child,
including during armed conflict. There are a number of
initiatives we have organized together with the African
Union, the World Bank and the United Nations — for
instance, a workshop on children in armed conflict,
held in Addis Ababa in September 2013. At the
Europe-Africa summit next month, our heads of States
and Government will make commitments towards
further cooperation, including on the protection of

Let me conclude by expressing the hope that the
Security Council will remain a forum that is guided in
its decisions on peace and security by the best interests
of children. Children deserve this.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.

Looking at the theatre in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo today, we find an extensive use of child
soldiers by various armed groups. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has itself noted with concern
allegations that 30 to 40 per cent of the Nduma Defence
of Congo elements may be below 18 years of age. Despite
this evidence, the Security Council has authorized
the creation of an Intervention Brigade to carry out
targeted offensive operations. The rules of engagement
are, however, silent on engagement with child soldiers.
The traumatizing nature of such engagement will also
have to be considered.
We share the view contained in the concept note that
those who exploit children should be held accountable.
We also agree that the most effective way of doing so is

14-2558329/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

through capacity-building for Member States. Action for
that should originate from the issue’s consideration by
the General Assembly and Peacebuilding Commission.
National efforts on the ground should be supported
by political missions. Civilian protection advisers
embedded in peacekeeping missions would themselves
only be able to perform a limited role.
The political will to address the problem needs to
go beyond the theatre of war. We need to address the
economic and social marginalization of the poorest
nations, which is driving hundreds of millions into the
kind of childhood that could well make them part of
tomorrow’s problem rather than tomorrow’s solutions.
It is that understanding that explains the importance
that our delegation attaches to an ambitious post2015 development agenda that has built-in means of
implementation and the required enabling environment
for its achievement.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, the members of the Security Council,
Ms. Zerrougui, and in particular Mr. Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh, who today put a face and a smile on the story
of so many others in places, such as Colombia, where
so many children have experienced these difficulties.
(spoke in Spanish)
I believe it is especially significant that the first time
that I am participating in a Security Council debate, we
are dealing with the very delicate subject of children
in armed conflict. That is why I should like to express
my gratitude, on Colombia’s behalf, for this invitation
to participate in this open debate. For a country such
as my own that has faced tremendous challenges as a
result of armed conflict, this is a valuable opportunity
to share experiences and lessons learned on an issue
that we unfortunately know all too well.
Security Council resolutions on this subject not only
enjoy the firm support of my Government, but also carry
institutional weight, since, as established in resolution
1612 (2005) and resolution 2143 (2014), adopted today,
the primary role of States in protecting and assisting
girls and boys in armed conflict and developing
the necessary corrective measures is recognized.
Colombia agrees with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Zerrougui, that in the implementation of the
monitoring and reporting mechanism established under
30/79

07/03/2014

resolution 1612 (2005), any dialogue between special
representatives, the United Nations team in our country
or the task force of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism will be possible only with the prior express
agreement of the Government of Colombia, and we
were thus able to work jointly.
After the visit by Mrs. Graça Machel to Colombia
in 1996, almost 20 years ago, to share her report on
the impact of armed conflict on children (A/51/306), we
adopted a law prohibiting and punishing the recruitment
of children under 18 years of age by the armed forces.
Our commitment is also evidenced in the voluntary
acceptance of the mechanism, the ongoing dialogue at
the political and technical levels between the national
Government and the United Nations system, and the
establishment and implementation of comprehensive
policies to protect children from recruitment.
Allow me to share with the Council that the
fundamental strategy of the Colombian State includes a
policy to prevent the recruitment and use of girls, boys
and adolescents by illegal organized armed groups
and criminal groups. Since 2010, we have been able
to dedicate a significant amount — $190 million to
date — to implementing that initiative. Colombia has
established an intersectoral committee that, since 2007,
has been working to reduce the recruitment of youth by
illegal armed groups. The committee brings together
23 national, regional and local entities that address the
prevention of sexual violence against girls and boys.
That strategy has produced encouraging results. We
have not achieved everything we wanted to, and we are
not able to declare a complete victory, but at least 3,400
children have been dissociated from illegal groups.
Some 1,160 investigations have been opened since 2003
by the country’s general prosecutor concerning the
rights of forcibly recruited children and the childhood
of which armed groups deprived them.
Colombia believes that the United Nations role in
the issue of children in armed conflict deserves our
attention due to the gravity and importance of the issue.
The focus should be on cooperation, prevention and the
development of national capacities to prevent, combat
and respond to this kind of problem, which confers on
us the moral obligation to provide a brighter future for
any society that calls for it.
In 2013, the National Centre for Historical
Memory, which was established by the Government of
Colombia as part of the peace process and through the
law for victims and the restoration of land, published
14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

a heartrending report entitled “Enough already: a
memoir of war and dignity”, which recounts the very
valiant way in which women in particular demanded
that illegal groups return their children, who had been
tricked into being recruited or had simply been recruited
against their will. I therefore want to emphasize, as our
Ambassador indicated to the Council last year (see
S/PV.6980), we believe that the implementation of the
mechanism set out in resolution 1612 (2005) should
also be sharply focused on strengthening the existing
international pressure brought to bear on illegal armed
groups to put an end to their violent actions and the
recruitment of minors. Similarly, we also believe that
we should always bear in mind that in dealing with
this issue, the Council should consider the situations
and focus on those where there are armed groups that
indeed threaten international peace and security, and
establish distinctions with those situations that are
not on its agenda. Every case must be analysed on an
individual basis and the appropriate response to the
circumstances, as well the specific context, of each
situation should be found.
The Government of Colombia is working with the
full conviction that the rebuilding of society in postconflict situations, if we are to achieve the peace
that we so deeply desire as Colombians, should be
established on the basis of protection for boys and girls.
As underscored by President Santos Calderón himself,
Colombia seeks genuine peace — peace that will
ensure non-repetition, contribute to an environment of
reconciliation and heal the wounds of confrontation,
and give my country its first generation in a long time
of children who grow up in an environment of peace,
security and prosperity.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Barriga (Liechtenstein): At the outset, I would
like to thank Luxembourg for holding this debate and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as the other briefers, for providing the Security
Council with timely information and analysis on the
impact of armed conflicts on children around the world.
We especially commend Mr. Sawaneh for his inspiring
words and the courage to share his experiences with us
here today.
Liechtenstein strongly condemns the widespread
intentional attacks on children and teachers at schools.
We also deplore the military use of schools, which
gravely endangers civilians and deprives children

S/PV.7129

of their education. Those are clear violations of
international humanitarian law, and we urge States to
take all the necessary steps to end those practices and
to protect children’s right to education. In that context,
we particularly welcome the draft Lucens guidelines
and we hope for their widespread endorsement.
Liechtenstein reiterates its firm support for the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and welcomes the “Children, not soldiers”
campaign. We are happy to see the willingness of
Governments to sign national action plans and end
the recruitment and use of child soldiers. But most
of the parties listed in the annex to the Secretary
General’s report (S/2113/245) are non-State actors. Of
the 11 persistent perpetrators, 10 are non-State actors.
We therefore fully support the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General’s efforts to engage with
all the relevant parties to conclude action plans and
promote their implementation. The early conclusion of
such action plans is also in the interest of the States
concerned. They should therefore allow unconditional
access for and facilitate the United Nations important
work in that regard.
Liechtenstein was shocked by the findings of the
Secretary-General’s recent report on children and armed
conflict in Syria (S/2014/31), which listed a number of
horrendous violations and abuses against children. We
are deeply concerned about those ongoing violations
and abuses by both parties to the conflict and ask them
to immediately put an end to them. The recent adoption
of resolution 2139 (2014) is of particular importance for
the situation of children, who suffer disproportionately
from the armed conflict in Syria. We were relieved to
see the Council take meaningful, albeit long overdue,
action on the humanitarian situation in Syria. We hope
that the Council will continue acting with resolve
and impose appropriate sanctions should the parties
fail to comply with the resolution. In addition, the
Council should finally live up to its responsibility to
ensure that those committing atrocity crimes in Syria,
in particular crimes against children, are brought to
justice. In the current circumstances, only a referral
to the International Criminal Court could jump-start
accountability efforts in Syria.
Let me conclude by drawing the Council’s attention
to the outcome of a workshop on strengthening the
children and armed conflict agenda, which we convened
together with our non-governmental organization
partner Watchlist and the Liechtenstein Institute on

14-2558331/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

Self-Determination in December last year. The report
was recently published as an official document and it
contains a number of useful recommendations that we
recommend for all stakeholders in the field of children
and armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank the presidency of Luxembourg
for convening this open debate on a topic so close
to Luxembourg’s work in the Council. The personal
presence of Deputy Prime Minister Asselborn only
underscores that. In that vein, we also express our special
appreciation to Luxembourg for its chairmanship of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, as well
as for the concept note (S/2014/144, annex) prepared
for this debate. We also thank the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui and Mr. Anthony Lake for their
respective briefings on the item under discussion. We
also express our appreciation to Mr. Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh for sharing his painful experience with us and
for encouraging us to continue working to find a better
life for all children.
Guatemala continues to give the highest priority to
addressing the situation of children caught up in armed
conflict, as well as to strengthening the provisions
for the protection of boys and girls in all the relevant
mandates of the United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions, including the deployment of
child protection advisers.
Since the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999),
in 1999, the links that have developed among
Governments, the United Nations, the international
community as a whole and civil society have been
invaluable for the effective release of child soldiers,
as well as for gathering evidence on serious violations
against children set out in resolution 1612 (2005) and
required by the monitoring and reporting mechanism.
We believe that the field visits of the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict are very illustrative.
Our delegation had the privilege of participating in the
visit to Myanmar in December 2013, which allowed
us to consider the Government’s political will to end
the recruitment of children into the armed forces as a
first step that must be reinforced subsequently through
the implementation of mechanisms to verify age at
recruitment centres, which requires having a universal

32/79

07/03/2014

registry of birth certificates, especially in remote rural
areas.
We therefore believe it is necessary to strengthen
national capacities and support the reforms of the
justice and security sectors, as well as the creation
of specialized tribunals and mixed courts to combat
mpunity for those who commit serious violations against
children’s rights, especially persistent perpetrators,
who should not be given any amnesty or hold office in
their respective Governments or armed forces.
We attach importance to the complementarity
of international justice to national mechanisms, such
as the International Criminal Court, in bringing to
justice those responsible for genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes, especially as committed
against children. In addition, our policies must evolve
in accordance with changing circumstances. It is
alarming that schools continue to be used for military
purposes, such as for barracks or weapons caches or as
command, detention and interrogation centres.
That is why we enthusiastically support the
“Children, not soldiers” campaign, launched yesterday
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF, in
collaboration with other agencies and programmes
of the United Nations system, which seeks to end by
2016 the recruitment and use of children as soldiers for
armed forces on the part of those Government security
forces listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s
annual reports.
In conclusion, we welcome the adoption this
morning of resolution 2143 (2014), which addresses the
concerns we have expressed earlier, carrying the votes
that enable us to advance in the protection of children
so that they will not be the most vulnerable group in
armed conflicts.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries: Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
We thank the Luxembourg presidency for holding
this important debate and welcome the adoption
of resolution 2143 (2014) today. We also reaffirm
our strong support to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Leila Zerrougui, and to the important work of her

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

office; to UNICEF; and to other United Nations actors
in the field. We would like to express our gratitude to
today’s briefers for their contributions — not the least
to Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for his moving personal
testimony and advice. We further acknowledge and
support the crucial role of civil society in advancing
the children and armed conflict agenda.
The implementation of action plans by Governments
and the United Nations is imperative in order to advance
the agenda. We therefore fully endorse the Special
Representative’s “Children, not soldiers” campaign,
launched yesterday, to end the recruitment and use of
children by Government security forces by 2016. We
further call for enhanced engagement with non-State
armed groups for the purposes of ending violations. We
call on them to conclude action plans and urge relevant
Member States to allow unconditional access of the
United Nations to those groups.
The next true test of the Council’s work in halting
violations against conflict-affected children will be
how the Council acts with regard to the category of
parties listed by the Secretary-General as persistent
perpetrators. Those parties to conflict, who have
chronically violated children’s rights and have been
listed in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s reports
for more than five years, make up more than half of the
parties.
Six parties have already signed action plans with
concrete time-bound steps to prevent the recruitment
and use of children in Government forces. It is important
that the Council help ensure that the plans are translated
into measurable action and that the United Nations
continue to provide resources, advice and technical
assistance to the Governments concerned. We call on
all other concerned parties to sign such action plans.
The Nordic countries are deeply concerned about
the ongoing violations against children in Syria. We
urge all Member States to act to protect schools, teachers
and students from attacks and to hold perpetrators
accountable. We condemn attacks on schools and the
military use of schools, and urge Member States to
take steps both within their own legislation, military
policies and doctrine, as well as internationally,
to end such use of school facilities and to protect
children’s right to education. We welcome the drafting
of the Lucens guidelines for protecting schools and
universities from military use during armed conflict,
and we are committed to supporting its finalization and
endorsement by States.

S/PV.7129

Conflicts often have a regional impact. Many
regional organizations therefore have a role to play
in conflict prevention, mediation and peacekeeping.
We support the Special Representative’s focus on
engaging and strengthening partnerships with regional
organizations for the sake of mainstreaming child
protection. The partnership of Special Representatives
of the Secretary-General and UNICEF with the
Peace and Security Department of the African Union
Commission is a good example of how to deal with
the issue. We urge regional organizations to share
experiences, cooperate and learn from each other.
This year, Sweden intends to host a training of
trainers child-protection course. It will be organized
with the support of the Secretariat, in partnership with
the Swedish Armed Forces International Centre, which
has extensive experience and expertise in delivering
similar training programmes.
Ensuring access to health care and education
for children in armed conflict may often be a very
challenging task, but it is of great importance. Education
is a powerful instrument for preventing young people
from involvement with non-State armed groups, and
an educated population is an important resource for
post-conflict reconstruction, economic development
and the building of a just and equal society. Special
attention should be given to children, who are typically
discriminated against or are at particularly high risk of
being subject to violence, especially girls and children
with disabilities.
We must fight against impunity for perpetrators
of grave violations against children in armed conflict,
including sexual violence, and underscore the
importance of national and international accountability
mechanisms, in particular the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The Security Council should, for example,
urgently address the situation in Syria in all its aspects,
including on a possible referral to the ICC. We welcome
the Special Representative’s request for progress in
prosecuting crimes of sexual violence at both the
national and the international levels.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium wishes to associate itself with the statement
made earlier today by the observer of the European
Union and congratulates Luxembourg for its
commitment to the issue under discussion.

14-2558333/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

The past few years have been marked by significant
progress in the field of protection of the rights of the child
in armed conflict, more specifically in the prevention
of and response to violence and abuses committed
against them. In that context, we refer in particular to
the demobilization, rehabilitation and reintegration of
thousands of children recruited into armed forces and
the signing of national action plans between parties to
armed conflict and the United Nations.
Despite such progress, however, huge challenges
remain. We stress first of all that although positive
achievements have been made in the fight against
the recruitment of children into armed forces, it is
limited at this stage to governmental forces. It is
therefore necessary to pursue dialogue to achieve
our goal of eliminating the use of child soldiers by
non-governmental armed forces and groups.
Belgium welcomes the attention accorded
in resolution 2143 (2014) — which the Security
Council has just adopted today and which Belgium
co-sponsored — to the problem of military use of
schools by governmental and non-governmental armed
groups, and to attacks on schools and hospitals. Indeed,
the Secretary-General’s report on children and armed
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic (S/2014/31) notes
an increase in attacks on schools and hospitals, which
should be areas of peace and refuge. The report notes,
however, that they are increasingly attacked or used for
military purposes.
Resolution 1998 (2011) highlights the impact of such
attacks on the security, education and health of children
in armed conflict, and calls for increased attention to
the issue. Belgium and Luxembourg have therefore
undertaken the initiative of organizing an event on the
margins of the current Human Rights Council session
to raise awareness of that urgent problem and shed
light on the challenges and opportunities involved in
implementing the resolution.
Belgium has similar concerns about the
reintegration of children who were involved in armed
conflict, not only as child soldiers but as sexual slaves,
scouts, messengers or in any daily life task. The
psychological impact of recruitment into armed forces
and the significant stigmatization of the children make
their return to civilian life especially difficult. Without
appropriate, targeted and long-term follow up — as
the Council heard in today’s testimony — they risk
becoming, in turn, perpetrators of violence as a result of
limited life experiences focused on the use of weapons.
34/79

07/03/2014

That is why we need to provide them with special
assistance and include their opinions and experiences
in peace processes.
Moreover, various awareness-raising actions are
necessary on the issue of children in armed conflict. On
the one hand, there is a need to raise awareness among
families and communities to prevent stigmatization
of the children; on the other hand, security forces
themselves must be informed of the negative
consequences, both for children involved as well as for
the security forces themselves.
Awareness-raising is also necessary in tackling the
issue of sexual violence, especially in cases involving
children. In the Sudan and in Syria, for example,
children who have suffered sexual abuse tend to remain
silent, rather than to complain, because they fear social
exclusion and reprisals. It is therefore of the utmost
importance to implement specific provisions in order to
guarantee access to justice and appropriate assistance
as part of children’s reintegration process.
In addition, while reporting such crimes is an
important first step for the victims, their voices need to
be heard and the perpetrators need to face justice.
Belgium remains highly concerned by the impunity
surrounding the perpetrators of violence. In that respect,
we welcome in particular the efforts of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to implement a national plan
aimed at preventing and eliminating the recruitment of
children in the national armed forces and preventing
sexual violence. However, Belgium notes with concern
the impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of sexual
violence. We encourage the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to undertake all possible measures to bring to
justice those responsible for such crimes.
Under the framework of the fight against sexual
violence, my country again calls for the application of
the broadest possible definition of sexual violence, as
determined by the International Criminal Court.
Finally, Belgium calls upon all of the countries
that have not yet ratified the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict to do so as
quickly as possible.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): Thank you, Sir, for convening
this open debate on children and armed conflict. Let me
14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

also take the opportunity to commend your country’s
chairmanship of the Council’s Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
I join the other speakers in welcoming the launch
of the campaign “Children, not soldiers” by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui. I wish also
to thank Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, and UNICEF Executive
Director Anthony Lake for their commitment to
defending and promoting the rights of children who are
victims of armed conflicts.
Italy endorses the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union.
As a constant advocate of greater Security Council
action to address the scourge of children in armed
conflicts, Italy welcomes the progress made in recent
years to strengthen the protection framework. The
resolution presented by Luxembourg and adopted today
(resolution 2143 (2014)), which Italy has sponsored,
confirms that trend. Yet there is still much to be done.
We therefore call on Security Council members to
remain committed to advancing this critical agenda.
Italy concurs with the assessments of the SecretaryGeneral contained in his report (A/68/267), regarding
increasing deliberate attacks on schools, teachers and
students. We are also concerned about the widespread
use of schools for military purposes, including as torture
sites. By rendering schools legitimate targets of attack,
children and teachers are put at risk and students’ right
to an education is denied.
In too many parts of the world, violations against
children are carried out in a climate of impunity.
Impunity undermines the credibility of the protection
system created by the Security Council. The Council
must step up its political engagement in that field.
Cooperation with national and international courts is
crucial. In that regard, Italy recalls that, in cases of
serious crimes of international concern, State parties
to the Rome Statute should consider referring such
cases to the International Criminal Court when national
judicial systems are unwilling or unable to deal with
such situations.
The engagement of the entire United Nations
system is critical to ensuring the implementation
of the architecture developed since the adoption of
resolution 1612 (2005). That is why we commend the

S/PV.7129

work of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
in cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
UNICEF and non-governmental organizations, to
develop a comprehensive and systematic training
programme on child protection and child rights for
all peacekeeping personnel — an initiative Italy has
supported since its inception.
I conclude by repeating the call for firm and united
action by the international community and by the
Security Council. We have a solid protection framework
to implement. Any boy or girl whom we save from the
scourge of war represents hope for a better future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Thailand.
Mr. Bamrungphong (Thailand): At the outset,
allow me to congratulate Luxembourg for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March as well as to thank you, Sir, for convening this
important debate and for the informative concept note
(S/2014/144, annex).
My delegation would like to thank Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Anthony
Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, and Mr. Alhaji
Babah Sawaneh for their important statements and
valuable perspectives.
As a member of the Human Security Network,
Thailand aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
later by the delegation of Greece on behalf of the
Network.
Children should joyfully play on playgrounds,
not fearfully take cover on battlefields. Thailand
therefore commends and fully supports the “Children,
not soldiers” campaign initiated by the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict
together with UNICEF.
As a State party to the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, which prohibits the
recruitment or use of children as soldiers, Thailand
has clear rules and regulations to ensure that children
under 18 years of age are not conscripted, recruited or
involved in combat. The Royal Thai Government is also
in the process of amending its child protection act to
explicitly criminalize the involvement of children in
armed forces or armed groups.

14-2558335/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

Let me turn to the issue of mainstreaming
child protection into the relevant United Nations
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and political missions.
In armed conflict situations, peacekeepers are often at
the forefront in protecting children. We underscore the
importance of having clear mandates and guidelines
in order for them to operate effectively. Peacekeepers
and peacebuilders also need specific predeployment
and in-mission training on issues concerning children
affected by armed conflict.
We also envisage a growing role for female
peacekeepers in child protection and rehabilitation
during and after armed conflicts. Thailand has
intensified its national efforts to increase its numbers of
female peacekeepers. They will be specifically trained
in international law and international humanitarian law
on the rights and protection of women and children. It
is our earnest hope that Thai female peacekeepers will
be able to make an ongoing contribution, particularly in
cases involving violence against women and children,
who need special care and treatment.
Next Monday, 10 March, Thailand will organize a
side event on increasing women’s contribution to peace
and security at the Japan Society here in New York.
Participants from Australia, Rwanda and Indonesia
will share their views and perspectives on the role of
female peacekeepers. In addition, two Thai female
peacekeepers will share their experiences from
peacekeeping missions in Haiti and Darfur.
In her concept note (S/2014/144, annex), the
President raises the question of how to make effective
progress on the issue of children and armed conflict. In
that regard, Thailand would like to reiterate the views
on the subject that it outlined in this Chamber last year.
First, the issue of child protection is
multidimensional. Different United Nations agencies
have different mandates. Synergies for protecting
children can be created by strengthening collaboration
and coordination within the United Nations system.
To avoid duplication of effort and make the best use
of limited resources, each entity’s mandate should be
strictly adhered to and carried out in a transparent and
accountable manner.
Secondly, we have repeatedly stressed the
importance of the information that forms the basis of
relevant reports and analysis. Thailand recognizes the
importance of gathering information from all sources
and stakeholders, including civil society. However,

36/79

07/03/2014

such information must be accurate, objective, reliable
and verifiable, as stipulated in paragraph 17 of the
Security Council’s landmark resolution 1998 (2011).
Assessments based on false or incorrect information or,
even worse, biased analysis, can misdirect future policy
and programmes and would be counterproductive.
Thirdly, my delegation has always highlighted
the critical importance of working with the consent
of concerned Governments and in close cooperation
with them. All actions taken by the United Nations
should aim to support national efforts and increase the
capacities of concerned Governments, not complicate
their work or create unintended negative consequences
on the ground that could ultimately place children at
greater risk.
My delegation notes that resolution 2143 (2014),
just adopted, invites the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict to
brief the Council on the issue of delisting. We welcome
such actions. Clear criteria for delisting will enable
the countries and parties concerned to understand and
take appropriate measures to meet the requirements for
delisting. It will allow work to be focused on areas of
real armed conflict and those where action is needed to
ensure that children are protected. It will also ensure
the most efficient use of limited budgets, time and
manpower. All mandate holders and desk staff, as well
as members of the Secretariat and Member States, will
instead be able to devote their time, energy and efforts
to situations where they are really needed and where
they can make a difference, especially on the ground.
We hope earnestly that the Council will take our views
into consideration.
In closing, my delegation condemns all grave
violations and crimes against children in situations of
armed conflict. Let me reiterate Thailand’s support
for and commitment to the effective implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions on this issue
and to all mandate holders working for children’s best
interests.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this open debate on an important subject.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
the various briefers for their statements earlier today.
I also welcome and support the adoption of
resolution 2143 (2014).
14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

Today I would like to touch on four issues. The
first is that of child soldiers; the second is on persistent
perpetrators. For the third, I would like to discuss
peacekeepers’ responsibility to protect children. The
last is that of military use of and attacks on schools.
First, I would like to address the issue of child
soldiers and welcome the “Children, not soldiers”
campaign launched yesterday. I commend the initiative
taken by Special Representative Zerrougui and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Lake, in starting
this campaign. We support it and will join in its efforts
to eliminate the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces in conflict by 2016. Looking
back, we can see that the issue of child soldiers is
exactly what made the Security Council put the subject
of children and armed conflict on its agenda. Child
soldiers are deprived of their right to education. Their
reintegration into society is difficult. That is a heavy
loss for society as a whole.
Japan has provided support for reintegrating child
soldiers into society in Africa, the Middle East and
Asia, through both bilateral assistance and international
organizations. That support represents an application
of the concept of human security, which Japan has been
promoting, by protecting and empowering the children
who are most vulnerable in armed conflicts. We have
expended approximately $75 million over the past five
years on the reintegration of child soldiers into society.
That includes a financial contribution to Sri Lanka for
the purpose of supporting job training for former child
soldiers through the United Nations Human Security
Fund. We are planning to make further financial
contributions relating to the issue of child soldiers in
such countries as the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Mauritania
and South Sudan.
Secondly, when addressing the agenda of children
and armed conflict, the international community
must pay attention to persistent perpetrators of grave
violations against children. In the last five reports of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict,
more than 30 parties to conflicts were listed. Of those,
11 have been on the list for more than a decade. The
Security Council should respond more firmly to such
persistent perpetrators, with measures that include
considering the possibility of an assets freeze. In
that context, Japan welcomes the fact that parties to
conflicts in Sri Lanka and Nepal have been delisted
from the Secretary-General’s reports. They were

S/PV.7129

delisted because they achieved considerable progress in
implementing the action plan that had been agreed on
between them and the United Nations. It is important
to study those cases to understand why the delistings
were possible, because we believe those lessons could
be applicable to similar situations in other countries.
Thirdly, one of the main objectives of United
Nations peacekeeping operations is to protect children
in conflict and post-conflict situations. Yet we hear
cases where peacekeepers have been criticized for
becoming violators of the rights of children. Is that not
a disgrace to the reputation of the United Nations?
I would like to emphasize that United Nations
peacekeeping operations should be a model in protecting
children. We, as troop-contributing countries to United
Nations peacekeeping operations, should recognize our
responsibility to train our personnel at home so that
they will not abuse children in the course of their duties
but will protect them.
Finally, the children and armed conflict agenda is
not only about child soldiers. There is also a growing
recognition of the military use of and attacks against
schools.
Japan pays great attention to the formulation of
the draft Lucens Guidelines for Protecting Schools
and Universities from Military Use during Armed
Conflict. The work of the Global Coalition to Protect
Education from Attack is bearing fruit. Japan, for its
part, is willing to participate in the future process of
the Lucens Guidelines.
Children are sometimes exploited, intimidated,
threatened and even killed all over the world. There
are a number of measures to prevent those tragic
cases, including providing assistance to countries in
conflict and developing rules and standards to address
new challenges. We are determined to contribute to
protecting the rights of children by using those concrete
actions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Riecken (Austria): We would like to sincerely
thank Luxembourg for convening this important open
debate today. Let me also express our appreciation for
Luxembourg’s leadership and tireless efforts on children
and armed conflict in the Council. We welcome the
briefings made, as well as the adoption of the resolution
2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict.

14-2558337/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

07/03/2014

Austria associates itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
Human Security Network statement to be delivered by
the representative of Greece.

not only as a single point of contact within the mission
but also in reaching out to all stakeholders responsible
for children’s rights and often also in monitoring the
implementation of action plans.

There is no doubt that the Security Council
has elaborated an impressive and comprehensive
framework for the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict. Yet more efforts need to be devoted
to a systematic implementation of the Security Council
resolutions and the mainstreaming of child protection
concerns into the Council’s work.

In addition to the deployment of child protection
advisers, ensuring appropriate training of peacekeepers
on child protection is of critical importance. We
therefore welcome the work carried out by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations on developing
training standards and are proud to contribute to
the development of a specialized training for child
protection advisers. Following the recent validation of
the course materials, the first training course for child
protection advisors will be held in the autumn of this
year. Austria will also be hosting a United Nations
training of trainers course on the protection of civilians
and child protection in May this year.

Out of the 55 parties to conflict listed in the annex
to the Secretary-General’s report on children and
armed conflict (S/2013/245), the majority are persistent
perpetrators that have been listed for at least five years,
and 11 of them even for over 10 years. Austria therefore
warmly welcomes the new campaign launched by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui and UNICEF to end the recruitment and use
of children by Government security forces in conflict
by 2016.
At the same time, we should not overlook the
importance of United Nations engagement with and
access to non-State armed groups and the continued
efforts of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for the conclusion of action plans with non-State
actors. After all, they constitute the vast majority of all
the parties listed in the annexes. The Security Council
should also make better use of the tools available
and must be prepared to take vigorous action against
persistent perpetrators, for example through the use of
targeted sanctions.
As the results of the study entitled Education under
Attack 2014, which was launched last week, clearly
demonstrate, attacks against schools, teachers and
students and incidents of the military use of schools
are far more widespread and pervasive than previously
documented and thus require more action. The Security
Council should consistently, including in its countryspecific work, condemn attacks against schools and
their misuse. Against that backdrop, Austria welcomes
the work by the Global Coalition to Protect Education
from Attack on the so-called draft Lucens guidelines
for protecting schools and universities from military
use during armed conflict.
Last but not least, allow me to turn to the efforts
by United Nations peacekeeping missions on child
protection. Child protection advisors play a crucial role

38/79

In addition to ensuring that peacekeepers have the
right skills to implement child protection mandates,
they themselves and their conduct need to adhere to the
United Nations high standards. Vetting procedures, in
particular the United Nations human rights screening
policy, as well as the United Nations human rights
due diligence policy on United Nations support to
non-United Nations security forces, are important tools
in that respect.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syria) (spoke in Arabic): First of all,
we would to welcome Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister
of Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg, who is presiding
over this important meeting. I duly note his remark
that he personally visited the camps of Syrian refugees
in Turkey. I hope that he will visit Syria itself so that
he can see first-hand the conditions of millions — not
just dozen hundreds or thousands — of Syrian children
who suffer from mortar bombs and recruitment by
armed terrorist groups, as is mentioned in the report
of Ms. Zerrougui (A/68/267), and to which I will turn
later. I hope that he will visit Syria so that he can get a
complete picture from the the other viewpoint.
I note with interest the briefings made this morning
and I take this opportunity to reaffirm the commitment
of the Syrian Arab Republic to all international treaties,
conventions and instruments which it acceded to and
ratified at an early date, in particular the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and its two Optional Protocols.

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

Syria has always been a pioneer in providing for
all the needs of children and in promoting their rights
and protection, in particular quality free education and
medical services. This fact has been recognized in the
reports of specialized United Nations agencies over
decades. However, it is regrettable that the current crisis
in Syria has led to inhumane extremist manifestations
that are contrary to the Syrian values of moderation.
Syrian children were the first to suffer under the practices
of mercenaries and takfiris openly imported from all
parts of the world to impose obscurantist Wahhabi
ideas on our children and young people and commit
the most horrific crimes against Syrian children. They
recruit these children and youngsters and train them to
commit the most horrific crimes of terror — slaughter,
kidnapping. maiming, dismemberment, beheading with
axes and swords, disemboweling pregnant women,
hanging their foetuses on trees by the umbilical cord,
and human and organ trafficking. Those are just some
examples.
During scores of meetings of the Security Council,
directly or indirectly related to Syria, I have never
heard that one or more States with influence over the
armed groups in Syria — some of which are members
of the Council — has exercised any pressure on these
terrorist armed groups to lift the blockade of a certain
area in Syria or to stop the militarization of a hospital
or a school in Syria, or to free religious leaders, priests,
nuns and orphans who have been kidnapped for months
or even years. I have not once heard that any of any
States that exercises pressure on terrorist armed groups
had pressed for the release of Syrian women and
children who had been taken hostage, kidnapped and
used as human shields, from Latakia to Deir ez-Zor,
Al-Raqqa and Deraa. I have never heard of anybody
who had pressured those terrorist armed groups to
release women and children who were kidnapped after
dozens and hundreds of them were slaughtered.
The great calamity is not that a group of criminals
and terrorists should commit such acts; it lies in the
fact that these terrorist groups are publically financed,
supported and armed by the Governments of Arab,
regional and international States that have vowed to
take part in these grievous crimes and great sins. They
lost no time and spared no effort in offering large sums
of money, influential media and abhorrent sectarian
incitement to undermine the social, educational and
economic progress that has been achieved by my
country, Syria.

S/PV.7129

Their aim has also been to subjugate the independence
of the national political decisions of Syria, intentionally
cover up the ongoing terrorism, destruction and
sabotage in Syria, deplete its national wealth of oil and
gas, and open the borders of neighbouring countries to
terrorists and foreign mercenaries into Syrian territory
under shameful pretexts that harm the image of Arabs
and Muslims. Despite this tragic and bleak picture,
some senior officials in the Secretariat still consider
that these events are mere reports that have yet to be
verified.
Despite all of these daunting and unprecedented
challenges, the Syrian Government continues to make
every effort in compliance with its commitments to
protecting children. It has maintained its positive
engagement with the United Nations to uncover the
details of what is happening in Syria, notably the
violations of children’s rights as a result of the practices
of armed terrorist groups.
The permanent delegation of the Arab Syrian
Republic to the United Nations circulated an official
memo to the members of the Security Council on
6 February, containing detailed and documented
information and examples of the crimes committed
by armed terrorist groups against Syrian children.
We explained in the memo how these groups have
launched systematic and repeated attacks on schools
and hospitals, stolen their equipment and killed their
staff. We provided the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the members of the Security
Council with a list of 28 cases in which terrorist
groups have targeted schools throughout Syria, and
54 cases of the killing, maiming and kidnapping of
children. Unfortunately, no one in the Secretariat has
made an effort to verify those reports or ask the Syrian
Government for more details about them.
While terrorist armed groups continue to recruit
Syrian children, boys and girls for their military
operations, the relevant authorities in the Syrian
Government are taking legal action with regard to these
recruited children, in accordance with the law on the
recruitment of children adopted on 6 May 2013, which
criminalizes those who recruit children to take part in
any form of combat. That is punishable by a term of
10 to 20 years of hard labour, reaching a life sentence
if the child dies while in combat. It is very important
to underscore that this law deals with the recruited
children as victims by virtue of the juvenile code under
Syrian law. They are placed in social protection centres,

14-2558339/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

rather than in detention centres, where they reside until
they face a fair trial and are immediately referred to
rehabilitation institutions in cooperation with civil
society and under the supervision of expert mentors.
In another violation of Syrian children’s rights,
certain foreign parties and satellite channels
broadcasting from Arab Gulf Arab States recruit Syrian
children to work for them as armed rebels against
the authority of the State and as war correspondents,
giving them cameras and communication equipment
and sending them to unsafe areas to report the news,
thereby jeopardizing their lives, of course, in a violation
of all principles and instruments on the protection of
the rights of the child. We call on the relevant agencies
of the United Nations and the Special Representative
Zerrougui to launch an immediate investigation of
such shameful acts, especially since the competent
authorities in Syria has detained one of the gangs that
manages the recruitment of children. Their confessions
were aired by Syrian television recently.
The Syrian Government, via the Health Ministry,
continues to implement its programmes to promote
child health care. It has launched the fourth stage of
the vaccination campaign against polio, a disease that
was eliminated more than 10 years ago in Syria. Having
said that, everyone knows now that the spread of that
virus in Syria was caused by infected individuals from
the very armed terrorist groups that came to Syria from
Afghanistan, Pakistan and other countries.
We are extremely concerned over the ongoing tragic
situation and grave violations against Syrian children
in the camps of neighbouring countries. Despite the
fact that all actors in the international, regional and
non-governmental organizations, as well as the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General, are aware
of the blatant violations that our children face in these
camps, as documented in their reports, we find it
extremely bizarre that there is not a single reference to
any such violations, including sexual violence, forced
marriage, lack of access to education, the separation
of family members in several camps, the violation of
the rights to work and freedom of movement even from
camp to camp, let alone the militarization of many of
those camps and the recruitment of a large number of
Syrian children by armed terrorist groups, whether
under supervision or by the host Governments turning
a blind eye to some of these cases. We are eseriously
concerned that the United Nations has yet to take any

40/79

07/03/2014

tangible measure with the Governments of neighbouring
countries to address this dangerous phenomenon.
The United Nations is called upon today to work
impartially, transparently and effectively to adopt
measures to protect Syrian child by reminding the
Governments of Member States — some of which are
members of the Council — of their commitments under
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, and to prompt the Governments of States that
support, finance, train and facilitate the transfer of
these armed terrorist and extremist groups to stop these
acts immediately, and to urge those States that take
illegal, unilateral and coercive measures to lift them
immediately.
In conclusion, my country reaffirms that it will
deal firmly with any form of human rights violations.
It stresses its willingness to continue cooperating
with the United Nations and partner regional and
international organizations to uncover the truth of the
situation in Syria, without politicizing, misleading or
agitating public opinion, in order to put an end to all
forms of violence against children in armed conflict
and to punish the perpetrators and instigators of these
acts wherever they come from.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): At the outset,
allow me to take this opportunity to convey my
congratulations to you, Mr. President, and Luxembourg
on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month, as well as on convening this open debate. My
delegation also expresses its appreciation to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive
Director of UNICEF, and Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
for their briefings.
Malaysia is particularly concerned that armed
conflicts in various parts of the world still plague
children’s lives, depriving them of their right to life and
physical integrity, as reflected in the annual report of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict (A/HRC/25/46).
My delegation is perturbed at the thousands of
children who are recruited, killed, maimed, abducted,
subjected to sexual violence, indoctrinated, forced to
commit atrocities, denied humanitarian access and

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7129

deprived of health care. Despite the progress made thus
far, more needs to be done in the area of the protection
of the child in armed conflict.

assist peacekeepers in executing their duties and would
further ensure better protection for children in armed
conflict.

The recruitment and use of child soldiers by parties
to armed conflict is not only a war crime, it also
affects a community’s invaluable asset — its children.
Children should be allowed to develop their potential
as they traverse from childhood to maturity. Children
are persons who must be protected during an important
period of their development. Malaysia reaffirms its
strong commitment to efforts to protect and promote
the rights of children. We condemn the recruitment and
use of children as soldiers by any party in conflict.

We are encouraged by the ongoing work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF, other agencies
of the United Nations system and other relevant
international organizations dealing with children
affected by armed conflict. Malaysia takes note of
the “Children, not soldiers” campaign of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF
to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children
by Government armed forces in conflict by 2016.
We believe that the campaign should not only create
awareness but should also encourage adherence by
States to respect the rights of children.

My delegation also believes that accountability
for ending the impunity of those responsible is a duty
under both domestic and international law. We cannot
deny the fact that in many conflict situations the most
vulnerable members of the population, particularly
women and children, are targeted with impunity. My
delegation is of the firm conviction that there should
be no leniency or amnesty for crimes perpetrated on
innocent children. In that regard, we call on Member
States to steer their national accountability systems
towards meeting international standards in order to
establish effective accountability measures in the
hope of bringing justice, dignity and rehabilitation for
children victimized by armed conflict.
In 2005, the Secretary-General proposed the
development of a monitoring and reporting mechanism
in document S/2005/72. Malaysia feels that was a
positive step in the right direction. We furthermore
believe that such a mechanism would provide objective,
accurate and reliable information on the recruitment
and use of child soldiers in violation of applicable
international law, and on other violations and abuses
committed against children. We would like to see
further developments on the monitoring mechanism,
as we believe that the mechanism would urge Member
States and United Nations agencies to take action to
protect children affected by armed conflict.
The discussion on children affected by armed
conflict would not be complete without making
reference to the role of United Nations peacekeepers.
My delegation believes that training is an underpinning
element in ensuring the effectiveness of the work of
peacekeepers in protecting children. We underline that
peacekeepers to be deployed in conflict areas must be
exposed to the issues and instruments for the protection
of children in the field. Such a mechanism would greatly

As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, Malaysia has undertaken efforts to
ensure that the rights of its children are protected.
On 12 April 2012, Malaysia further reaffirmed its
commitment to promoting and protecting the rights
of children by acceding to the two Optional Protocols
to the Convention, namely, on the sale of children,
child prostitution and child pornography and on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. Prior to
that, in July 2009, Malaysia initiated its national policy
on children and its national plan of action on children.
Taken together, both sets of initiatives outline the
Government of Malaysia’s priorities to promote and
protect the rights of children in Malaysia.
To conclude, Malaysia reaffirms its commitment
to continue working together with the international
community in advancing the agenda for the protection
of children in armed conflict. Malaysia upholds the
significance of resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1612 (2005),
on children in armed conflict. We call on Member States
to demonstrate political will and give attention to this
important issue for us to better accord the necessary
protection to children from the harms of conflict. Rest
assured, Malaysia will continue to do its part in that
regard.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Mexico.
Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
topic of this open debate is of great importance to my
delegation. Mexico thanks Luxembourg and its Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs, Mr. Jean Asselborn,
for making it possible for us to assess the progress in

14-2558341/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

our common challenges in this area. Mexico believes
that resolution 2143 (2014), adopted today, which we
joined as a sponsor, strengthens our commitment to
ensure that children be children, not soldiers.
Despite undeniable progress in recent years on the
agenda of children and armed conflict made as a result
of the cooperation amng the Organization, Governments
and civil society, thousands of children continue to be
recruited as soldiers, sexually abused and excluded
from the right to education and other basic services.
The efforts and resources devoted by the international
community since the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999)
makes it possible for us today to use tools to monitor and
prevent the recruitment of children in specific contexts,
but it is clear that those are not enough. As with other
functions of the Organization in the maintenance of
peace and international security, the agenda of children
and armed conflict calls for financial, human and
technical capacities that are tailored to the needs in the
field.
The novel tactics used by any parties to conflict,
such as attacks on schools and hospitals, call for
equally strong, effective and innovative responses
from the international community. Mexico believes
that the political will we have achieved around this
challenge should be accompanied by a robust strategy
to strengthen national and international capacities,
especially in the justice and security sectors, from
prevention to reintegration. In order to prevent the
recruitment of children, we need a legal framework
that responds to impunity and makes it possible for
us to have effective age verification mechanisms. The
Council in particular, as well as the United Nations in
general, can provide decisive support to ensure that
national plans and strategies in the post-conflict stage
include care for children among their priorities.
My country condemns attacks on schools and
hospitals as a tactic of war, as well as the use of
unmanned aerial vehicles and explosives in densely
populated areas, given the impact on the civilian
population and on minors in particular. Such practices
violate obligations under international humanitarian
law and human rights law.
We welcome the “Children, not soldiers”
campaign, launched yesterday by the Office of the
Special Representative and the UNICEF, and reiterate
our absolute commitment to its objectives. We also
acknowledge Member States for having signed action
plans in that regard. We also believe it is necessary to
42/79

07/03/2014

redouble our efforts to ensure respect for the rights of
children by non-State actors. To that end, we propose
devoting greater finacial, human and political resources.
We recognize the work of Sanctions Committees
that have included in their working criteria grave
violations of the rights of children, and we urge the
Security Council to adopt similar parameters in all its
other committees.
Lastly, Mexico calls on the Council to continue
including specific provisions to protect children in
peacekeeping operations and special political missions.
We call on troop- and police-contributing countries to
such missions to train personnel before deployment so
that they can respond in a timely fashion to challenges
in the field.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Kyaw Tin (Myanmar): My delegation wishes
to thank the Luxembourg presidency for organizing
this open debate on children and armed conflict.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Leila
Zerrougui, UNICEF Executive Director Anthony Lake
and Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for their statements this
morning.
Over the past 15 years, there has been considerable
progress in advancing the agenda of protecting
children in armed conflicts, which has resulted in the
development of a sound framework for a monitoring
and reporting mechanism.
As a country fully committed to doing away
with the involvement of children in armed conflicts,
Myanmar has voiced its full support for the campaign
“Children, not soldiers”, launched yesterday by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
UNICEF to end and prevent the recruitment and use
of children by Government armed forces in conflict
by 2016. We believe that goal could be achieved if the
current momentum of our cooperation with the United
Nations is reinforced and supported by the global
community. We hope that this time-bound initiative
will be able to garner broader international support for
providing technical and financial assistance to speed
up the implementation of our action plans.
Since Myanmar embarked upon a peaceful
democratic transition, the Government has made every
possible effort to improve human rights in every aspect.

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

One of the bold steps taken by the Government since
then was the signing of an action plan with the United
Nations in 2012 to end underage recruitment.
In Myanmar we have a strong legal base that
prohibits forced conscription and recruitment under
18. Yet, in the past, there have been incidents of
children finding their way into the armed forces for
various reasons, such as relationship problems in their
communities, a lack of proper documents to identify
their age, a lack of employment opportunities and a
weakness in recruitment offices and their procedures.
The Government recognized this ugly problem and
has taken serious steps to tackle the issue since 2004.
Today we are pleased to say that Myanmar has made
significant progress in implementing its action plan
over the past 18 months. As I already explained in detail
yesterday at the launch of the campaign, I shall refrain
from repeating the measures taken by the Government
in responding to the issue. But I wish to stress again
that in Myanmar every complaint of violation received
was properly checked and all underage children found
were discharged and reintegrated. Since the launching
of the action plan, 272 children have been discharged
and reintegrated.
Offenders of child recruitment, be they civilian
or military personnel, have been punished according
to the law. Some of that progress has been reflected
in the most recent report of the International Labour
Organization on Myanmar, which states that
“[t]here has been a good response to the ongoing
activities of underage recruitment, including on
awareness-raising among military personnel and
the release of underage recruits.”
The action plan was also incorporated in the training
curriculum for my country’s military officials.
We are pleased to have facilitated the successful
visit to Myanmar of the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, led by
Ambassador Sylvie Lucas of Luxembourg last year, to
assess the situation on the ground. We are looking at
the recommendations provided by the Working Group,
including becoming a party to the Optional Protocol
on the involvement of children in armed conflict.
Following the visit, the Myanmar authorities agreed
once again to extend the current plan of action.
Difficulties in age-verification remain a challenge
for the identification of underage soldiers due to an

S/PV.7129

absence of national registration cards. We hope that
challenge will be resolved with the launching of a
nationwide census later this month. We are hopeful that
the tangible progress made in the implementation of the
action plan in Myanmar will lead to the delisting of the
Myanmar national armed forces in the near future.
As we have stated time and time again, the best
way to protect children from armed conflict is to end
such conflicts. The Government’s peace efforts have
resulted in striking ceasefire agreements with almost
all ethnic armed groups. A nationwide ceasefire
agreement is just around the corner, auguring well for
the protection of children. The prevalence of peace
and stability is creating an environment conducive to
our efforts at rural development, poverty reduction
and job creation, which will help to deter the inclusion
of children in armed groups. National efforts to end
child recruitment should also be accompanied by wellfunded reintegration and development programmes to
provide a livelihood and vocational training for former
child soldiers to restart their lives with dignity in their
new environment.
My delegation is pleased to see that the Council
is taking a cooperative and constructive approach to
reach its goal of protecting children. However, we are
concerned about the current definition of “persistent
perpetrators”, which is inaccurate and misleading.
In our view, if a party, although listed for more than
five years, is making good progress in implementing
its action plan with strong political commitment, it
should not be classified as a persistent perpetrator.
We believe that the current practice of a cooperative
approach rather than a punitive one would better serve
the purpose and will win the trust and cooperation of
the parties concerned. Inclusion and delisting from the
annexes of the reports of the Secretary-General should
not be based on a subjective political decision, but on
certain criteria or standards.
In conclusion, Myanmar reiterates its pledge to
continue to work together with the United Nations on
the action plan to achieve the goal set by the United
Nations global campaign “Children, not soldiers”.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Estonia.
Mr. Kolga (Estonia): At the outset, allow me to
thank Luxembourg for organizing this open debate on
a very important subject. I also thank Ms. Zerrougui,
Mr. Ladsous and Mr. Lake for their interesting and

14-2558343/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

thought-provoking statements. By the same token, I
welcome to the Chamber and thank for his remarks
Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh. He probably knows better
than any one of us here what we are really talking about
today.
I should like to congratulate the presidency on
the adoption of a timely resolution on this matter,
which Estonia also sponsored. Resolution 2143 (2114)
represents a step forward in our common endeavour.
Estonia fully aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union. Let me stress some topics that are
especially important for my country.
Fifteen years have passed since the adoption of
resolution 1261 (1999), and significant progress has
been made since then. Nevertheless, we in the United
Nations are used to reading, listening and talking
about the atrocities throughout the world that concern
children. Among others, most of us have read the
recently issued report of the Secretary-General on the
situation of children in Syria (S/2014/31). We have read
that more than 10,000 children have died as a direct
result of the conflict there. We have also read that
thousands more have been injured and mutilated. We
know that more than 1 million children are now living
as refugees, and millions more are displaced within
their own country. Some children have been separated
from their families. Others have seen their parents,
brothers or sisters being killed or injured. It sounds as
if something regular is going on in the world on a daily
basis. It can happen that we do not even think any more
about the real persons behind those huge numbers or
about the thousands and millions of real children and
their suffering. What can we do to make a difference
for those children? I should like to stress three points:
education, accountability and capacity-building.
Education is the best and most effective prevention
tool we have. Habits, norms and mindsets can only be
changed through education. Only through education
can we ensure a better future for these children. Let me
stress, therefore, that schools should be for children and
should never, under any conditions, be used for military
purposes. Also, every child continuing his or her daily
schooling should be kept away from the heinous hands
of warlords willing to conscript them. Education
also means empowerment, and if one has decent job
opportunities one is less exposed to armed conflict.
Secondly, with regard to accountability, although
ending impunity for grave violations against children

44/79

07/03/2014

in situations of armed conflict is crucial to halt and
prevent these crimes, perpetrators are rarely held to
account. National courts have the primary responsibility
in that regard. Sometimes they are not able to do that.
The international community, therefore, should assist
in strengthening national judicial systems to ensure
accountability, including through the development of
legislation criminalizing violations against children.
However, where national courts still lack the
capacity or the political will to investigate and prosecute
grave crimes against children in armed conflict, the
International Criminal Court (ICC) has a crucial role to
play. The Council itself has on numerous occasions, as
in the resolution adopted today, acknowledged that the
fight against impunity for atrocious crimes, including
against children, has been strengthened through the
work of the ICC. For the ICC to fulfil its mandate,
effective cooperation and assistance by all States, the
Council, and international and regional organizations
is essential.
To achieve its commitment to deal effectively
with perpetrators, the Council could increase pressure
on them by including violations against children in
the mandates of all Sanctions Committees and by
improving the exchange of information among the
Council, Sanctions Committees and the ICC to include
individuals on sanctions lists sought by the Court. While
it is important to work with Government authorities to
end violations against children in armed conflict, it is
also crucial to engage and conclude action plans with
non-State armed groups.
Thirdly, with regard to capacity-building and
concrete actions by the United Nations, providing
specific operational predeployment and in-mission
training for peacekeepers so as to enable them to make
the right decisions while operating in difficult situations
is one of the most important issues. We believe that
predeployment training should be a rule rather than an
exception, and we commend the recent developments
in that regard. We would like to stress the crucial role
of child protection advisers, who should be deployed in
peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding missions and
special political missions. They must be deployed in a
consistent manner, and the child protection capacities
of the different missions must be reinforced.
Finally, let me express Estonia’s full support for the
“Children, not soldiers” campaign, launched yesterday.
Its aim is to end and prevent the recruitment and use of
children by Government armed forces by 2016. Indeed,
14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

the goal sounds ambitious. In the United Nations we
rarely see goals that have to be reached in only two
years, but Estonia believes in such ambitious goals.
Children throughout the world deserve the time to be
children: they should not be parents, they should not be
used as cheap labour and they should not be soldiers.
Their blood should not be shed for the political,
ideological or economic goals of grown-ups. We will be
looking forward to the next Secretary-General’s report
in June, and truly hope that progress will already be
reflected by then. No ambition should be too ambitious
on this topic.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
participate in this debate.
(spoke in English)
Canada thanks the Security Council for this opportunity,
and the Luxembourg presidency for holding this debate.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our support for
the work undertaken by the Council to protect children.
The robust system of child protection built by the
Security Council has been judiciously implemented in
the field by key partners such as UNICEF and others.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and UNICEF have worked tirelessly to raise awareness
and to address the rights and protection of girls and
boys affected by armed conflict. Canada commends
their efforts.
(spoke in French)
The international community has made a lot
of progress in the protection of children who find
themselves in conflict-related situations. Much
remains to be done in this area, however, as we witness
the devastating impacts of the conflicts in Syria, the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, to name but a few.
As we work to ensure that Government armed
forces uphold their obligations, we continue to call
on the Security Council for action to hold persistent
perpetrators to account. I am referring here to those
who continue, year after year, without accountability,
to commit violations against children. In that regard,
Canada encourages dialogue between the United
Nations and non-State actors to advance child
protection in armed conflict, and urges action plans

S/PV.7129

that result from these dialogues to be implemented with
time-bound deadlines.
(spoke in English)
Both formal and informal child-protection systems
are important. Formal systems include donor support
for civic registration and vital statistics, with data
collection that is disaggregated by sex, ethnicity,
wealth quintile and other factors. That, in turn, would
contribute to establishing age-verification procedures
for recruitment in the military. Informal systems
include active participation by families, communities
and children themselves to create and foster protective
environments that contribute to preventing recruitment
and other grave violations. Capacity-building is
an essential element of the protection of children.
Experience has shown that the protection of children
in conflict situations is very complex and requires
the application of diverse and specialized medical,
psychological and social skills and knowledge.
We should support effective predeployment training
in child protection for personnel involved in field
missions, including military and police personnel. It is
also crucial that such personnel be screened to prevent
individuals who have themselves committed violations
against children from serving with the United Nations.
That goes to the very heart of the United Nations
mandate.
Canada condemns in the strongest terms the
targeting of schools and hospitals. We welcome the new
report from the Global Coalition to Protect Education
from Attack, which found that over the past five years
armed non-State groups and State military and security
forces have attacked thousands of schoolchildren,
teachers and schools in at least 70 countries worldwide.
In 13 countries more than 500 attacks alone have been
recorded. Since 2009 there have been more than 1,100
attacks on education facilities in Afghanistan, including
arson attacks, explosions and suicide bombings. In
Colombia 140 teachers were killed in four years, and
more than 1000 received death threats. Canada urges
all Member States to act to protect schools, teachers
and students from attack and to hold perpetrators
accountable.
(spoke in French)
We are alarmed that more than 10,000 children have
been killed and 3,000 schools damaged or destroyed
over the course of the conflict in Syria. Approximately
3 million children are in dire need of humanitarian

14-2558345/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

assistance. Canada calls on all parties to the conflict
immediately to end all violations and abuses against
children and to facilitate unimpeded humanitarian
access in compliance with the new resolution 2139
(2014).
(spoke in English)
Canada also deplores the practice of using schools
for military purposes during armed conflict and urges
States to restrict the use of schools for any military
operations. Schools ought to be safe and protected
and must never serve as barracks, fighting positions,
detention centres, interrogation or torture sites, or
weapons depots in conflicts.
Canada is committed to ensuring that the rights of
children are always protected. Be assured that we will
continue to fight against the unspeakable violations
that threaten the safety, dignity and lives of girls and
boys in situations of armed conflict in every corner of
the world.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): I wish to join previous
speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
this important debate under the presidency of
Luxembourg. We welcome the presence today of His
Excellency Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister for Foreign
and European Affairs of Luxembourg. We also thank
the speakers who briefed the Council today.
Children in armed conflict is a profoundly
disturbing subject for us in Sri Lanka. We went through
a dark and brutal conflict during which, according to
UNICEF records, thousands of children were recruited
as child soldiers and were deprived of their precious
childhood. Mercifully, our war on terrorism ended in
May 2009 and the sad era of forcible child recruitment
for combat by the terror group Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam (LTTE) was brought to a close — but not
before thousands of children paid a heavy price with
their lives.
According to UNICEF in a report published in
2011, more than 60 per cent of the LTTE’s fighting
cadre from 1983 to 2002 consisted of boys and girls
less than 18 years of age. UNICEF recorded more than
5,700 cases of child recruitment by the LTTE from
2003 to 2009. Human Rights Watch has suggested a
figure of more than 21,000. Following the tsunami,
orphaned children were harvested for combat purposes.

46/79

07/03/2014

Child soldiers were also used as suicide bombers,
especially girls. Each family was forced to surrender
even very young children for combat purposes in the
final stages of the conflict. The LTTE had no scruples
about sacrificing thousands of children in the frontline
of combat. Children were given cyanide capsules by
their leaders to commit suicide to avoid capture.
At the Geneva peace talks in February 2006, the
LTTE publicly conceded that it was holding thousands
of children as combatants. With the end of the conflict,
594 child combatants — 231 girls and 363 boys between
the ages of 12 and 18 years — were taken into custody
by the security forces. The Government adopted a
caring attitude with those former child combatants,
treating them with a sensitivity rarely seen elsewhere,
as victims and not as perpetrators of violent crimes.
They were placed in institutional rehabilitation centres
and received access to education, vocational training,
health care and psycho-social support. Following their
rehabilitation process, they have all been reunited with
their immediate or extended families. That happened as
early as May 2010. The rehabilitation and reintegration
of child soldiers was a priority for Sri Lanka. Family
reunions are continuing to take place with the
assistance of the International Committee of the Red
Cross and UNICEF, which has continued to assist with
its extensive background of experience and goodwill.
We have always placed the welfare and protection
of children at the heart of our policy agenda. The
traditional extended family structure in Sri Lanka
prioritizes the welfare and education of children.
Therefore, forcible child recruitment was excruciating
for the affected families in the former conflict-affected
areas, as well as for our society at large. I should like
to mention that in Sri Lanka all children are required to
attend school. Attendance at the primary school level
is now close to 100 per cent, including in the former
conflict-affected areas.
Let me illustrate the pain and personal loss behind
the statistics, with the story of one former child soldier
as described by UNICEF. Rajeewan was only 13 years
old when he was abducted in 2007 by the LTTE while
visiting his sister’s family in the Vanni region in the
Northern Province of Sri Lanka. His many attempts
to escape were unsuccessful. He said, “I longed to see
my family. I wanted to go home”. He was subsequently
placed in the armed ranks of the LTTE and compelled
to fight with it until the final stages of the conflict.
After the end of the conflict, he surrendered to the Sri

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

Lankan army and was allowed to return home after a
year at a rehabilitation centre. The teenager, who left
his family at 13, finally returned home as a 19-yearold battle-hardened grownup. Rajeewan lost seven
years of his young life to the cruel taskmasters who
recruited him. The conflict took away his childhood
and disrupted his education, leaving him no option but
to look for unskilled work on his release. As he also
said,
“I was happy to be finally home, but I was worried
about my future and what I could do to earn a living
and help my ageing parents”.
Today, almost five years after the end of the
conflict, child recruitment is a distant but ever-recurring
memory. The story of Rajeewan had a happy ending.
With the help of UNICEF, he attended a vocational
training programme and obtained qualifications that
led to a permanent job as an icecream vendor, selling
icecream in villages and towns. Now he says he loves
his job and, more than anything, he is able to help his
family.
Sri Lanka made its zero-tolerance policy on child
recruitment a non-negotiable condition. Through
sustained political will and proactive efforts, the
rehabilitation and reintegration of former child
combatants under our campaign entitled “Bring Back
the Child” was achieved. Sri Lanka has criminalized
the recruitment of children for armed combat.
Sri Lanka’s approach has had a positive effect
on the country’s reconciliation process. Former child
soldiers were able to put their pasts behind them
and rebuild their lives as the Government adopted
the overarching principle of restorative justice and
not retributive justice, consistent with our cultural
heritage and reconciliation efforts. For us, revenge and
retribution was not an option. The opportunity was
given to 273 child combatants to continue with their
formal education at Hindu College in Colombo, in
close cooperation with the Ministry of Education, prior
to their reintegration into their families. Following
reunification, they were also given the freedom to seek
admission to a school of their choice. Thirty-five former
child combatants returned to Hindu College to continue
their junior and senior high school education, and 321
former combatants opted to undertake vocational
training conducted by the vocational training authority
of Sri Lanka.

S/PV.7129

Among the adult beneficiaries who were once
recruited as children, a system called the Catch-up
Education Programme has been initiated in liaison with
the Ministry of Education to enable them to continue
their formal education. In 2010, 175 beneficiaries
completed the national Grade 10 examination, while
361 beneficiaries completed the national Grade
12 examination — 91 passed their ordinary level
examinations and 222 passed the advanced level
examinations.
Let me briefly outline some actions taken by the
Government of Sri Lanka over the years on this vital
issue.
In terms resolution 1612 (2005), Sri Lanka
voluntarily submitted to the Security Council
monitoring process and established the Sri Lanka
Task Force on Monitoring and Reporting in July
2006. Sri Lanka fully cooperated with the Special
Representative, the Council’s Working Group and
UNICEF on the rehabilitation and reintegration of
former child combatants.
During the entire conflict period, basic and
essential services such as health care and education
were provided unimpeded to all affected communities
in the north and the east, with particular attention on
safeguarding the rights and needs of children. The
lessons learned and reconciliation commission report
comprehensively details the supply of essential services
to those areas. In 2006, the consultative committee on
humanitarian assistance, an apex consultative body
to ensure a coordinated humanitarian response, was
established following a request by the co-chairs to the
peace process — Japan, the United States, the European
Union and Norway.
Sri Lanka’s experience in ensuring the overall wellbeing of children in conflict is unique. Even during
the height of the conflict, the Government agreed to
a cessation of hostilities to ensure that the national
qualifying examinations were held in the conflict
zones to enable students to sit their examinations
every year. We were also able to reach agreement on
ceasing hostilities to ensure that the polio vaccination
programme could be carried out in the conflict zones.
In recognition of those dedicated efforts, UNICEF, in
The State of the World’s Children 2008, documented
and commended Sri Lanka as the best achiever in our
subregion despite a long-standing conflict. UNICEF

14-2558347/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

also commended Sri Lanka in its publication entitled
Progress for Children: Achieving the MDGs with Equity.
Following the end of the conflict, special initiatives
were undertaken to provide access to health services
for children through a collaborative mechanism
between the national child-protection authority and the
department of paediatrics of Colombo University.
In the post-conflict phase, significant attention was
paid to restoring and rebuilding schools. Today, 1,630
schools in the former conflict-affected areas have been
restored.
An armed group released all combatants under
a tripartite action plan with UNICEF and the
Government. It has also since transformed itself into
a legitimate political party by joining the democratic
process. The former adult cadres are very much part of
the democratic process. A former child soldier of that
armed group was elected as the first chief minister of
the Eastern Province.
The Government has established women’s and
children’s police desks staffed with female police
officers in police stations in the north and the east.
Specially trained police officers function at such desks,
which provide an enabling and protective environment
for children, women and girls and their parents to
report incidents of abuse and exploitation. The network
is also linked to the national child-protection authority.
Sexual and gender-based violence help desks are
located in hospitals in the districts formerly affected
by the conflict.
Due to the progress made and the true commitment
of the Government with regard to its children and
former child soldiers, Sri Lanka was delisted from
the Secretary-General’s list of shame in June 2012.
Sri Lanka successfully completed Security Councilmandated programmes to end the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict.
Finally, Sri Lanka continues with its efforts to help
and support former child soldiers to rebuild their lives.
The Government of Sri Lanka is appreciative of United
Nations agencies such as UNICEF, and countries
such as Japan, which have made key contributions to
the Government’s efforts to reintegrate former child
soldiers into society.
The Secretary-General’s 2013 report on children
and armed conflict (S/2013/245) notes that the evolving
character and tactics of armed conflict are creating

48/79

07/03/2014

unprecedented threats to children. We encourage
greater engagement between Member States and the
United Nations for the better protection of all children
who are affected by armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Patriota (Brazil): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate,
and through you I wish to express our appreciation of
Minister Jean Asselborn’s personal leadership in this
matter. I should like to thank the Secretary-General,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Leila Zerrougui and Mr. Anthony Lake for their
presentations. Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh’s testimony
about his experience as a child soldier in Sierra Leone
reminded us of the horrors to which some children are
still subject to this day.
Stopping the plight endured by children in armed
conflict is a moral imperative. Children in conflict
situations are particularly vulnerable. Their suffering
extends in time, in the form of traumas that burden
entire generations for many years after the resolution of
a crisis. The Security Council is right to help increase
awareness about violations and to be more involved
in preventing and halting violence against children in
cases determined by the Council to constitute threats to
international peace and security.
As the concept note prepared by the Mission
of Luxembourg points out (S/2014/144, annex), the
consideration of the agenda related to children in
armed conflict has significantly progressed in the past
years. The international community has been able to
take decisive steps to confront the gravest challenges
regarding children in conflict. The initiative launched
by Special Representative Zerrougui and UNICEF to
end the recruitment of children by Government forces
by 2016 deserves our full support. We are convinced
that, with political will by all parties involved, that
target can be achieved. Nevertheless, the reality on the
ground in many conflicts remains a source of serious
concern.
The appalling situation of children in Syria
was rightly described by the Secretary-General as
unspeakable and unacceptable. The High Commissioner
for Human Rights reminded us in her presentation to
the General Assembly on the humanitarian situation
in Syria that grave violations against children have
been committed by both sides, with documented cases

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

of detentions, torture, sexual violence and executions.
The number of schools and hospitals that have been
seriously affected by the conflict is alarming. Those
acts violate the most fundamental rules of international
humanitarian law. To deprive children of education and
access to health is to deprive them of paramount tools
to build a peaceful society and jeopardize the future of
the entire nation.

S/PV.7129

to peace and stability, as supported by the international
community.

The plight of Syrian children turned refugees as
the result of the conflict is also very telling about the
serious consequences of the military option that some
have been promoting and seem to continue to believe in.
Brazil is acutely aware of the increasing pressure faced
by neighbouring countries hosting Syrian refugees.

In order for crimes against children in situations
of conflict to be eradicated, perpetrators must be
brought to justice. International efforts to ensure that
accountability is upheld have been greatly enhanced
by the role of the International Criminal Court in
prosecuting individuals accused of violations against
children and by its deterrent effect. Peacekeeping
missions may also have a role to play — as long as
they have the adequate capabilities to perform their
protection tasks — both through the protection of
civilians in immediate danger and through the work of
child protection advisers.

Those facts must not be regarded merely as troubling
statistics. The emotional impact of the conflict on
young Syrians has disturbing after-effects. We cannot
simply hope that Syrian children will prove to be as
bold, courageous and resilient as Mr. Sawaneh from
Sierra Leone. The very touching and troubling reports
regarding the suffering of children in Syria must awaken
our moral conscience and collective responsibility in
order to promote an urgent and peaceful solution to
the conflict on the basis of the Geneva communiqué
of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/522, annex) and the efforts of
Joint Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi.

As in many other situations, in the case of children
and armed conflict the Security Council should also
pay greater attention to the benefits of prevention. The
promotion of sustainable development, with social
inclusion and food and nutritional security, can certainly
contribute to conflict prevention, and therefore to
avoid bringing conflict to the doorsteps of millions of
children. An improvement in living conditions and, as
a consequence, the establishment of a safe environment
for children and youth to pursue their educational and
cultural development, are vital factors to avoid the
recruitment of children by armed groups.

Brazil has been contributing to humanitarian
initiatives to alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people,
including children and Syrian refugees. In response
to the call made by High Commissioner for Refugees
António Guterres, Brazil is facilitating entry visas for
Syrian nationals seeking asylum in our country.

In conclusion, let me once more underscore
Brazil’s firm commitment to the protection of children
in situations of conflict. When serving as a member of
the Security Council, Brazil worked actively for the
adoption of resolutions addressing this critical issue,
resolutions such as 1612 (2005) and 1998 (2011). We
will continue to enhance our cooperation with the
United Nations system and to make use of our bilateral
channels to ensure due attention is given to halting
violence against the most vulnerable. Brazil joins the
Security Council’s efforts to break the cycle of violence
and to spare children the direst consequences of adults’
wars.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
Afghanistan, in the Central African Republic and in
other conflict situations, children continue to bear a
heavy burden. Abuses against children are perpetrated,
moreover, even in situations on the Council’s agenda
that are not currently of open conflict. A report issued
by Amnesty International last week underscores the
dire scenario faced by Palestinian children under
occupation in the West Bank. We call on Israeli forces
to abide by their obligations under international human
rights law and humanitarian law, with special attention
to the situation of Palestinian children. Reports of
harassment and intimidation are particularly distressing
and impact negatively on the perspectives for peaceful
and harmonious coexistence between Israelis and
Palestinians in future. Such abuses must cease forthwith
if the two sides are to build an environment conducive

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to begin, Mr. President, by cordially
commending you on organizing this debate and on the
excellent chairmanship of Luxembourg of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. I also wish
to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral.

14-2558349/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

07/03/2014

I align myself fully with the statement of the
European Union.

the campaign and we have announced a contribution of
€30,000 to that end.

We also have circulated the written text of the
statement by the delegation of Spain, so I will try to
extract the three or four most basic ideas. The first
has to do with the use of schools in armed conflicts;
the second with the need to adopt a completely crosscutting focus on fighting this scourge, which is the use
of children in armed conflicts; the third is the need to
reinforce and redouble efforts at prevention; and I will
conclude with the views of Spain on this issue.

Also when it comes to prevention, a few days ago
I had the honour to present at the United Nations an
outstanding short film, which was coincidentally a
Spanish one, entitled That Wasn’t Me. The film tells the
story of the tragedy that is the use of a child in an armed
conflict. As someone said, the film has the great merit
of telling a story that could in fact be true, earning it an
Oscar nomination at the Hollywood Academy Awards.

First, with regard to schools, although progress
has been made, it is still true that recent events have
demonstrated that schools continue to be used in armed
conflicts as real powder kegs. Proof of this is that more
than 500 attacks on schools have taken place over the
past year. The use of schools for military ends is clearly
documented in current conflicts, as was just mentioned
by the Ambassador of Brazil. It should be recognized
that the fundamental right of a child to education and
the use of a child as a weapon of war are at opposite
ends of the spectrum. We must not allow this to happen.
It is perhaps worthwhile exploring the idea of having
markings for schools so that they would not be subject
to attack in armed conflicts.
The second idea I wanted to bring up was the crosscutting issue. The use of children in armed conflicts
is so serious that we need a cross-cutting focus in the
entire United Nations system. It is not an action that
falls solely to the Security Council and its Sanctions
Committees. Quite the opposite, thas perspective must
be incorporated into the funds and programmes of
the United Nations. It is also the responsibility of the
General Assembly and the Peacebuilding Commission.
Only through the general involvement of all the funds
and programmes in all of the main and subsidiary
bodies of the United Nations will we be able to achieve
our goals effectively.
The third idea is prevention. In that regard, I share
the idea brought up by the Ambassador of Brazil that the
best way to prevent the use of children in armed conflicts
is by preventing the conflicts themselves. But for lack
of this, an absolutely essential element is awareness.
Let me recall the event organized by the Mission of
Luxembourg yesterday when its wonderful campaign
to fight against the use of children under the motto
“Children, not soldiers” was launched. I am proud to
repeat once again that Spain has enthusiastically joined

50/79

Turning to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2013/245), my delegation notes with some concern
that only four of the 11 groups listed in the reports in the
past 10 years have signed action plans to put an end to
violations. It goes without saying that the delegation of
Spain firmly supports the recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General’s report as to the measures to
be taken in the Security Council.
In conclusion, Spain places great importance on
the efforts of the international community and of the
United Nations to put an end to this scourge, which is
a violation of the rights of children in armed conflicts.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Honduras.
Ms. Flores (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): We
are pleased to address the Security Council as part of
the open debate under the Luxembourg’s outstanding
presidency, with a view to contributing constructively
to the consideration and discussion of a topic of such
importance that touches such a sensitive chord at
the Organization: the situation of children in armed
conflicts.
While the exploitation of any human being is
reprehensible, it is all the more so when children are
involved. The use of minors in conflicts by armed
organized groups violates ethical standards and
international legal principles. Besides being a merciless
practice, it is an unforgivable violation of human rights.
Innumerable defenceless innocents should not be used
as human shields. It is inconceivable that they should be
forced to place or deactivate mines, thereby endangering
their precious lives. That makes it imperative that
States today take a greater responsibility to support
the efforts, processes and mechanisms at the United
Nations to prevent the recruitment and participation of
girls and boys in armed conflict and to ensure that they
are protected from hostilities.

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

We are not unaware of the fact that progress has been
made over the past two decades. In 1993 the General
Assembly called on the Secretary-General to deal with
the issue, commissioning Graça Machel to conduct a
study of the impact of armed conflict on children. The
recommendations of her report (A/51/306) led to major
initiatives such as the creation of the position of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
the rights and protection of children trapped in armed
conflicts, who has done major work in recent years and
today has undertaken a campaign, together with the
UNICEF, to put an end by 2016 to the recruitment and
use of children by the security forces of Governments
in such situations.
Nevertheless, as has been noted, the greatest
responsibility for abuse and violations included in
the lists of the Secretary-General falls on non-State
armed actors. The recommendation recently made to
the Office of the Special Representative to promote the
approval and application of action plans against such
agents is appropriate, as well as is identifying how to
hold accountable those who commit crimes against
children.
It is commendable that, since 1998, the Security
Council held debates and adopted resolutions
contributing to the current monitoring and detailed
reports by countries and promoting diplomatic
initiatives and humanitarian initiatives intended to put
an end to the barbarous infraction of using children as
hostages in armed conflicts. The Council has also aimed
at strengthening the agenda in all member countries
by strengthening national legal capacity, measures to
prevent recruitment and programmes of rehabilitation
and reintegration into civil society. Indispensable in
that regard is the assistance of regional organizations
and the support of donors to implement action plans
and provide all the information needed for the general
public. But that is not enough.
Central America has not been removed from the
scourge of armed conflicts that affected the region in
the 1980s. Since then there has been modest progress to
reach peace and security through democracy and social
investment for development. Even though these are
major achievements, they are not enough to respond to
the new challenges we face. It is inevitable that nations
with limited resources and so many needs in precarious
situations find children to be the first victims of
imbalance. That is not just a problem of the lack of
security but also of seeking the social and economic

S/PV.7129

causes of this insecurity aggravated by the vulnerability
of a territory that is easily used as a bridge for the
trafficking of illegal substances and of people where
the arsenal of clandestine weapons conspires against
peace. That is a cocktail of precarious circumstances
that leads to explosive results. The violence drags in
many minors, who are subject to all kinds of abuse.
While those situations do not fit into the specific
cases of armed conflict and do not figure on the lists
of the Secretary-General submitted to the Council, we
believe that they are both tragic and pertinent. This
phenomenon should be studied in depth as a priority.
To that end, we respectfully call with great energy for
the Organization to provide the attention needed. In
the same way that it responded to the problem of child
soldiers, it should find the initiatives, mechanisms and
recommendations needed to protect the young people
in our region who are trapped in equally disquieting
conflicts. Each of their stories is a moving one; their
repercussions and the ability to contain them goes
beyond our domestic capacity, while the terror they
entail goes beyond our national borders. Together they
threaten international peace and security.
My country is making herculean efforts to defend
itself against the growing infrastructure of organized
crime and criminal groups. We have begun to reverse that
pernicious trend — more through our own efforts than
as a result of assistance — but the levels of insecurity
continue to be unacceptable. The roiling violence drags
in hundreds of girls and boys, either as victims or as
bullies. It does not matter what terminology we use.
Quite simply, they are victims. Any expectation for the
future of the country is unfortunately being lost.
In terms of the number of lives being turned upside
down there are less damaging wars, as compared to the
violence that is eating away at our societies. The harm
of this scourge is not measured necessarily by the drugs
distributed in the markets but, rather, by the horror and
pain caused by so much death. The unrestricted use
of children recruited by gangs to serve as “mules” in
criminal activities such as extortion is an abominable
practice that, in the worst of cases, turns children
into hired killers. Beyond family disintegration and
economic exclusion, which makes them easy prey for
organized crime, is the impossibility of escaping from
it once they are identified or recruited.
In those circumstances, my delegation believes that
the situation of young people and children subjected to

14-2558351/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

social environments of violence, insecurity and extreme
vulnerability should be studied in a broader framework
including not just child soldiers or those enmeshed
in conflicts but by adding another dimension to the
worldwide effort to protect children and give them the
security and opportunities they deserve.
This is nothing more than a respectful call to the
Security Council and the international community to
take the steps that conscience dictates. There is no
doubt that we can draw closer to the peace we long for
if work together for a global society that is increasingly
more fair and equitable.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Greece.
Mr. Spinellis (Greece): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the members of the Human Security
Network, namely, Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Greece,
Ireland, Jordan, Mali, Norway, Panama, Slovenia,
Switzerland and Thailand, and on behalf of the Republic
of South Africa as an observer.
The Network is a cross-regional group of States
that promotes human security as a people-centred,
comprehensive and prevention-oriented approach for
achieving peace, development and human rights. The
protection of civilians in armed conflicts is a core
matter for the Network.
First, I should like to express my appreciation to
Luxembourg for taking the initiative to convene this
very important meeting and for the comprehensive
and stimulating concept note (S/2014/144, annex). We
welcome the holding of this debate to tackle this critical
matter. We also welcome the adoption of resolution 2143
(2014), which enables us to proceed with a successful
way forward.
The Human Security Network also welcomes the
launching of the campaign “Children, not soldiers”,
initiated by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and UNICEF,
in collaboration with other United Nations partners,
with a view to ending and preventing the recruitment
and use of children by Government armed forces in
conflict by 2016.
The Human Security Network remains concerned
by the numbers of children that are negatively affected
by conflict and post-conflict situations, as mentioned
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.

52/79

07/03/2014

Since Graça Machel’s seminal report (A/51/150)
recognized the impact of armed conflict on children,
millions of children have continued to be caught amid
armed conflicts, not only as mere bystanders but as
targets of multiple acts of violence, such as attacks
against schools, mutilations and sexual abuse, as well
as hunger, disease and exploitation as tools of war.
Such children are subjected to death and suffering and
are consequently transfigured into victims of terror
and fear. We therefore remain deeply concerned for
children’s safety in all armed conflicts, including in
Syria, the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of Congo and many other places. Furthermore,
we strongly deplore the use of schools as detention and
torture centres.
This is a grave and urgent matter, and it is therefore
essential to shift our focus to action plan adoption and
implementation as a practical way forward. Action
plans are vital strategic tools in order to end these
horrendous violations against children in situations
of conflict. It is therefore important for concerned
Member States to pursue concrete, time-bound action
plans and to commit to action plan implementation
through national-level strategies. We acknowledge
that respect should also be given to the time frame of
the action plans, and non-compliance should result in
direct consequences for those concerned.
The importance of strengthening national
accountability mechanisms is also essential. It is vital
to ensure an adequate child-protection mandate and to
place importance on the monitoring and reporting of
violations. We highlight the monitoring and reporting
of violations, which should be upheld and considered
as noteworthy tools, to mitigate the ongoing effects
of impunity. That should be accompanied by political
dialogue, demarches, multilateral cooperation and
mainstreaming the issue of children in armed conflict
in order to advocate for the protection of children.
The Security Council is encouraged to exert
pressure on perpetrators and to apply the necessary
measures to address these violations. That includes
imposing lawful consequences for perpetrators.
Stronger collective commitment to the responsibility
for dealing effectively with persistent perpetrators
of violations against children in armed conflict is
encouraged of all States.
It is the responsibility of all States to investigate
and prosecute those responsible for violations against

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

S/PV.7129

children. It is therefore important to develop legislation
criminalizing violations against children and to
develop the necessary prosecutorial and investigative
capacities. In that regard, we reiterate the importance
of ensuring universal registration, including late birth
registration, in order to investigate and verify the age of
recruits and ensure protection of those under 18 years of
age from active military service. Furthermore, Member
States are encouraged to take the necessary steps to end
violations such as the military use of schools and to
hold perpetrators accountable for violations that have
already been committed.

Greece welcomes the holding of this debate to tackle
this critical matter. We also welcome the adoption of
resolution 2143 (2014), which enables us to keep up the
momentum to proceed to a successful way forward.

The Human Security Network highlights the
importance of focusing on the prevention of future
violations, and of restoring and integrating those who
have been affected by conflict through protection
and relief. The Arms Trade Treaty is a step forward
towards the protection of children in armed conflict, as
its provisions establish that exporting States shall take
into account the risk of covered conventional arms or
items being used to commit or facilitate serious acts of
violence against children.

Greece welcomes the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2014/144) and we too express our concern
pertaining to the escalating numbers of children that
are negatively affected by conflict and post-conflict
situations. This is in addition to the military use
of, and attacks on, schools as a tool of war. Schools,
which formerly represented a place of safety, are now
being transformed into places of trepidation and terror.
Lamentably, the culture of violence is replacing the
culture of learning, thereby reinforcing ideologies of an
unsafe world.

The implementation of concrete primary prevention
strategies is imperative. That should include sustainable
ways to ensure an age-verification process in recruitment
procedures, measures to ensure that children have
birth certificates, and education programmes to
inform communities on national and international laws
pertaining to recruitment and the consequent reporting
of unlawful recruitment practices.
We underscore the importance of peacekeeping
missions and the provision of key psychosocial services
to children and their families affected by armed conflict.
We must also aim to support national institutions and
mechanisms that protect civilians in armed conflict.
The Human Security Network urges Member
States to keep concerns relating to children high on the
international agenda and remains committed to, and
diligent in, the implementation of resolutions relevant
to the topic, including resolutions 1261 (1999) and 1998
(2011), as well as resolution 2143 (2014), adopted by
the Security Council today, which contains important
provisions to ensure and protect the right of the child
to education. The members of the Human Security
Network are dedicated and committed to responding to
the issues that have been raised.
I should now like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.

Greece aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union.
It has already been established that the impact
of armed conflict on children is a grave and urgent
matter. It is therefore essential to shift our focus to
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
adopted to date as a practical way forward.

In Syria, for example, approximately 1,000 schools
were used as detention and torture centres in 2013.
It is vital for Member States to protect children and
teachers from attacks and to protect children’s rights
to education by taking steps to end the military use of
schools and to hold perpetrators accountable. A strong
commitment to the responsibility for dealing effectively
with persistent perpetrators of violations against
children in armed conflict is encouraged of all States in
order to combat impunity. The importance of national
protection and accountability mechanisms is therefore
essential. Engagement with non-State armed groups for
the purposes of ending violations and concluding action
plans is also necessary.
It is important for Member States to pursue concrete,
time-bound action plans and to commit to action plan
implementation through national-level strategies. It is
therefore crucial to call upon donors to support national
efforts to strengthen capacities for child protection.
That includes training and capacity-building for child
protection workers and advisers, peacebuilders and
peacekeepers, and working together with communities
on preventive efforts.
We must also aim to support national institutions
and mechanisms that protect civilians in armed conflict.

14-2558353/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

Furthermore, the monitoring and reporting of violations
should be upheld and considered as noteworthy tools to
mitigate the ongoing effects of impunity. That should
be accompanied by political dialogue, demarches,
multilateral cooperation and mainstreaming the topics
of children in armed conflict so as to advocate for the
protection of children.
In the words of a former child soldier in Sierra
Leone, Ishmael Beah, “children have the resilience to
outlive their sufferings, if given a chance”. Let us work
together to give those children a chance for hope and a
future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to express Uruguay’s gratitude to the Permanent
Mission of Luxembourg for convening this open debate
on children and armed conflict during its presidency of
the Security Council. I am also grateful for the work of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and
reiterate our full support to her in fulfilling her mandate.
We would also like to thank the Executive Director of
UNICEF, whose joint work with Ms. Zerrougui is of the
greatest significance in achieving the goal of stopping
child recruitment by security forces and armed groups
by 2016.
Allow me to highlight the value of the substantive
reports prepared by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, which allow us to appreciate the
achievements made and challenges to be addressed in
order to overcome the serious problems that this sensitive
issue presents for the international community. We also
thank Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for his courageous firsthand testimony.
The impact of armed conflict on children is
alarming and horrifying, as is the recognition of the
increase in serious violations of the rights of children
despite the many efforts being made to limit and
ultimately put an end to such acts. We therefore call
on the Security Council to adopt specific measures to
strengthen the children and armed conflict mandate.
An alarming and growing number of children are
being killed, subjected to sexual violence and rape, and
recruited into armies and armed groups. In addition,
unacceptable attacks on schools and their deliberate
use for military purposes endanger children’s lives and
security, as well as their right to education. The task
54/79

07/03/2014

before us of preventing such violations and abuses of
children’s rights and establishing effective protection
for children from the atrocities of war is an arduous
one, especially as most children involved in armed
conflict are being recruited by States themselves.
The subject we are considering today is an item on
the agenda of the General Assembly, where every year
my country plays as active a role as possible to increase
the share of responsibilty shouldered by that United
Nations organ, which is of universal membership, on a
subject that is part of its mandate and of grave concern
to all of us.
Nevertheless, Uruguay should like to highlight the
role the Security Council has been playing through the
adoption of its many resolutions aimed at establishing
and implementing specific measures to end the illegal
recruitment and exploitation of children in armed
conflict. We reiterate our gratitude in this regard, in the
understanding that the Council’s intervention is of vital
importance to achieving the objective of stopping such
recruitment by 2016 and preventing further violations
of the fundamental rights of children. Thanks to the
action plans resulting from the Council’s mandate
on this subject, over the past 20 years thousands of
children have been freed from a form of exploitation
that is a violation of human dignity.
Resolution 2143 (2014), adopted by the Security
Council today, on the rights of the child is of special
importance. In particular, the Council reiterates its deep
concern over the lack of progress in situations of armed
conflict and the fact that, in such conflicts, parties
continue to violate with impunity the provisions of
international law that protect children by condemning
their recruitment by armies and armed groups. The
Council has stressed that concern in the resolution
by calling on the parties involved in armed conflict
and armed groups to respect the norms of the Geneva
Conventions of 1949 and their additional protocols, and
to refrain from the use of schools for military purposes.
Uruguay believes that this is essential when it comes
to respecting the rights of the child, as established
in various instruments, in particular article 28 of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, which obliges
States to respect children’s right to education.
We should also recognize the contribution
made by the International Criminal Court in various
situations, in particular by designating as war crimes
acts that involve sexual violence against children,
the recruitment of children under 15 years of age, or
14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

their use as active participants in armed conflicts. We
also recognize the work of other international courts
that have also taken on the issue of the protection of
children in their jurisdictions. We appreciate the fact
that the resolution expressly recognizes the work of the
International Criminal Court and calls on all States to
put an end to impunity for cases of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and other abhorrent
crimes against children.
Our delegation affirms Uruguay’s belief in the
fundamental need to strengthen the fight against
impunity for all of those responsible for grave
violations of children’s rights. We therefore encourage
the Security Council to report such cases to the
International Criminal Court. We also believe that
cooperation with national and international courts is a
necessary and fundamental step in ensuring effective
judgments in such situations.
Another relevant issue is the attention to be
accorded to the effective reintegration of children who
are linked to armed groups and those who have suffered
other severe violations of human rights, in particular
in cases involving sexual exploitation or abuse. I stress
the crucial importance of effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes to the
well-being of all children affected by armed conflict.
Such programmes should necessarily enjoy the human
and financial resources they require and the support
of the communities to which they belong in order to
ensure the successful and sustainable reintegration of
those children into society.
To conclude, my delegation believes that the
social reintegration of children implicitly involves
recognizing situations in which children are accused of
crimes committed during their association with armed
forces or groups. In such situations, children need to be
considered first and foremost as victims, and as such
treated in accordance with international law within the
context of a legal system that enables their full social
rehabilitation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): I would like to thank the
presidency of Luxembourg for organizing this important
debate and Alhaji Babah Sawaneh for sharing his
touching story with us. We also welcome the adoption of
resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict,
which includes very important elements with regard to

S/PV.7129

the development and implementation of the framework
on children and armed conflict.
The legal and normative framework regarding
children and armed conflict has developed considerably
over the past 15 years, leading to significant
improvements on the ground. There has been increased
momentum, especially with regard to the prevention of
the recruitment of child soldiers, thanks to important
campaigns such as “Children, not soldiers”.
On the other hand, the expansion of the framework
of children and armed conflict beyond child soldiers
to include the six grave violations has highlighted the
other challenges currently faced. The latest report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/245) stresses that tens of
thousands of children continue to be recruited, killed
or maimed, sexually abused or deprived of their right
to education and health care, among other abuses.
We are particularly concerned about the widespread
and deliberate attacks against schools, educational
personnel and students, as well as the use of schools
for military purposes, including as barracks, fighting
positions, detention centres, interrogation or torture
sites, and weapons depots.
Sadly, we are witnessing a heartbreaking example of
how children are affected by armed conflict right across
our border with Syria. There are recent depictions of the
grave crimes committed against the children of Syria in
the report of the independent international commission
of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, released on
12 February, as well as the Secretary-General’s May
2013 report on children and armed conflict. According
to UNICEF statistics, over 4 million Syrian children
are in need of assistance and 3 million are internally
displaced; 94,362 have lost their parents due to the
conflict; at least 5,000 out of 22,000 schools have been
partially or totally damaged, and a further 1,000 have
been used to shelter internally displaced persons; and
there are over 60,000 Syrian students at the camps in
Turkey.
A strong display of political will, unity and joint
action on the part of the international community would
be the most important tool for child protection. United
Nations and the other missions can be crucial sources
of trustworthy information and provide monitoring and
reporting functions, which could lead to awarenessraising, as well as better planning, protection and
response. Therefore, it is crucial to mainstream
principles related to children and armed conflict into

14-2558355/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

07/03/2014

peacekeeping mandates and the training programmes
of their personnel. Moreover, ensuring humanitarian
access, as well as full access to justice by children,
should be prioritized in areas of conflict.

crisis on children, including in the life-saving areas of
health, nutrition, immunization, water and sanitation,
as well as investments in the future of children through
education and child protection.

New conflicts erupting around the globe, as well
as the evolving character of war and conflict, give rise
to new threats and challenges in relation to children
and armed conflict. The increased number and scope
of conflicts heightens the importance of cooperation
and coordination between the United Nations, regional
countries and organizations, troop-contributing
countries and other relevant actors that are active in
crisis areas. Regional and subregional organizations
can especially contribute to the protection of civilians
and child protection on a number of issues, ranging
from reporting, information-sharing and analysis
to mediation and a possible presence in the field,
especially during armed conflict. Towards that end,
those organizations, which are increasingly involved
in conflict prevention, mediation and peace support,
should further mainstream child protection issues in
their efforts.

In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong
readiness to extend our full support to international
and regional efforts related to child protection and
child soldiers. I would particularly like to commend
the valuable efforts of the United Nations, and express
our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zerrougui and her hard-working
team.

While focusing on new threats and challenges,
we must not lose sight of the initial goal of mobilizing
efforts to end the recruitment and use of children by
armed groups. The Security Council must continue to
apply pressure on persistent perpetrators, including
through sanctions if necessary. Preventive measures,
such as the establishment of legal frameworks
and age-verification mechanisms, especially birth
registration, are of particular importance. Justice and
security sector reform processes must be supported to
foster investigative and prosecution capacities, as well
as national accountability mechanisms. On the other
hand, international organizations and non-governmental
organizations should refrain from drawing up any kind
of documents, including deeds of commitment, with
terrorist organizations, which can easily abuse that
situation to legitimize their existence and acts.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that children and
armed conflict is a development issue as well. Sustainable
development is dependent upon healthy, educated and
socially integrated youth in every society. As such, the
sustained denial of the right to health, education and a
safe and secure environment for children results in lost
generations, endangering the future of entire societies
and cultures. We appreciate the work done by UNICEF
and its partners in that respect, especially with regard to
the critical efforts made to minimize the impact of the

56/79

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): The Netherlands
aligns itself with the statement made by the observer
of the European Union. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Luxemburg for its leadership on
this issue and for organizing this important debate.
Also, please allow me to commend the work of both
Special Representative Leila Zerrougui and UNICEF in
promoting and protecting the rights of children affected
by armed conflict.
Since the adoption of resolution 1261 (1999),
thousands of children have been killed in conflicts
and many more have been left disabled, homeless or
separated from their parents. The civil war in Syria
stands out for its catastrophic scope and human cost.
Over 10,000 children have been killed and 3 million
children are in need of humanitarian assistance. Let me
underline the importance of the “No lost generation”
initiative and other efforts to alleviate some of the
suffering of Syrian children and offer them a future.
In view of the continued violence against children
in conflict and the use of child soldiers in conflict, it
is clear that more should be done by the international
community. Let me address three issues: prevention,
protection and prosecution.
First of all, we must strengthen the prevention
of conflicts and the prevention of the use of child
soldiers in conflict. The further focusing of our
common international norms in resolution 2143 (2014),
adopted today, is of great importance to that effect.
The establishment of legal frameworks, strengthening
governance and rule of law in countries, age verification
in recruitment mechanisms and raising public
awareness are some examples of concrete action. We
therefore welcome the important report published by
14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack
recently and the launch of the “Children, not soldiers”
campaign.
The full implementation of the action plans by
parties in conflict, as listed in the annual report of
the Secretary-General (S/2013/245), is called for. It is
clear that children belong in schools, not in armies,
as the Secretary-General so rightfully mentioned this
morning.
Secondly, together we should strengthen the
protection of children in conflict. In that regard, the
Netherlands is especially alarmed by widespread
and deliberate attacks against schools, teachers and
students as a tool of war. Nearly 50 million children
and young people in conflict zones face enormous
barriers to education every day, keeping them out of
school and preventing them from reaching their true
potential. That will affect the potential for growth and
development of the country as a whole, long after peace
agreements have been signed.
My Government is also alarmed by the rise in the
use of school buildings for military purposes, including
as barracks, fighting positions, detention centres,
interrogation or torture sites, and weapons depots.
We strongly oppose such practices and, in line with
resolution 1998 (2011), urge everyone to take steps both
within their own legislation and military policies and
doctrine, as well as internationally, to end the military
use of schools and protect children’s rights to safety
and education. Schools, as we know, are protected
under international humanitarian law. Nevertheless, as
Valerie Amos has told us, in Syria they are used for
military purposes. That must stop.
My third point is if prevention and protection have
not had sufficient results, prosecution and fighting
impunity are called for. If crimes against children
do occur, it is first and foremost the State concerned
that should ensure that perpetrators are brought to
justice. But if a State is unwilling or unable to do so,
the International Criminal Court (ICC) should step in
and investigate and prosecute violations and abuses
against children in armed conflict that fall within its
jurisdiction. The verdict of the ICC against Thomas
Lubanga for recruiting and using child soldiers in
hostilities was important in that context. For children
who were the victims of armed conflict, it is important
to see that justice is done, because impunity is not only
denial of justice — it is denial of the truth. Fighting
impunity is therefore a prerequisite for durable conflict

S/PV.7129

resolution and stable and peaceful societies, which we
all want for our children.
In conclusion, the Preamble of the Charter of
the United Nations states: “We the peoples of the
United Nations [are] determined to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war”. Of course, that
phrase is about our children and their children. Let us
engage in that task, knowing that our children are the
promise for a more peaceful future. The Kingdom of
the Netherlands will continue to be a partner in that
endeavour for peace, justice and development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Thoms (Germany): At the outset, please allow
me to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President,
not only for organizing today’s open debate, but also
for Luxembourg’s active chairmanship of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict. I would also
like to recognize and thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict and her Office for their work in keeping this
significant issue at the top of our agenda, and I would
add, also very present in the public discourse.
Germany aligns itself with the statement made
earlier today by the observer of the European Union.
The Council’s instruments on children and armed
conflict are among the most developed and innovative
mechanisms at our disposal in the United Nations. They
demonstrate the potential of multilateral cooperation
and renew our faith in the effectiveness of the Security
Council on thematic issues. In that regard, we very
much welcome the adoption today of resolution 2143
(2014). It is another important building block in forming
a solid framework for the protection of children in
armed conflict. We especially welcome the focus on
the importance of protecting schools and hospitals in
armed conflict, which builds on resolution 1998 (2011),
adopted during the German presidency of the Security
Council in 2011.
Groups that recruit and use children in armed
conflict violate the most basic principles of international
law, irrespective of whether they are State or non-State
actors. They violate the promise that each generation
makes to the next that the world should be left as a
more secure and more prosperous place for those who
succeed us. I would like to make the following three
points.

14-2558357/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

First, we must resolutely support the “Children, not
soldiers” campaign of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and
UNICEF, which was launched just yesterday. Ending
the recruitment and use of children by Government
armed forces in conflict by 2016 is a realistic goal.
We need to seize upon the existing political will of
the concerned Governments to realize that objective.
Germany stands ready to support those Governments
that have committed themselves.
Secondly, Germany strongly advocates the
continued and comprehensive inclusion of child
protection advisers in peacekeeping operations,
peacebuilding missions and special political missions.
We wholeheartedly support the commitment that the
Council has made in the resolution adopted today. In
that regard, the Council should remain in close contact
with such child protection advisers in order to provide
greater clarity on the training and resources needed for
the protection of children in each situation.
Thirdly, the international community must seek
innovative solutions on how armed non-State actors
can be compelled to cease the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict. It is important that the
Special Representative also be allowed to reach out to
non-State actors in order to set up action plans to end
violence against children in armed conflict. Such action
plans have proven a very effective tool to ensure the
protection of and a better life for, children in conflict
situations.
We have established a system which is good and
effective. We should thus gather all our efforts to
ensure that all provisions for the protection of children
in armed conflict are implemented fully.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, let me extend
my delegation’s appreciation to you, Madam President,
for convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict, and for the helpful concept note (S/2014/144,
annex). I also wish to thank the Secretary-General,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, and the Executive
Director of UNICEF for their valuable briefings.
Our appreciation also goes to Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
for being willing to share his heartfelt experience as
a former child combatant. Thirteen years ago in this
very Chamber (see S/PV.4422), Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
58/79

07/03/2014

narrated how, at the tender age of 14, he was trained
by rebels to shoot, burn down houses and kill innocent
people. Since then, there has been notable international
progress on the protection and promotion of children’s
rights in conflicts. Yet too many children continue to
tragically become fodder in the various war zones and
hostility-affected regions.
Indonesia welcomes the adoption today of
resolution 2143 (2014) , which it is hoped will garner
greater concrete support for the efforts to safeguard
children in armed conflicts. Indonesia appreciates the
work of the Special Representative, along with other
relevant United Nations entities, on protecting children.
We also take note of the collaboration between her
Office and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, particularly
regarding the mainstreaming of children’s rights issues
into important mechanisms, such as the Human Rights
Council’s universal periodic review and the treaty
bodies. In addition, Indonesia would like to make the
following observations.
First, we must all contribute to further strengthening
the global normative framework within and outside the
United Nations system on the protection of children in
conflict. It must always be underscored that there will
be neither any tolerance for recruiting child soldiers
nor any lax measures to safeguard children and their
rights in conflicts. While that should be clear in United
Nations peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
it is crucial that there also be dialogue and cooperation
with national authorities on those issues. Effective
child protection will be possible when concerned
Governments and local authorities are closely engaged
with and involved in protection efforts. We therefore
encourage the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral to step up her efforts in working closely with
the relevant national Governments to enhance mutual
trust and confidence.
Secondly, while the United Nations is uniquely
placed to advance child protection in conflicts
normatively and operationally, it should seek greater
partnerships with the wide array of relevant regional
organizations and civil society groups to enhance
outcomes, especially because a number of ongoing
conflicts have a regional dimension. We are pleased that
the Special Representative places priority on partnering
with regional and subregional organizations, which
will bolster the United Nations agenda on children
and armed conflict.
14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

Thirdly, the various United Nations child protection
actors, including the Blue Helmets, must be adequately
resourced and supported in carrying out protection of
children in the field. While United Nations personnel
should be properly equipped and trained in child
protection, they should also work closely with the
concerned national actors to increase their sensitivity
and capacity in that imperative. In that regard, we
would also highlight the potential enabling of the
needed capabilities for child protection through the
ongoing United Nations Civilian Capacities Initiative.
Standing resolutely, we must all ensure that
international human rights and humanitarian laws
for the protection of children are not perceived as a
challenge. At home, Indonesia is grateful that our
children have the opportunity to live without fear and
to grow and develop physically, mentally and socially.
To that end, we have enforced measures to ensure
the protection and promotion of the rights of children
through various national laws, targeted strategies and
infrastructure.
Indonesia underlines the need to have greater
international support for child victims, whether for
former under-age combatants or those affected by
violence or displacement. We emphasize greater
measures for meeting children’s physical, educational,
health and psychological needs, which may persist for a
long time. We stress the role of family and community
in creating a welcoming and enabling environment for
former child soldiers, along with other effective longterm measures that help them to become normal and
productive members of society.
Also, as a State party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, Indonesia is
committed, including through its national peacekeeping
centre, to improving the training and capacity of its
peacekeepers on this subject.
In closing, I would submit that the most important
step in protecting children’s rights is preventing conflict
itself. It is essential to build capacities that can assist
Governments in resolving challenges non-violently. A
culture of peace based on the principles of tolerance,
rights, responsibilities, reconciliation and coexistence
needs to be promoted intensively. Indonesia, in its
contributions at the various regional and multilateral
organizations, including the different United Nations
forums, will continue to give high priority to the
safeguarding of children in conflicts.

S/PV.7129

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Ružička (Slovakia): Slovakia welcomes and
highly appreciates the dedication and tireless effort of
Luxembourg in mobilizing efforts to end the abuse of
children in war. We salute the presidency for placing
this important topic on the Council’s agenda. Allow
me also to congratulate all organizers and participants
for launching the “Children, not soldiers” campaign
yesterday.
At the outset, I would like to align myself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union, and also to make a few remarks on
behalf of Slovakia.
I would like to thank today’s briefers for their
presentations. In particular, I wish to accentuate the
tireless efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, to work for
the benefit of children in conflict-affected areas. We
fully support the initiative launched by the Office of
the Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict towards ending the recruitment of children in
Government forces by 2016.
Slovakia has noted with satisfaction an increase in
the attention directed to child protection issues when
setting up or renewing certain mandates of United
Nations missions. Nevertheless, it is only a first step.
The prerequisites of improved child protection, as stated
in mission mandates, have to be fully implemented in
the field. We commend Luxembourg, as Chair of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, for
being proactive in ensuring that language on children
and armed conflict has been retained and expanded
wherever possible in country-specific resolutions.
Slovakia sponsored resolution 2143 (2014). At the
same time, without the additional effort of all Member
States, the Working Group risks losing its momentum,
credibility and maybe its relevance.
Just a few weeks ago, the Security Council held
an open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (see S/PV.7109). During the debate, I stated
that the protection of peace and the prevention of
war comprise one of the most important missions of
the United Nations, and that in cases where we fail
to prevent war or conflict, we must combine efforts,
abilities, means and resources to protect those most
vulnerable: women, children, elderly persons and
persons with disabilities.

14-2558359/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

A stolen childhood cannot be restored in a lifetime.
Armed conflict and violence pose considerable and
serious risks to the well-being and welfare of children.
Abuse suffered in time of war is the worst form of
violation of children’s rights. Not only do children
suffer from the direct consequences of war and armed
violence; they are also affected by displacement, loss
of relatives and the trauma associated with witnessing
acts of violence. Recovery after having experienced a
particularly difficult or challenging situation is always
long-term, with a possibility of failure. It requires
adequate health care, the involvement of parents and
society, education and complex attention in dealing
with physical and mainly mental trauma.
Slovakia remains gravely concerned about the
continuing practice of child soldier recruitment.
The number of child soldiers remains alarming and
their personal stories are utterly disturbing. The
international community must step up efforts both in
rescuing children already recruited as soldiers and
in developing solid preventive measures to help to
discourage, suppress and, ultimately, totally eliminate
that distressing phenomenon. There are two key areas
in particular to address: poverty and education.
We call on all States that have not yet done so to
ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict and to adopt all necessary domestic
measures towards its full and effective implementation.
As I stated earlier, access to education both during
and after conflict is a key factor in terms of preventing
violations of children’s rights. Slovakia urges all States,
the international community and United Nations
institutions to address the matter of education as a
priority when adopting policies and programmes with
an impact on children and their rights. By providing
children with adequate education, we can reduce the
risk of their being subjected to abuse.
Slovakia condemns the use of schools for military
purposes. The study Education under attack 2014,
published in February, identifies 70 countries where
attacks occurred between 2009 and 2013. In 30 cases,
there was a pattern of deliberate attacks. Armed
non-State groups and national military and security
forces alike have attacked education to advance their
own interests. In 24 out of the 30 countries profiled in
the study, warring parties took over schools in whole or
in part, using them as bases, barracks, firing positions

60/79

07/03/2014

and weapons caches. Buildings that should have
provided safe spaces for learning became battlefields
when their use for military purposes made them targets
for attack. Those figures are extremely alarming.
Early focus on restoring functioning schools and
returning young people to classes can represent peace
dividends and foster support for peace. Education
systems need to collaborate on health, education, safety
and security in the schools. Landmine awareness,
psycho-social support and reconstruction of education
institutions must be aligned with social and economic
development planning and public sector and labour
market reform.
Slovakia recognizes its share of responsibility
in helping children to gain access to education and
health care in conflict and post-conflict areas. That is
reflected in our development assistance programmes.
More than €6 million have been allocated to date for
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and Slovak
research and education institutions in the field of health
care and education.
As far as prevention is concerned, those efforts
will not be entirely successful without addressing the
root causes of conflict, as well as its enabling and
facilitating factors. Credible and in-depth security
sector reform has been shown to play a crucial and
decisive role in reducing or even eliminating conditions
that can facilitate the outbreak of conflict, as well as
the sustainability of peace in the longer term.
In that context, we reiterate the need to implement
vetting mechanisms to ensure that those who have
committed crimes against children are not included in
army ranks, that the necessary attention is paid to the
training of military personnel, including peacekeepers,
and that mechanisms to prevent underage recruitment
are put in place. If security sector reform could create
conditions that would help reintegrate or save even one
single child from the horrors of conflict and war, it must
become an imperative for each one of us to undertake.
Children need pens and books, not guns and boots.
In concluding, I want to stress that the protection of
children and their rights, well-being and welfare in
any place on the Earth is the moral obligation of each
and every citizen of each and every State. We must not
abandon those who are the most vulnerable, innocent
and defenceless. The international community, States,
civil society, humanitarian agencies and NGOs all

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

have the duty and the responsibility to use all means
necessary to protect children from suffering.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me to congratulate you, Madam, on your accession
to the presidency of the Council and to thank you
for convening this important meeting to promote the
implementation of the Council’s agenda in ensuring
the protection of children affected by armed conflict.
I am also pleased to welcome His Excellency Mr. Jean
Asselborn, Minister for Foreign and European Affairs
of Luxembourg, and thank him for his participation this
morning. I would be remiss not to thank the SecretaryGeneral; Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict; Mr. Anthony Lake,
Executive Director of UNICEF; and Mr. Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh for their valuable statements this morning.
We continue to face many challenges, including
grave violations against children. Since children are
the most vulnerable group in societes, and given the
continued suffering inflicted upon them in complex
and diverse armed conflicts and the non-compliance
of parties to conflicts with international humanitarian
law, we look to the Security Council to further consider
this issue and take more effective measures to protect
children from violations. In this regard, we commend
the concept paper on the subject submitted by the
President today (S/2014/144, annex). While we reaffirm
our commitment to the frameworks adopted by the
United Nations in this respect, we believe that attention
should not be limited to the conceptual level. Rather,
the recommendations of the Secretary-General and the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict must
be applied to the individual cases considered by the
Council.
The international community is determined to
protect children in times of war and peace alike. The
need for the international community to give priority
to this issue is underscored by more than 25 articles
of the Geneva Conventions and its two additional
protocols that refer to children specifically, as well as
the provisions of the Convention of the Rights of the
Child as universally ratified.
Palestinian children are suffering from injustice
because of ongoing Israeli violations against the
Palestinian people. As indicated by the SecretaryGeneral in his latest report on children and armed

S/PV.7129

conflict (S/2013/245), in one year alone 50 Palestinian
children were killed and more than 665 injured by
Israeli forces. Palestinian children, including minors,
are subject to arbitrary arrest by the Israeli authorities
on the pretext of being a security threat. According to
the Secretary-General, more than 194 children were
arrested by Israeli authorities. It is also alarming that
a large number of attacks were made on schools and
educational institutions in the Palestinian occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem, where attacks
on 321 schools were reported, representing a large
proportion of schools in the Palestinian occupied
territories.
The Secretary-General’s report on children and
armed conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic (S/2014/31)
describes horrendous situations, including grave
violations against children in particular. The Syrian
regime is primarily responsible for the tragic outcomes
of its policies of oppression and use of force against
the the Syrian people who rose up peacefully to
demand their legitimate rights. The use of excessive
and arbitrary military force by the regime’s forces and
militia have killed and maimed countless numbers of
children, with long-term direct and indirect impacts,
such as psychological effects.
The regime’s security and military forces do not
spare children from arrest, arbitrary detention, ill
treatment and fatal torture. The violations perpertrated
by the regime include the use of children as human
shields, sexual and physical violence, and massacres of
civilians, including babies. Children, who are especially
vulnerable to hunger and disease, are obviously the
main victims of the regime’s policy of starving Syrian
towns and villages. They are also largely affected by
the massive destruction inflicted upon the health-care
sector in Syria. It is alarming, that as a result of the
crisis, polio has re-emerged in Syria.
In addition to all this, it is painful to consider that an
entire generation of Syrian children may be lost because
the lack of access to education, as indicated in a recent
UNICEF report. More than 3,000 schools have been
destroyed and more than 1,000 used as shelters. We are
very concerned about the recurring attacks on schools
and their use as military barracks, operations bases and
detention centres. This is not only a violation of the
civilian nature of such institutions, but it also endangers
children and deprives them of their fundamental right
to education, as mentioned in the Secretary-General’s
report as well as in those of other organizations, such as

14-2558361/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

the latest report on attacks on education issued by the
Global Alliance to Protect Education from Attacks. In
that connection, we commend the efforts of the Global
Alliance to formulate guidelines aimed at protecting
schools and universities from military use.
In conclusion, we are here to day to re-emphasize
the importance of efforts to prevent the recruitment of
children and promote their rehabilitation. We would
like to reaffirm that it is equally important to involve
United Nations peacekeeping operations with a mandate
for the protection of children in armed conflicts and
advisers thereof. We reiterate the importance of paying
sufficient attention to strengthening accountability
for violations against children, combatting impunity
for perpetrators, hold them accountable rapidly and
effectively, and taking targeted measures against
persistent violators.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I will deliver a
shortened version of my statement; the longer version
can go to the website.
Luxembourg’s presidency for today’s debate is
very fitting, given its tireless work on addressing the
plight of children engaged in armed conflict. We thank
Special Representative Zerrougui, Executive Director
Lake and Under-Secretary-General Ladsous for their
briefings, and above all we commend Mr. Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh, whose address provided insights rarely heard
by the Council and was powerful testimony to the
fundamental importance of the issue.
The abuse of children in armed conflict is
regarded as abhorrent by the vast majority of United
Nations Member States, and against that background
New Zealand welcomes the consensus behind today’s
resolution 2143 (2014) as a proper reflection of the
views of the wider United Nations membership. What
is required now is to further strengthen the political
will and leadership of the Council. We must continue
to reinforce the architecture on children and armed
conflict, not least by adopting new initiatives and
innovating in order to ensure effective follow-up
and greater accountability. Today’s debate provides
a catalyst for new ideas, in the context of which we
commend Ms. Zerrougui and her partners on their
ambitious launch of the “Children, not soldiers”
campaign, which New Zealand supports.

62/79

07/03/2014

The Secretary-General’s recent report on children
and armed conflict in Syria (S/2014/31) presents, in
the starkest terms, the deplorable costs in young lives
and lost futures exacted by that awful conflict. It is a
reminder of the real cost of failure to act, and should
galvanize the Council to redouble its efforts regarding
Syria. The Council’s recent resolution 2139 (2014)
was, among other things, a much-needed step towards
addressing the humanitarian situation facing children
in Syria, particularly as a consequence of attacks on
schools and children’s arbitrary detention.
Despite commendable progress in some areas of the
children and armed conflict agenda, serious problems
remain in many places. We commend the Council for
recognizing the need for innovative, practical solutions.
But more innovation is required, and that should be
regarded as an urgent task. For example, the number
of persistent perpetrators is of particular concern. New
Zealand suggests that the Secretary-General’s annual
report on children and armed conflict focus on and
give even greater prominence to such perpetrators.
In addition to the information already provided in the
annex, the report should also detail the number of years
that each perpetrator has appeared on the list. That
would highlight the worst of the persistent perpetrators.
The Council could also incentivize progress through,
for example, periodic briefings of the wider United
Nations membership in a special open session of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
which could highlight positive progress on a country
basis and provide an opportunity to discuss lessons
learned for use elsewhere.
The challenge of reducing and eliminating the
abuse of children in armed conflict is made all the more
difficult by the fact that the large majority of violators
are non-State actors. Progress cannot be made unless
we develop techniques for influencing such groups. We
also call on the Council to give greater consideration to
providing better support for the Special Representative,
United Nations agencies and Member States to enhance
their ability to engage with non-State actors.
The concept note for today’s debate touches on one
other aspect, on which I would like to focus: attacks on
and the military use of schools. It has been referred to
by many of those who have made statements. Education
provides the foundation on which the next generation is
built. New Zealand welcomes the Council’s expression
of concern about attacks on and the miltary use of
schools but such violation continues. More must be done

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

in response. The draft Lucens guidelines for protecting
schools and universities from military use during armed
conflict deserve very serious consideration. They
involve a practical and voluntary approach based on
existing international humanitarian law and provide a
resource for use by States to improve their own military
policy and doctrines and to assist others to do likewise.
Those ideas must, of course, exist within a much wider
framework of initiatives.
New Zealand grieves that children are still forced to
see things that no child should see and to do things that
no child should ever do. We again place on record our
commitment to the urgent cause of protecting children
from armed conflict and from the scourge of war and
to maintaining the gains that we have already made.
Above all, New Zealand is committed to achieving
even better outcomes for children who are, through
no choice of their own, deprived of their childhood by
being forced into armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): Like my
colleague who preceded me, I, too, will read a shortened
version of my text. I refer participants to the full written
statement. However, allow me begin by thanking
you, Madam President, in particular for holding this
debate. We especially appreciate its open format, which
allows all Member States to publically reaffirm their
commitment to the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict and to make recommendations to the
Security Council.
Like preceding speakers, we highly value the very
important work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and support
the joint campaign to end the recruitment and use of
children by government security forces in conflict by
2016, launched yesterday by the Special Representative
together with UNICEF.
Despite the repeated calls of the international
community to put an end to grave violations of
children’s rights in situations of armed conflict, a
number of parties to armed conflict still recruit or
use children. The list established by the SecretaryGeneral contains more than 50 perpetrators, 46 of
which are armed non-State actors. The representative
of New Zealand also referred to that fact. Despite the
praiseworthy efforts of the Special Representative to
engage with a number of those non-State actors to end

S/PV.7129

grave violations against children, the commitments
from armed non-State actors remain very limited and
a number of challenges continue for the conclusion
of action plans with those groups, namely, because of
their ephemeral nature, Government opposition or the
difficulty in getting in contact with them.
In that regard, Switzerland supports a project on
improving accountability for children in situations of
armed conflict, which is being implemented by the
Liechtenstein Institute on Self-Determination and the
Watchlist on Children and Armed Conflict. The project
will, in particular, focus on facilitating information
exchange and dialogue between armed non-State
actors, the United Nations and civil society as a step
towards increased implementation of action plans with
non-State actors that are still committing violations
against children.
Furthermore, we will also continue to support the
non-governmental organization Geneva Call, which
has access to armed non-State actors and engages them
to sign deeds of commitments to prevent and put a ban
on the recruitment and use of children in hostilities.
Geneva Call’s approach is complementary to the work
undertaken by the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations and other stakeholders.
Training and capacity-building for the personnel
responsible for child protection are of the utmost
importance. The pre-deployment training in child
protection for peacekeepers is essential. Police officers,
military personnel and civilians need specialized
training on child protection. Switzerland will financially
support the mainstreaming of the protection, rights
and well-being of children affected by armed conflict
within United Nations peacekeeping operations. Also,
we are of the view that Government armed forces listed
in the annexes to the Secretary-General’s reports on
children and armed conflict should be prohibited from
participating in United Nations peacekeeping operations
until they have adopted and fully implemented action
plans to end violations against children.
Finally, Switzerland encourages States that have
not yet done so to ratify the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.

14-2558363/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

07/03/2014

Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this debate and for
steering the strong, yet pragmatic resolution 2143
(2014) on children and armed conflict.

punishing perpetrators. Persistent perpetrators must be
identified and brought to justice under national judicial
systems and, where applicable, through the use of
international criminal justice mechanisms.

The testimony of Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, the
former child soldier, this morning has touched our
hearts. We appreciate the valuable briefings given by
the Secretary-General, his Special Representative,
Ms. Lelia Zerrougui, and UNICEF Executive Director
Anthony Lake.

Education is an enabler and emancipator, and
by far the most effective answer to armed conflicts.
Attacks on schools endanger students and teachers,
destroy premises and deprive children of their right to
education. Such attacks, in most cases, are perpetrated
by terrorist and other armed groups that do not respect
national laws and international norms. In any case, the
military use of schools should be strictly prohibited in
all circumstances. The international community should
therefore strengthen the hands of national Governments
in dealing with these groups and protecting seats of
education and learning.

Children are our most valuable asset. They need
to be protected and nurtured through better education,
proper nourishment and moral guidance. The dictum of
the Charter of the United Nations to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war cannot be realized
without making a continued investment in the future of
our children. All cultures foster love and affection for
children.
Yet we find millions of children trapped in wars
and conflicts around the world. As noted in the concept
paper (S/2014/144, annex), tens of thousands of children
continue to be recruited, killed or maimed, sexually
abused or deprived of their right to education and
health care when schools or hospitals are attacked. In
situations of armed conflict, children are often coerced
into taking part in active hostilities. Pushing children
into combat situations is inhuman. As a child soldier,
a child becomes both the subject and object of crimes.
The scourge can and must be stopped.
With the Council’s determined efforts over the past
15 years, significant progress has been made to reduce
the number of child soldiers. Comprehensive norms and
standards have been developed. Thousands of children
have been demobilized, rehabilitated and reintegrated
into societies but the task has not been accomplished.
We should all support the Special Representative’s
“Children, not soldiers” campaign by creating a
greater awareness through media campaigns about
the recruitment of children as soldiers, by conducting
dialogue with the mothers and families of the affected
children, by enlisting the endorsement of all parties to
conflict to the initiative and by mobilizing resources
for capacity-building.
The establishment of legal frameworks, aid
verification mechanisms and universal world
registration systems prevent child recruitment and
reinforce accountability. Investigative and prosecutorial
capacity-building helps in combating impunity and

64/79

Peacekeeping missions can play a vital role in
the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict; they are often the first line of defence. It is
therefore essential that peacekeeping missions receive
the necessary training and resources to effectively
perform their critical tasks. As the largest contributor
of peacekeeping troops, Pakistan welcomes the
recommendations in resolution 2143 (2014) on specific
operational predeployment and in-mission training of
peacekeepers. Pakistan treats this responsibility with
the utmost seriousness.
We should continue to encourage the closer
involvement of regional and subregional organizations
in protecting the rights of children in armed conflicts.
The African Union’s intercession in Somalia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Chad, Côte
d’Ivoire, Sierra Leone and Mali, for instance, has
been quite successful. These experiments are worth
replicating. Progress on the delisting process depends
on the political will of the countries concerned.
We support the mandated reporting and monitoring
procedure to protect the rights of children in armed
conflicts. We want to strengthen the political consensus
around such mandates. For that purpose, the legal
parameters of the mandate must be respected. Focus
should continue to remain on situations of armed
conflict and those threatening international peace and
security.
Finally, we call for the cessation of all armed drone
strikes as they infringe the rights of children to life,
education and development.

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Madam President, and the
delegation of Luxembourg on your leadership of the
Security Council this month and on organizing this
debate on the important issue of children and armed
conflict.
I also thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui; Executive Director of UNICEF
Anthony Lake; and Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations Hervé Ladsous for their useful
briefings. We also appreciate the insights provided by
Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, from Sierra Leone, based on his
own experience as a child soldier.
We often say that children are the future of the
world, and indeed they are because they represent
humankind’s hopes. As the most vulnerable group,
children are adversely affected by armed conflict. It
is therefore incumbent upon all Member States and
parties to conflicts to ensure that children are protected
from the harm of armed conflict.
Uganda condemns the recruitment, use and abuse
of children in armed conflict in violation of applicable
international law. The psychosocial consequences on
the well-being and mental health of the affected children
are traumatic. We therefore welcome the attention that
Security Council continues to accord to this issue and
the progress that is being made, including the adoption
of a series of measures to promote the protection of
children in armed conflict by the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. Nevertheless,
there is still a lot of work to be done, especially in
assisting countries emerging from conflict to give full
consideration to the special needs of children as part
of their disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.
The challenge of protecting the rights and wellbeing of children during conflict and ensuring
attention to their educational, health, rehabilitation and
nutritional needs in post-conflict periods is daunting.
Too frequently, the absence of participation by advocates
of youths and children during peace negotiations means
that their concerns are often not given the attention
they deserve.
We are convinced that addressing the needs
of children is not just a matter of fairness, equity

S/PV.7129

or humanitarianism; it is also key to building and
maintaining lasting peace. It is therefore crucial to
ensure respect for children’s rights, hold accountable
those responsible for abuses and crimes committed
against children in armed conflict, and cater to the
needs of affected children in post-conflict situations.
Beyond the impact on peace and stability, there is
indeed the human dimension of the tragedy of children
caught up in armed conflict. Unfortunately, there have
been many instances of violent conflict where children
have been used as bearers, cooks, messengers and sex
slaves, and others have been involved in combat, taking
human lives. Besides child soldiers, all children become
victims in one way or another during armed conflicts.
They become victims when they are displaced or when
their Government cannot ensure adequate funding for
schools and health clinics, resulting in very low school
participation rates and high infant mortality rates.
No country emerging from war can, without risk,
leave its young people on the sidelines without any future,
knowing only a culture of violence. Programmes for
disarming, demobilizing and reintegrating combatants
must therefore take into account the specific needs of
children, in particular young girls, who are even more
severely affected than boys and whose reintegration is
even more difficult. In Uganda, following the end of
the Lord’s Resistance Army insurgency in 2006, one
of the priorities of the Government was reintegration
of formerly abducted children into their families and
communities.
In conclusion, it is vital that we constantly improve
strategies to make an impact in terms of protection
of children in armed conflict. The international
community must make sustained efforts to truly change
the situation. The United Nations should continue to
document its experience and lessons learned in the
area of protection of children during peacekeeping
operations so that future peacekeeping operations can
benefit from that experience.
At the same time, all parties to armed conflicts
should strive to meet their obligations under relevant
international law and to respect and safeguard the
rights of children. In post-conflict situations, the return
of children to their families, schools and communities
as well as the provision of sufficient resources should
be prioritized. Young boys and girls kidnapped or
coerced into joining armed groups must be freed to live
the rest of their lives without the stigma or trauma of
those early years shadowing their future.

14-2558365/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): At the outset, I would like
to highly commend the Luxembourg presidency for
convening this important meeting. There can hardly
be a topic that calls for greater attention than this one.
Our sincere appreciation also goes to the SecretaryGeneral, the Special Representative of the Secretary
General for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Executive Director of UNICEF for their valuable
briefings. Special gratitude goes to Mr. Alhaji Babah
Sawaneh for his personal testimony.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered on
behalf of the European Union, and I would like to add
the following remarks in my national capacity.
The reports of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict are a stark reminder for us of the
challenges ahead. We note with appreciation that
some progress has been made in the protection and
reintegration of children affected by armed conflict,
especially with regard to the release of children from
armed forces and armed groups in several countries.
However, we remain gravely concerned and saddened
that children in many countries continue to suffer
terribly from the physical and emotional wounds that
armed conflicts bring upon them.
Croatia fully supports all efforts aimed at the
prevention and combating of sexual violence in conflict
and at ensuring accountability for crimes committed.
Croatia has become one of the global champions of
the United Kingdom’s initiative entitled Preventing
Sexual Violence in Conflict and has supported a
historic declaration aimed towards worldwide efforts
to eradicate that war crime. We look forward to
the elaboration of the international protocol on the
documentation and investigation of sexual violence in
conflict, which is of special relevance for children’s
rights and their protection.
Croatia strictly opposes and is gravely concerned
by the use of schools for military purposes, because
it puts children in grave danger and negatively affects
their right to education. That seriously jeopardizes their
chances for the future. We recognize the right to access
to education as a fundamental human right. Particular
attention is being paid to its protection through Croatia’s
international assistance and development cooperation
to countries in and emerging from conflicts.

66/79

07/03/2014

Last year, following a children-sensitive approach
and supporting girls’ education in particular, Croatia
funded the construction of a library in Afghanistan used
by 5,000 children, and a high school attended by 600
children. Last year we also provided medical treatment
in Croatia to a number of Palestinian children suffering
from respiratory diseases, thereby contributing to their
psychosocial rehabilitation and well-being.
As a country that experienced war horrors that
gravely affected children, Croatia fully supports the
campaign “Children, not soldiers”, which has as its
primary aim preventing the recruitment of children by
2016.
The use of child soldiers and their conscription
and enlistment into armed units is a war crime. There
can be zero tolerance for impunity. This and all other
forms of war crimes and crimes against humanity
must be prosecuted and brought to justice, primarily
before national courts but ultimately, in the absence
of capacity of States to do so, before the International
Criminal Court (ICC). With the aim of strengthening
this important principle of subsidiarity, Croatia fully
supports deepening the dialogue between the Security
Council and the ICC.
We must all increase the pressure on those who
have no heart, no shame and no conscience. Listing
violations against children as clear designation criteria
for sanctions, and making concerted efforts to sanction
responsible individuals is one way to do so.
We should spare no effort to protect those who
are the most vulnerable and those unable to protect
themselves. Croatia firmly supports the inclusion of
child protection advisers in peacekeeping operations
and the organization of predeployment targeted training
for child protection for peacekeepers. It is of paramount
importance that all the relevant peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations properly address the impact of
conflict on children, especially girls. We also advocate
that this aspect be given even greater prominence in the
relevant reports submitted to the Security Council.
Croatia ratified the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement
of children in armed conflict and calls for its universal
ratification. We also consider the Paris Principles and
Commitments a useful guide in our common efforts
to respond to the plight of children affected by armed
conflicts worldwide.

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

Finally, as one of the sponsors of today’s resolution
(resolution 2143 (2014)), we highly commend its
unanimous adoption.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Mr. Nikolić (Montenegro): We thank you for
organizing this open debate, Madam President, and
commend your leadership in preparing the text of the
resolution just adopted (resolution 2143 (2014)), which
we were happy to sponsor. We also thank today’s
briefers for their valuable presentations.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
I would like, however, to highlight some points of
particular importance to my country.
We were moved by the story of Mr. Alhaji Banah
Sawaneh, who was a former child solider in Sierra
Leone. His testimony is yet another reminder of the
scope of the challenge we face, even today.
Although the Security Council has made significant
progress in advancing the children and armed conflict
agenda, more action is needed to protect the rights of
children in situations of armed conflict and to ensure
that perpetrators of grave violations against children are
held to account. It is in that context that we welcome and
strongly support the campaign “Children, not soldiers”,
which the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and the
Executive Director of UNICEF unveiled yesterday as a
new effort to end the recruitment and use of children in
Government forces in conflict by 2016.
Thousands of boys and girls around the world are
still being recruited into Government forces and armed
opposition groups to serve as combatants, cooks, porters
or messengers, or in other roles. Girls, and sometimes
boys, are also recruited for sexual purposes. Therefore,
we fully echo the words of the Special Representative
that the time has come for the world to unite and turn
the page, once and for all, on the recruitment and use of
children by security forces in conflict.
We expect that the campaign will make a significant
difference through its twofold contribution: first, to the
full implementation of action plans to end and prevent
recruitment and, secondly, to the release of children and
their reintegration into civilian life in order to ensure
that children released from armed forces or groups are

S/PV.7129

able to become productive members of their societies
and are no longer at risk of re-recruitment in future.
It is also essential that the Working Group of the
Security Council on Children and Armed Conflict
continue to best use the tools at its disposal in order
to provide appropriate responses to all types of grave
violations, including those committed by non-State
actors. In that regard, we would like to stress that
Member States need to allow access for the United
Nations to armed non-State actors for the purpose of
ending violations and concluding and implementing
action plans.
We share the concern about attacks and the
increasing use of schools for military purposes, as it can
have a devastating impact on children. It is worrisome
that schools can be converted into military targets
and that students, teachers and learning facilities can
indeed be made vulnerable to attacks and other forms
of violence by parties in conflict. We call on all parties
to armed conflict to refrain from actions that impede
children’s access to education. We also have to ensure
that all measures are taken to protect students, teachers,
schools and universities from attack and military use.
With respect to United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions and the indispensable role they play,
Montenegro would like to advocate for a strong child
protection component to be incorporated in missions’
mandates. That would require peacekeepers, military
and security personnel to receive specialized child
protection predeployment training.
Montenegro is concerned about the use of explosive
weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas. We
would like to call on all parties to conflicts to refrain
from the use of such explosive weapons so as to ensure
that civilians, in particular children, are protected
against death, injury and psychological harm.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) has
a key role in fighting impunity. When crimes of
an international scale are committed and national
judiciaries are unwilling or unable to deal with them,
States parties to the Rome Statute should pay due
consideration to referring those situations to the ICC.
It is also vital that the Security Council, to the extent
possible, use the option to refer situations to the ICC.
In conclusion, let me point out that everyone — the
international community, regional and subregional
organizations and the entire United Nations

14-2558367/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

system — must contribute to our common and noble
objective so that no child ever experiences what
Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh went through. We owe that
to children.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Ms. Čolaković (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank you, Madam President, and your delegation
for convening this open debate and thereby showing
that your country attaches particular importance to the
issue of children in armed conflict.
Allow me to express our appreciation to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Anthony Lake,
and especially to Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, for their
excellent briefings today.
Bosnia and Herzegovina fully supports the adoption
of the Security Council’s action-oriented resolution
2143 (2014), on children in armed conflict.
I would like to start with some statistics. According
to UNICEF, 10 million children were traumatized by
war in the past decade. Furthermore, in armed conflict,
children are the most vulnerable group in society
and are often subjected to rape, sexual violence and
abduction. Tens of thousands of children continue to
be recruited, killed, maimed or deprived of their rights
to education and health care. Poverty and conflict are
frequently obstacles, as children barely in their teens
are compelled to support hungry families or forced to
become child soldiers or comfort wives.
The practice of the recruitment and use of children
in armed conflict still persists. It is a grave human
rights violation. The involvement of children in armed
conflict presents serious challenges on the ground
for both States in conflict and for the United Nations
presence. There are a number of examples that we see
in the world today.
We stress the primary role of national Governments
in providing protection and relief to all children affected
by armed conflicts. We also urge all parties to conflicts
to fully comply with international humanitarian law
and human rights law with regard to protecting the
civilian population as a whole. All countries and groups
must place the protection of children in situations of
conflict above politics.

68/79

07/03/2014

Education is increasingly being highlighted
as essential to the advancement of society, as well
as crucial to opportunity for individuals. Defining
education as a fundamental human right is an important
start. In spite of that recognition, we are witnessing a
growing number of attacks against schools, educational
facilities, teachers and pupils. Hundreds of thousands
of children all over the world are today suffering from
the absence of any opportunity to be appropriately
educated. Two out of three children do not attend
secondary school. The majority of them become
completely lost, and a forgotten generation for good.
Such a situation establishes a historical basis for future
international peace and security challenges.
Malala Yousafzai, targeted by the Pakistani
Taliban for assassination for promoting education for
a generation of young men and women, stands out as
a symbol for millions who are denied opportunity and
access. Therefore, in times of conflict, all steps should
be taken to safeguard the right to education. All parties
to conflict should safeguard schools as protected areas
and zones of peace for boys and girls.
What more can be done, both in practice and
definition, by the United Nations and the international
community? We reiterate that targeted, gradual and
more vigorous measures against groups and individuals
who persistently commit grave violations against
children should be undertaken.
In order to end impunity for violations against
children, Member States must uphold existing
international standards and put into practice their
obligations through accelerated national legislative
reform and systematic implementation and monitoring.
Perpetrators should be brought to justice in compliance
with international justice mechanisms, criminal courts
and tribunals. We are encouraged by the fact that
some parties to armed conflict have made progress in
releasing child soldiers. In that context, we stress the
primary role of national Governments in providing
protection and relief to all children affected by armed
conflict.
With regard to the practice of reintegrating
children into communities, domestic and international
stakeholders dealing with situations of conflict in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations often face
difficulties. To resolve such complex issues, efficient
coordination among different actors is needed, including
by the host country, host Government, United Nations

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

entities, donors and non-governmental organizations.
Special attention should be given to refugees and
displaced children, children with disabilities and those
who have been subjected to sexual violence. We believe
that their participation in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration practices is critical.
In addition, we believe that the cooperation and
exchange of information between the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict, the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict and the
relevant Sanctions Committees should be improved.
We commend the “Children, not soldiers” campaign
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to end and prevent the recruitment and use of children
by Government armed forces in conflict. Regional
and subregional organizations have an important role
to play in the promotion and protection of children’s
rights.
United Nations-mandated institutions, including
the Offices of the Special Rapporteurs, UNICEF, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the Human Rights Council, provide regular
reviews on the status of, and respect for, human rights
within the borders of any United Nations State Member.
The protection of children must remain at the top of any
review agenda for the sake of our future.
When we talk about the future of child protection,
we should also keep in perspective the post-2015
development agenda and sustainable development
framework. During the discussion in the Open Group
on Sustainable Development Goals in February, many
countries voiced the issue of conflict and violence
prevention and the pursuit of durable peace as one of
the starting points or prerequisites of development and
sustainable development. Furthermore, education is
promoted as one of the most critical priorities among
the Millennium Development Goals.
In conclusion, we firmly believe that the Security
Council should remain committed to the protection
of children in armed conflict, including through
determination to ensure the full implementation of,
and respect for, its resolutions on the issue. Bosnia and
Herzegovina stands ready to contribute to that aim.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

S/PV.7129

Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic
of the Congo) (spoke in French): As this is the first
time I take floor in the Security Council during your
presidency, allow me at the outset of my statement, to
congratulate you, Madam President, and tp express
how pleased I am to see you presiding over the Council
during the month of March. Мy delegation thanks the
Security Council and the presidency of Luxembourg
for including on its agenda an issue that particularly
affects the Democratic Republic of Congo, namely,
children and armed conflict. I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for
his annual report (S/2013/245) on the issue. My thanks
also go to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and to Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director
of UNICEF, for their commitment to the cause of
children.
In one of her annual reports, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict writes that thousands of children
continue to be killed, maimed or abducted, suffer
sexual violence, or are denied access to humanitarian
assistance or health care in many countries. In several
countries, she continues, they have also been used to
commit suicide attacks or to serve as human shields.
That description corresponds exactly to the ordeal
suffered daily by Congolese children due to the presence
of numerous foreign and domestic armed groups that
plunder the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Indeed, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
a country that has suffered for more than a decade
of intermittent armed conflicts with the grimmest
of consequences, children are among those civilians
whose rights are most frequently violated. What is
worse, given their immature psychological makeup,
they experience great trauma when they are recruited
as soldiers. That is the case, for example, when they are
forced to kill an adversary in cold blood or a comrade
in arms suspected of collaboration, or when forced to
burn villages or to stand by helplessly as comrades
suffer. All the armed groups operating in the territory
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo recruit boys
and girls as soldiers, messengers, spies or traffickers or
to transport munitions.
Change has been palpable since the defeat of
the Mouvement du 23 mars. However, internal
displacements from ongoing acts of violence have not
completely ceased, given the armed groups that continue

14-2558369/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

to recruit children, subjecting them to forced labour and
the extraction of natural resources. These children are
also used to grind rocks into gravel in quarries. Once
broken down, coltan is used in electronic devices. The
high level of radioactivity of such substances explains
the frequent respiratory problems, sometimes lethal,
suffered by a great number of Congolese children who
have been transporting and breaking down coltan.
Those who survive are traumatized by acts of
vandalism and barbarism perpetrated by the armed
groups that victimize them. They have had to witness,
powerlessly, horrible scenes of violence in which their
families and friends have been killed before their eyes.
Thousands of child victims of violent attacks by armed
groups have suffered considerable material and moral
damage. I speak on behalf of those children, whose
families, generally in a dire economic situation, would
have liked concrete measures of redress and reparation
to be made for them. From the viewpoint of education,
displaced children living in areas of combat have
virtually no access to education, which leaves them
even more vulnerable to recruitment by armed groups.
Given the scope of the phenomenon, and pursuant
to the recommendations contained in the annual
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict, the Congolese authorities have spared no
expense in tackling the challenges. In October 2012, my
Government and the United Nations signed an action
plan with a series of commitments by both parties,
aiming to end the recruitment and use of children by
Congolese armed forces and security services in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as sexual
violence against children.
Progress has been made since the signing of that
action plan. Two directives have been issued by the
Congolese authorities. The first was issued by the
Ministry of National Defence and Veterans Affairs
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo Armed
Forces, recalling the various commitments made by the
Government in the matter and the obligations arising
therefrom. The second was issued by the general
administrator of the Congolese National Intelligence
Agency. It gives the United Nations task force and
child-protection agencies access to intelligence staff,
documents, sites and installations, and authorizes the
release of all children associated with armed groups
into the care of child-protection agencies.

70/79

07/03/2014

Moreover, two coordination mechanisms have been
created to follow up the implementation of the action
plan. Results have been encouraging. According to
statistics, 2,494 children were removed from armed
groups and forces in June 2013, while 2,824 children,
of whom 365 were girls, were placed in the care of
the transitional support structure. Those numbers fell
through 31 December 2013 and perhaps even more by
today.
Among the wide-ranging actions undertaken by
the Government to address the phenomenon of sexual
violence, I note the law of 20 July 2006. Compared to
the earlier criminal code of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the law brings meaningful change,
including by raising the age limit for those considered
to be victims of sexual violence from 14 to 18 years
old. Practices that were formerly considered to be
lesser crimes — including forced marriage, forced
prostitution or the exploitation of children, sexual
slavery, bestiality and genital mutilation — are now
punished more severely. Moreover, the new law on
sexual violence, includes not only those crimes but also
16 additional crimes under the principle of international
humanitarian law.
In conclusion, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is resolved to pursue its campaign to eradicate
this phenomenon. Along those lines, my delegation
takes this opportunity to call upon the foreign and
domestic armed groups still active in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo to respond positively
to the invitation of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Congolese armed forces to lay down
their arms and to surrender to Congolese authorities so
that they can be repatriated to their countries, in the
case of foreigners, or inscribed in the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, in the
case of Congolese nationals.
My delegation welcomes the commitment of the
Security Council to working to protect children against
grave violations committed during armed conflict.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): Madam
President, my delegation is pleased to take part in
this debate under your presidency, which confirms
your commitment and ongoing efforts on this issue.
I congratulate you for the adoption this morning of

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

resolution 2143 (2014). I also would like to thank
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Mr. Anthony Lake and Mr. Alhaji
Babah Sawaneh for their statements.
Since 1999, the issue of the involvement of children
in armed conflict has enjoyed the special attention
of the Security Council. Despite the progress made,
the international community continues to face major
challenges related to the ongoing recruitment of children
by certain parties to armed conflict, in violation of the
most basic elements of human rights and international
humanitarian law, including refugee law. The focus on
women, boys and girls as vulnerable groups in times
of armed conflict must remain at the very centre of the
Council’s concerns with a view to eliminating the worst
forms of violence and exploitation against those groups,
promote their rights and ensure respect for their human
dignity.
The adoption by the Council of resolution 1612
(2005) on the recruitment and use of children in
armed conflict facilitated the establishment of a
mechanism to monitor and report on grave violations
committed against child soldiers. That mechanism has
broadly contributed to collecting reliable information
supporting the implementation of national action plans
for the protection of children in armed conflict.
Other resolutions — including 1882 (2009) on
sexual violence and children, 1998 (2011) on attacks
against schools and hospitals, and 2068 (2012) on
criminal liability for persistent perpetrators — are
among those initiatives aimed at bolstering existing
legal frameworks in terms of child protection. Through
its ongoing commitment, the Security Council has
also clearly highlighted the fact that the fight against
the phenomenon is not only a moral and humanitarian
imperative, but also a pillar of international peace and
security.
Nevertheless,
the
international
normative
framework adopted to ensure the best possible
protection of children in armed conflict, and the
United Nations mechanisms established in that area,
cannot guarantee the necessary protection without the
essential political involvement of Member States to put
an end to the scourge.
The stubborn nature of the recruitment of child
soldiers is closely related to the illicit trafficking
of small arms and light weapons, particularly by
organized crime networks and due to weak border
control cooperation and difficulties in implementing

S/PV.7129

disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes. Within the framework of its efforts, the
Council should adopt a holistic approach to address
the phenomenon of child recruitment in its military,
security and social and humanitarian dimensions.
My delegation shares the view that the fight
against child recruitment of soldiers includes conflict
prevention while addressing such root causes as poverty,
exclusion and social inequalities. In the framework
of post-conflict situations, we must strive to ensure
national reconciliation, respect for the rule of law and
democracy, and conditions conducive to sustainable
development.
National child protection strategies continue to
depend on measures to build Government capacities
and on the availability of material, financial and human
resources to ensure the sustainablility of initiatives
established under national action plans. They also
require attention to international development
indicators in the establishment of rehabilitation and
reintegration programmes aimed at child victims of
recruitment through national training and job-creation
projects to offer young people improved prospects
through re-education and training. In that respect, my
delegation welcomes the growing number of action
plans signed or in negotiation that reflect the merits of
dialogue and cooperation. Those efforts should involve
not only public authorities, but also non-governmental
organizations, national human rights entities and civil
society.
The Kingdom of Morocco commends the “Children,
not soldiers” campaign launched by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and UNICEF,
aimed at ending the recruitment of children in armed
conflict by 2016 and supporting national initiatives in
that area. Similarly, we welcome measures taken by
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
to strengthen the education and training of military
personnel involved in peacekeeping operations so as to
enable them to protect children in situations of armed
conflict.
My delegation hopes that the guidelines jointly
set forth in 2009 by the DPKO and the Department of
Field Support will help to guide activities of the United
Nations system related to children in armed conflict and
to support the mandates of child protection advisers in
peacetime. The recruitment of children in armed conflict
is a crime that must be denounced, condemned and

14-2558371/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

punished. The efforts of the international community to
end it will require specific, targeted, practical actions.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): I thank you, Madam
President, for giving me this opportunity to speak
before the Security Council. The Philippines notes
the adoption today of resolution 2143 (2014) and the
briefing by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict, as well as
the statement of the Chair of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.
My Government reaffirms its firm and demonstrated
resolve to protect our children and their rights wherever
they may be or in whatever circumstances they are in.
My Government’s actions on the matter speak volumes
about our seriousness. Our commitment cannot
be questioned. My Government has been working
steadfastly to institute meaningful and significant
additional measures or specific actions to ensure that
the framework for the protection of our children in
any circumstances, including challenging situations,
remains robust. That includes the signing of Executive
Order No. 138, which created a monitoring, reporting
and response system for grave child rights violations
in all possible venues that a Filipino child may be in,
including situations that may be characterized as armed
conflict.
My Government and our negotiators from both sides
are working very hard in forging the agreement that
will ensure a durable solution in southern Mindanao.
My President went to Malaysia a few days ago to thank
the Malaysian Government for hosting many of the
negotiations on a very comprehensive agreement for a
lasting solution in southern Mindanao.
Members should note that Typhoon Haiyan hit
the central Philippines in the central region of the
Visayas. Our negotiators were even very careful in
their choice of words. The Council is very familiar
with the nature, sensibilities and complexities of
negotiations — anywhere and everywhere. And yet one
still hears general sweeping references in statements
or terms regarding the Philippines that cause one to
wonder if they are at all reflective of a geographical
knowledge of my country or helpful to national efforts.
The Philippine Government continues to work
closely with the United Nations for the promotion of
the interest of the children. The reports issued by the
72/79

07/03/2014

Secretary-General and his Special Representative and
the documents emanating from the Working Group
should follow from clear, accurate, verifiable and upto-date data. It is therefore important that gaps in the
reporting process that have been identified be addressed.
Old data must be discarded. The Philippines raised that
issue with the Working Group. The observation has
to be translated into appropriate recommendations.
The Security Council must be cognizant and address
those gaps. The integrity of the reports and work of the
Security Council and everybody else involved rests, in
fact, on such basic requirements.
Let me also bring to the fore additional points
that need to be highlighted and commented on. We
acknowledge and are grateful for the due recognition
given to the positive developments that have taken
place in the Philippines. Those institutional and legal
developments need to be appreciated in the larger
context of inclusive and sustainable growth and the
peace and development agenda of my Government. It is
a delicate balance that we in the Philippines are trying
to achieve. The work carried out here on children should
support the work that is being done at the country level.
The Philippines also wishes to take exception
to the statement in the report of the Working Group,
recognizing that
“children’s vulnerability to violations and abuses
committed by parties to the armed conflict
might have increased in areas in the Philippines
affected by Typhoon Haiyan, and urging relevant
international governmental and non-governmental
agencies working in affected areas to bear this risk
in mind” (S/AC.51/2014/1, para. 6 (d)).
My delegation wishes to know the factual basis
of that statement. It bears noting that Typhoon
Haiyan — the strongest typhoon ever recorded in
history to hit landfall — while cutting a huge swathe
through the country, significantly affected provinces
in the Visayas region, not in Mindanao. Those are not
areas of operation of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front,
with which we have forged a lasting solution and which
might be slighted by those reports or comments, or
the Abu Sayyaf Group or other armed bands. Previous
reports of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral will bear that out.
There were a number of nasty reports that came
out at the time, including on the trafficking of children,
but all had shaky factual bases; such reports came out

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

to advance the specific interests and hidden agendas
of certain groups — but not the armed groups. I would
refer, for instance, to the report that relief goods and
medicines from the United Kingdom were diverted to
private distributors or markets outside the calamitystricken areas for private gain, but there were no such
distributors in kind from the United Kingdom. Given
the very real challenges that confront my nation’s
reconstruction and rebuilding efforts in the aftermath
of Typhoon Haiyan, such speculative statements are
quite insensitive and outright irresponsible, Thet
are a disservice to the thousands of children in the
typhoon-affected areas who need all the help they can
get at this very crucial time.
I take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for visiting the calamity-stricken areas and the
international community — including the countries of
my region and those represented here — for the very
kind support they have extended to my Government,
their relief efforts, and their assistance the recovery,
reconstruction and development of the affected areas.
My Government wishes to inform the Council
that the fourth and final annex on the Bangsamoro
was recently signed. It is the last the 12 annexes of the
comprehensive framework agreement that was signed
more than two years ago. Throughout that period, there
has been tranquility in the area other than isolated cases
of violence. By the end of this month, the comprehensive
agreement will be signed.
Allow me to reiterate the position of the Philippine
Government. We value the sanctity of every human life,
particularly the lives of our children and youth. Our
position is unchanged — the situation in the Philippines
does not warrant any inclusion on the list. The concrete
developments and the concerns we have descrived,
including on data and reporting, should be taken into
full account. The Philippines offers more positive
lessons learned and points of advancement rather than
setbacks, which warrant our exclusion from the list.
The operational activities of the United Nations
could provide concrete instruments for the promotion
of the interests of the children. It would in fact be
an indication of failure on the part of the Security
Council, even on an issue that is very important but
of tangentional concern to the Council, if no final
action were taken with respect to those countries
on the list that are clearly not in situations of armed
conflict. The appropriate agencies or United Nations

S/PV.7129

operational activities can do more, instead, to secure
the improvement of the situation of children in those
countries and free up the Security Council to engage
in the larger and more pressing issues of international
peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Hassan (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank you, Madam President,
for having organized this open debate on children and
armed conflict, taking into account the ongoing efforts
in the campaign to end child recruitment by the end of
2016, launched yesterday with the participation of our
delegation.
Issues related to protection of the rights of children
constitute a major priority for the Government of
the Sudan, as evidenced by a number of efforts and
achievements by the Government. To give a few
examles only, first, concerning its international
commitments, my country has ratified the Convention
on the Rights of the Child and its Optional Protocols
on the involvement of children in armed conflict and
on the sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography. It has also ratified International Labour
Organization Organization (ILO) Convention No. 138,
on the minimum age for admission to employment and
work, and ILO Convention No. 182, on the worst forms
of child labour.
Secondly, at the national level, the laws governing
the armed forces, police and security services
categorically prohibit the recruitment of children under
the age of 18 in their ranks. My country has established
an integrated system of justice and corrections for
minors, including the 2010 law on child protection, and
the creation of a competent prosecutor’s office to that
end.
Thirdly, with respect to child protection
mechanisms, the Government has established units for
the protection of children and and the family within
the military forces and the Ministry of the Interior.
It has also established a national council for children
and appointed a prosecutor for crimes perpetrated in
Darfur in order to investigate all allegations since the
onset of the conflict in 2003, particularly claims related
to violations of the rights of children. The Government
has also established a fact-finding committee on the
abduction and recruitment of children in Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states. In July 2013, it launched

14-2558373/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

07/03/2014

a 10-year comprehensive national plan to promote
human rights in the Sudan.

we want the debate on children and armed conflict to
be inclusive comprehensive.

Fourthly, with respect to the engagement with the
relevant United Nations bodies, through its Permanent
Mission to the United Nations, the Government of
the Sudan has remained in constant contact with the
Office of the Under-Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and UNICEF, with a view to
addressing all child-related concerns.

First, Governments suffering from conflict must
be assisted in their efforts to end them, by persuading
and compelling armed rebel groups to put down their
arms and turn to negotiation as a means to settle their
differences.

The Government of the Sudan is also making
ongoing efforts to improve the situation of children.
In that regard, over the past few weeks, the Sudanese
national child-care council has set up a national
coordinating task force on children in emergency
situations, including all the relevant actors and bodies
working on this important question. One of the most
important mandates of the task force is to ensure child
protection, deal with cases of children in emergency
situations and coordinate with UNICEF and the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur. Similarly, in June 2013, the national childcare council organized a symposium on local cultures
focused on protecting children, including when it
comes to recruitment. The symposium was aimed at the
following objectives.
The first aim was to enhance awareness of
international principles and standards on the protection
of children; bring into play the role of the media with
regard to local cultures that favour the recruitment of
children, as well as underscore the role of civil society
and scientific institutions in this connection; and prepare
the launch of an information campaign to promote the
goals of the symposium, which will be coordinated
with the UNICEF office in Khartoum. The campaign
will send outreach messages with the participation of
the local community leadership and women’s groups.
Work is under way with various relevant agencies for
the completion of the action plan on children and armed
conflict.
Given the policies that I have mentioned and the
practical steps we have taken in that regard, we call
for removing the Sudan from the list of countries
annexed to the annual report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict.
My delegation would like to draw attention to the
following points that need to be taken into account if

74/79

Secondly, the root causes of the presence of
children in the military must be addressed, alongside
the root causes of conflicts, by eradicating poverty,
dealing with the impacts of climate change, lifting
the unfair unilateral economic sanctions imposed on
certain States, including the Sudan, and cancelling the
debts of developing countries and proving them with
technical support and capacity-bulding , particularly in
the areas of education and post-conflict reconstruction.
Thirdly, the fact that rebel movements are
signing on to action plans to end child recruitment is
not enough. Such measures must be backed up with
condemnation of the behaviour of rebel groups, which
must also be forced to lay down their arms and pursue
negotiations. Fourthly, Governments must take part in
any efforts relating to the issue of children in conflict,
transparently and on a basis of national sovereignty.
In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
commitment to continuing to cooperate with all United
Nations bodies dealing with children, and calls for
the Secretary-General’s reports to include correct and
verifiable information based on objective and impartial
sources, about which Governments must be consulted
before that information is incorporated into official
reports.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Botswana.
Mr. Ntwaagae (Botswana): I would like to join
other delegations that spoke before me in extending
our sincere congratulations to you, Madam President,
on your country’s assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of March. In the same vein, I
wish to thank you on behalf of my delegation for
convening today’s open debate on the very important
theme of children and armed conflict.
We thank the Secretary-General for his latest
annual report (S/2013/245), which not only highlights
the progress that has been made in protecting children in
countries affected by conflict, but also documents how
the evolving character of war is creating unprecedented

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

risks for our children. We are also encouraged by the
Security Council’s continued focus on the subject
and wish to emphasize the need for greater and more
systematic attention to be paid to the agenda of children
and armed conflict in the Council’s own work.
Recognizing that ending violations of the rights of
children is a moral imperative that we must collectively
commit to achieving, Botswana reaffirms the
importance it attaches to the protection and promotion
of the rights of children, including in the context
of armed conflict. To that end, we strongly support
all efforts aimed at protecting the rights of children,
including the mandate and work of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict, among others. My delegation also
welcomes yesterday’s launch of the “Children, not
soldiers” campaign organized by UNICEF, the Special
Representative and the Luxembourg Permanent
Mission. We believe the launch was timely and will go
a long way to complementing ongoing efforts to end the
recruitment and use of children in armed conflict.
Despite the commendable progress highlighted in
the report, we remain deeply concerned that children
continue to be recruited, killed, maimed, sexually
abused and deprived of their childhood and their right
to education and health care, among other things. It
is disheartening to note that in some ongoing crises,
such acts have become systematic and widespread.
In line with the principle of the responsibility to
protect, Botswana believes that States have primary
responsibility for protecting their own populations
from genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and crimes
against humanity, including protecting children from
the risk of war.
My delegation also wishes to reiterate that impunity
for violations against children is unacceptable and must
never be tolerated. In that regard, we wish to stress
the urgency and importance of enhancing political
will and commitment in order to address the tragic
plight of children in armed conflict. To that end, a
focus on national ownership and responsibility, and on
engagement with concerned Governments and armed
groups to establish commitments to accountability, as
well as the systematic monitoring of such commitments,
represents the highest possible priority and importance
for my delegation. We therefore call on the Security
Council to continue its efforts to fight impunity and
enforce accountability, including by adopting targeted
measures against persistent perpetrators of violations

S/PV.7129

against children and their referral to the International
Criminal Court.
Regarding the effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance, we believe that allowing the access necessary
for reaching vulnerable populations, particularly
children in situations of armed conflict, is essential.
Botswana believes that strengthening global efforts
to end the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflict should be consistent with and complementary to
wider efforts to promote the implementation of Security
Council resolutions on children and armed conflict
and of other resolutions regarding the promotion and
protection of the rights of children. In that regard, we
welcome several States’ significant efforts to implement
those resolutions, including resolution 1612 (2005) and
2068 (2012), and believe that they should continue to
be vigorously pursued. We also share the view that
such efforts should be supported so as to strengthen
national capacities for child protection, investigation
and prosecution and accountability mechanisms, as
well as the establishment of age verification processes
in military recruitment.
As the well-known children’s rights activist,
Graça Machel, once said, “The impact of armed
conflict on children must be everyone’s concern and
is everyone’s responsibility” (A/51/306, para. 317). We
remain optimistic that given our collective will and
responsibility, we can bring an end to the shameful
crimes currently prevailing against children.
To conclude, we welcome the adoption today of
resolution 2143 (2014) on children and armed conflict.
Its adoption by consensus indicates the willingness of
Council members and, indeed, the general membership
of the United Nations, to move ahead on this agenda and
focus on areas that have not received much attention in
the past.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia.
Mr. Samvelian (Armenia) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to say how pleased we are to
see Luxembourg presiding over the Security Council,
and to express our gratitude to you, Madam President,
for organizing this open debate on an issue that is so
important to the United Nations and its Member States.
We are also grateful to Luxembourg, and its Permanent
Mission in particular, for launching the “Children, not
soldiers” campaign.

14-2558375/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

(spoke in English)
My delegation would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Anthony Lake, the Executive
Director of UNICEF, and Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, for their briefings earlier
today.
In recent years the evolving character of armed
conflict has created unprecedented threats to children.
They have become more vulnerable, particularly due to
new tactics in warfare — an absence of clear battlefields,
the increasing numbers and diversification of parties to
conflicts, which add to conflicts’ complexity, and the
deliberate targeting of safe havens such as hospitals
and schools. Conflict deprives children of their parents,
caregivers, basic social services, health care and
education. Civilians, including child soldiers, should be
spared war’s devastation, and no civilian losses should
be forgotten or overlooked.
There was no outright ban on child soldiers under
international law until fairly recently.
Both the additional 1977 Protocol I of the Geneva
Convention and the Convention on the Rights of the
Child prohibit States from recruiting soldiers under
the age of 15. However, there was no prohibition
against children choosing to fight in conflict. The
situation changed from the year 2000 and onward
when the United Nations authorized a special tribunal
to prosecute those with the greater responsibility of
violations of international humanitarian law, including
the use of child soldiers. Compliance with international
human rights and humanitarian law, with their emphasis
on special protection for children, remains the key to
preventing grave violations against children. In that
resepct, in 2005 Armenia ratified the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and strongly
supports the activities of the Committee and the wider
United Nations system in that regard.
However, it is regrettable that, notwithstanding the
fact that the legal regulation of the rights of children
and their involvement in armed conflict has been
significantly strengthened and affirmed, the substantive
use of child soldiers in armed conflicts still continues to
take place. Children in conflict are separated from their
families, are forced to kill and experience violence and
abuse. Ending impunity for grave violations against
children is crucial. Recruiting child soldiers constitutes

76/79

07/03/2014

a war crime and the perpertrators of such crimes must
be held accountable.
While the promotion and protection of the rights
of all children is a priority concern of States Members
of the United Nations, Armenia believes that particular
attention should be paid to projects specifically related
to disarmament, reintegration and rehabilitation,
including psychosocial work. The promotion of peace
is in the overriding responsibility of all countries, as
well as of the Council. As long as armed conflicts are a
reality, we have a duty to promote the protection and to
defend the rights of the most vulnerable — the children.
The United Nations system as a whole has a role to play
in that regard, and we owe it to the children of the world
to mobilize the full potential of that system.
In conclusion, let me commend the efforts of the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Children and Armed Conflict. The Office
does impressive work in raising awareness and in
mobilizing strong support for the protection of children
affected by armed conflict.
In that connection, let me also make a reference
to the statement of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ms. Leila Zerrougui made during
the presentation of her annual report in the autumn of
2013 to the General Assembly, which fully reflects the
position of Armenia on the issue discussed. She said
that constructive engagement with Member States
in collaboration with child protection partners was
crucial to end and prevent the recruitment and use of
children; no one could single-handedly accomplish the
difficult task of addressing the impact of conflict on
children; and that Member States, the United Nations
and civil society partners had to support each other for
the sake of children affected by conflict and to include
children’s needs in peace agreements and in broader
peacebuilding recovery and development initiatives.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Portugal.
Mr. Moura (Portugal): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict, which is an issue to which
Portugal attaches great importance.
Let me start by thanking today’s briefers for their
presentations. I take this opportunity to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
for her briefing. I take this occasion to commend her
14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

work and efforts to ensure the protection of children in
situations of ongoing armed conflict.
Portugal fully supports the “Children, not soldiers”
campaign launched by the Special Representative
yesterday with UNICEF and in collaboration with
Luxembourg and other United Nations partners.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
observer of the European Union, but I would like to
underline some aspects of particular significance to my
country.
Portugal bears a strong commitment to the
promotion and protection of human rights and to
international humanitarian law. The first debate held in
the Council on the issue of children and armed conflict
was, in fact, promoted by my country in 1998 (see
S/PV.3896). We were then already convinced, as we
remain today, that the issue has serious implications for
international peace and security.
We welcome the Security Council’s commitment
to addressing the grave violations committed against
children in situations of armed conflict and the progress
achieved over the years with the adoption of a number
of resolutions that have reinforced the mechanisms to
deal with that pressing issue. Despite the significant
progress and establishment of a strong normative
framework and a mechanism to monitor, report and
respond to grave violations against children, huge
challenges remain, due in particular to the changing
nature of conflicts.
It is troublesome that in his latest report (S/2013/245),
the Secretary-General notes the increasing trend of the
use of schools for military purposes, as well as attacks on
education. We are gravely concerned about widespread
and intentional attacks against schools, teachers and
students as an instrument of war. As a recent study
launched by the Global Coalition to Protect Education
from Attack demonstrates, there is a very concerning
pattern of deliberate attacks against education
perpetrated by armed non-State groups, State military
and security forces and armed criminal groups in more
than 70 countries. Schools and education facilities are
being systematically used as bases, barracks, weapons
caches, detention centres and even torture chambers by
regular armed forces and armed non-State opposition
groups. Hence, education infrastructures become
strategic targets of attack, putting children and teachers
at risk and denying children their right to an education.

S/PV.7129

As we sit here today, children are being forced out
of their classrooms and playgrounds and such attacks
not only affect children and communities as a whole
but also should affect our consciousness. In Syria, more
than 2,500 schools were damaged or destroyed by April
last year, and the number now exceeds 3,000. We urge
all Member States to act to protect schools, teachers
and students from attack and to hold perpetrators
accountable. We salute the efforts of Luxembourg,
as Chair of the Working Group, to agree on tangible
measures aimed at preventing the attacks on education
and the military use of schools and to ensure the
accountability of perpetrators.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) continues
to play a fundamental deterrent role, complementary to
the roles of tribunals at the national and international
levels, by holding perpetrators accountable and by
investigating and prosecuting those responsible for
committing atrocities against children. The need to
tackle impunity regarding persistent perpetrators
already clearly identified should certainly guide our
work in the near future. It is striking that we are referring
to individuals or entities that have been identified as
persistent perpetrators for five years or more, most of
whom are non-State actors. It is the credibility of the
system that we have built that is at stake. The Council
needs to address those difficult cases and to ensure
that such individuals are accounted for and sanctioned.
Further institutional dialogue between the ICC and the
Security Council is fundamental in that regard.
On peacekeeping operations, Portugal strongly
supports the inclusion of child protection advisers
in mandates. It is fundamental that in scenarios of
hopelessness, such as armed conflicts, United Nations
peacekeepers on the ground are a symbol of the core
values of respect and protection of human right for which
the Organization strives. In this sense, predeployment
training in child protection for peacekeepers, and the
effective screening of peacekeepers to ensure that
individuals who have committed grave violations
against children do not serve with the United Nations,
are essential. It is particularly paradoxical that, in spite
of the existence of normative international instruments,
such as the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
most inclusive of all instruments of international law,
children continue to be the main victims of armed
violence, being injured, raped and killed.
Let me conclude by saying that Member States and
the Security Council share the common responsibility

14-2558377/79

S/PV.7129

Children and armed conflict

for taking collective action to overcome this scourge.
Protecting children in armed conflict requires the
commitment of the international community as a whole,
and my country is fully dedicated to this objective.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mr. Huseynli (Azerbaijan): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this important
and timely open debate on children and armed conflict.
Let me also commend the active role and leadership of
Luxembourg in advancing this issue in the work of the
Security Council.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General, his
Special Representative Leila Zerrougui, the Executive
Director of UNICEF and the other speakers for their
presentations and insights and for sharing experiences
that can hardly leave anyone in this Chamber indifferent
to the gross violations committed against children and
their unspeakable suffering during armed conflict. We
join the call for efforts to be stepped up at all levels to
reduce the grave impact of conflicts on children and
upholding justice by bringing to account those who
perpetrate crimes against children.
Azerbaijan remains deeply concerned by the
negative impact of conflict on children and strongly
condemns all violations of international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights
law committed against them. Azerbaijan’s principled
position with regard to the protection of civilians,
including children, in situations of armed conflict
is based on a strong interest in contributing to the
protection of human right and fundamental freedoms
and to the achievement of sustainable peace and
development. In doing so, my country proceeds from
its practical experience in addressing the devastating
consequences of serious violations of international
humanitarian and human rights law committed during
the war waged against my country. It is a well-known
fact that today Azerbaijan continues to suffer from the
presence of high numbers of refugees and displaced
persons, many of whom are children.
The consistent attention of the international
community, in particular the United Nations, to the
problem has been crucial in developing and applying
measures to prevent and respond to violations and
abuses committed against children. Azerbaijan remains
committed to continuing to support the activities of
existing United Nations mechanisms aimed at ensuring

78/79

07/03/2014

more effective protection for the rights of children and
improving the situation of children affected by armed
conflict.
Important steps have been taken in a number of
situations of armed conflict to achieve accountability
for grave violations of children’s rights, including the
development of the international legal framework.
However, serious challenges remain. Among them is the
continued lack of proper attention and responses at both
the international and regional levels to the violation of
international humanitarian and human rights law in
some situations of armed conflict.
It is obvious that more resolute and targeted
measures are required to protect children in situations
of armed conflict and to end impunity for the most
serious crimes of concern to the international
community perpetrated against children. Combatting
impunity is important not only for the purposes of
prosecuting such crimes and bringing those responsible
to justice, but also for ensuring sustainable peace, truth
and reconciliation.
Particular consideration should be given to
internally displaced children in terms of ensuring their
inalienable right of return and to the implications of
illegal policies and practices in situations of foreign
occupation for the protection of children’s rights. In
addition, determining the fate of children taken hostage
and reported missing in situations of armed conflict,
as well as searching for them and their reunification
with families are other layers of the problem requiring
urgent action.
I would like to conclude by welcoming the adoption
of resolution 2143 (2014) today, which demonstrates
the Council’s continued determination to address the
problem in a comprehensive and by focusing on its most
salient aspects.
The President (spoke in French): The representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic has requested the floor to
make an additional statement. I give her the floor.
Ms. Alsaleh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): We very much appreciate your giving us the
floor for the second time at this meeting, Madam
President. We are taking the floor to respond to the
allegations in the statement by the representative of
the Qatari regime, which has now become isolated and
ostracized even by its closest allies in the Arab Gulf.

14-25583

07/03/2014

Children and armed conflict

If the representative of Qatar were truly concerned
for the children of Syria and their lives, she would have
asked her ruling family to stop the sectarian narrative
of instigation launched from their territory through
their local and and satellite television channels. Such
a narrative — for her information, of course — is
what sends jihadists from the world over to Syria to
perpetrate the most abhorrent forms of killing, slaughter
and rape against Syrian children. I believe that the
decision by Qatar’s neighbouring States to withdraw
their Ambassadors in protest of Qatar’s narrative
is the strongest proof of the ignominous and brutal
methodology adopted by the Qatari sheikhdom in
altering facts, inciting sectarian conflict and instigating
the murder of Syrian children from a distance.
Those who claim that they are concerned for human
rights in States worldwide should set an example in this
area. Today, I do not want to remind the representative
of Qatar of the remarks by the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers,
Gabriela Knaul, about the persistence of a judicial
system that flouts the human rights of non-Qatari
nationals in Qatar and which is not independent
because of interference by the Qatari executive branch,
in particular by major companies and the members of
the ruling family.

S/PV.7129

Today, everybody is aware of the role played
by the Qatari regime, which sponsors international
terrorism. Facts are unfolding about the involvement
of the Qatari regime in bombings in Syria, Egypt,
Libya, Saudi Arabia and Bahrain. In addition, we
have seen the closing down of the mouthpiece of the
Qatari regime, the Al-Jazeera channel, in a number of
capitals around the world, following evidence about
its involvement in stirring up public opinion and
conveying a distorted picture about what is happening
in the world. It is no secret that this channel has been
covering, for several decades, the activities of Al-Qaida
and Taliban movements. We reserve the right to hold
these people accountable for their crimes, which have
been documented by the United Nations in the General
Assembly and the Security Council.
Finally, I should like to recall the well-known
Arabic saying, which applies to the Qatari regime and
its representatives: “If you have no shame, then do
whatever you wish”.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 6 p.m.

14-2558379/79
