S/2017/859

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
12 October 2017
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation with
respect to piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast
of Somalia
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to paragraph 33 of Security Council
resolution 2316 (2016), in which the Council requested an annual report on the
situation with respect to piracy and armed robbery at sea off the coast of Somalia.
2.
The report covers major developments since my previous report of 7 Oc tober
2016 (S/2016/843) through 30 September 2017. The report is based on information
provided by the United Nations system, the International Criminal Police
Organization (INTERPOL), the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and
Member States and regional organizations, including the European Union and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).

II. Main developments, trends and considerations regarding
piracy off the coast of Somalia
A.

Major developments and trends during the reporting period
3.
During the reporting period, efforts to minimize acts of Somali piracy continued
thanks to the efforts of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia to foster
governance and the rule of law within Somalia, the physical presence of international
naval forces and the observance of the IMO Best Management Practices for
Protection against Somalia-based Piracy by the shipping industry. However, a slight
increase in piracy activities between March and June 2017 pointed to the root causes
as not being fully addressed. In October 2016, there had been an attempt to attack the
chemical tanker Korea, travelling 300 nautical miles east off the Somali coast, outside
the Internationally Recommended Transit Corridor, but the attempt failed after an
exchange of gunfire with the ship’s security forces led to the suspected pirates fleeing
the scene. From May 2012 until March 2017, no merchant vessel had been
successfully attacked by Somali pirates.
4.
During March and April 2017, six successful pirate attacks occurred involving
the hijacking for ransom of cargo ships and dhows, including the Aris 13, the Casayr
II-No. 30, the Al Kausar and the Salama. In April 2017, Chinese and Indian naval
forces thwarted an attack on the OS-35 and, later the same month, Chinese naval

17-17848 (E)

161017

*1717848*

S/2017/859

forces and the European Union Naval Force (EU NAVFOR) prevented an attack on
the Al Heera. Local authorities in Puntland and Galmudug contributed to hostage
negotiations and the release of the crew of the Aris 13 in March, and of the crew of
the Al Kausar in April, as well as assisted with identifying the apprehended suspects.
Twenty-two unsuccessful attacks or suspicious maritime activities were recorded
from March to 30 September 2017. Of the 29 attempted or successful attacks during
the reporting period, only 2 were against fishing vessels.
5.
The hijackings in 2017 began four months after NATO terminated its counter piracy operations (Ocean Shield) off the coast of Somalia. According to the Share d
Awareness and Deconfliction risk assessment, which is a major source of maritime
threat assessments, the spike in recent incidents may imply that piracy networks have
retained the capability and intent to commit acts of piracy, but were dissuaded from
carrying them out by the international naval presence, which includes the European
Union, the Combined Maritime Forces and the independent naval forces of China,
India, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and Turkey, among
others, in the Gulf of Aden and the Somali Basin. The European Union is reviewing
the continuation of its naval presence (Operation Atalanta) after 2018. Withdrawing
that presence may present increased opportunities for piracy.

B.

Addressing root causes
6.
The recent attacks demonstrate that the underlying conditions fuelling piracy
have not changed, and that piracy networks are still active. Pirate groups remain
opportunistic, given the relative ease with which operatives may source weapons and
skiffs, making it an option with a low threshold for entry. Several factors add to the
risk of a resurgence in piracy activities, including: coastal communities’ perceptions
of weak coastal and marine resources protection by federal, international and local
authorities, especially with regard to illegal fishing by foreign vessels; the ease of
recruitment of potential pirates and the financing of attacks as a result of strong
criminal networks operating onshore and internationally; the weakness of the
institutional capacities and legal frameworks that identify, capture, prosecute and
convict suspected pirates and their accomplices; and the lack of alternative income generation opportunities for affected coastal communities. The perception of a more
peaceful environment off the coast of Somalia, the recent favourable weather
conditions in the pre-monsoon period and the ongoing humanitarian crisis within
Somalia may also have prompted the recent attacks.
7.
In addition, a number of external factors contribute to the persistent risk.
Commercial ships are not adhering to the Best Management Practices, and are
deviating from the Internationally Recommended Transit Corridor, taking increased
risks and reducing their usage of private security personnel. In addition, there is weak
information-sharing on the part of the international community, regional instability,
and the fact that pirates are possibly viewing the current environment as permissive
owing to the recent reduction in the international naval presence. As long as those
external and internal conditions remain, so will the risk of further attacks off the coast
of Somalia and in the Gulf of Aden.

III. Development of counter-piracy efforts within Somalia
A.

National legal and policy frameworks
8.
The Federal Government of Somalia has been developing a policy framework
for the Somali Coast Guard, with technical assistance from the United Nations

2/18

17-17848

S/2017/859

Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the European Union Mission on
Regional Maritime Capacity-Building in the Horn of Africa (EUCAP Nestor, now
rebranded as EUCAP Somalia), under the Somali Maritime Resource and Security
Strategy overseen by the Maritime Security Coordination Committee. The Federal
Government has also been working towards a revision of its Maritime Code, and the
establishment of a Maritime Administration Department under the Ministry of Ports
and Marine Transport, with the assistance of IMO. The new Department will aid the
Federal Government in undertaking its flag, port and coastal State maritime
responsibilities. 1
9.
Somalia, as a party to the Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing of the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), which was the first international
agreement to target illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, has requested
assistance with its implementation. Under a technical cooperation project with FAO,
Somalia will update its information on current practices, procedures and laws
concerning ports, flags and coasts; undertake a national gap analysis and needs
assessment; review related international instruments and existing regional
coordination mechanisms; and develop a national strategy and action plan. The FAO
capacity development workshop held in April 2017 has helped Federal Government
representatives formulate national strategies and action plans for improving the
country’s compliance with the agreement.

B.

Capacity-building
10. During the reporting period, the Federal Government and regional
administrations continued to build their maritime security capacities, with assistance
from international partners, in conjunction with the United Nations trust fund to
support initiatives of States countering piracy off the coast of Somalia. The first of a
series of planned maritime operations centres became operational in Berbera, under
the command of the “Somaliland” coastguard, with assistance from Oceans Beyond
Piracy, EUCAP Somalia and the Global Maritime Crime Programme of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). The centres are designed to offer
Somali maritime institutions greater situational awareness and improved
communications between local maritime security institutions and international naval
forces operating in high-risk coastal areas.
11. The maritime law enforcement authorities in “Somaliland”, Puntland and other
coastal regions across Somalia continued to develop their maritime security and
justice sectors, with assistance from UNODC and EUCAP Somalia. The UNODC
Global Maritime Crime Programme provided in-country maritime law enforcement,
engineering and communications mentors who delivered on-the-job training and
mentoring to Somali maritime police and coastguard units. Somali maritime police
also benefitted from advanced training in Seychelles on visit, board, search and
seizure operations under the Programme. Mentors routinely reviewed security
conditions at Somali prisons to reduce the risk of escape or mistreatment, especially
for prisoners transferred under the Piracy Prisoners Transfer Programme and other

__________________
1

17-17848

A flag State is one in which a vessel is registered or licensed and under whose laws the vessel
operates; a port State is one which holds internationally agreed jurisdiction for the inspection of
foreign ships operating outside national ports with regard to their compliance with the
requirements of international conventions; a coastal State is one that is not landlocked and is
responsible for territorial waters or a territorial sea out to 12 nautical miles, as defined by the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
3/18

S/2017/859

high-risk offenders. The Transfer Programme supports prison operations in Hargeysa,
“Somaliland”, and in Garoowe, Puntland.
12. UNODC continued its multi-year programme of training, procurement and
construction work at the Mogadishu prison and court complex, which will be the most
technologically advanced and secure prison facility in Somalia. The complex will
provide a secure environment for the trials of high-risk prisoners, such as pirates,
terrorists and former combatants. During the reporting period, construction work
progressed on a high-security cell block, a court complex, accommodation for judges
and other administrative buildings. Security and information management training for
Somali custodial officers continued with a vie w to improving their professionalism
and the security of the complex.
13. During the reporting period, three new purpose-built patrol boats were procured
and delivered by UNODC to the Maritime Police Unit of the Somali Police Force in
Mogadishu. The skiffs are better suited to the rough sea conditions off Mogadishu
than the dhows they replaced, enabling the Maritime Police Unit to patrol the coast
365 days a year. The Unit now regularly patrols the Mogadishu harbour and the
adjacent coastline. The Unit also supported the maritime forces of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in patrolling the seaward approaches to Aden Adde
International Airport (formerly known as Mogadishu International Airport).
14. In Puntland, construction of the new headquarters for the Boosaaso port police,
which started in 2015, was completed in 2017 and handed over to the police and the
Minister for Maritime Transport, Ports and Maritime Crime Prevention. It will serve
as a training and operations centre for port police. With assistance from UNODC, the
Boosaaso port police have updated their equipment and communications
infrastructure in order to facilitate the regular interdiction of vessels used to smuggle
people and weapons. UNODC also procured two purpose-built patrol boats for the
Boosaaso port police to replace existing skiffs to give the police increased patrol
range.
15. The “Somaliland” coastguard updated its sea operations with radio operator
training and other support from the UNODC Global Maritime Crime Programm e. The
training and mentoring efforts are credited with contributing to the coastguard’s
successful interdiction of illegal fishing vessels and human smugglers. During the
reporting period, UNODC engineering mentors assisted in making five patrol boats
operational, and will continue training and mentoring for the remainder of 2017.

C.

Community issues
16. Somali waters have the potential to be as lucrative as they are vast. They contain
rich fisheries that attract fishing fleets from all over the world. The illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing narrative is often stated to justify pirates’ actions. Ho wever,
only 2 of the 29 vessels involved in maritime incidents during the past year were
fishing vessels. Livelihood projects such as coastal development and microfinance
loans (e.g., the Shuraako programme) are offered as viable revenue -generating
alternatives by non-government entities. FAO, UNODC and Secure Fisheries have
also supported such efforts to date. The implementation of a component of the
European Union-funded Programme to Promote Regional Maritime Security with
FAO aims to promote proper and transparent licensed and regulated fishing with
regional States to improve the livelihoods of people in coastal communities.
17. In his remarks to the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia in July
2017, the Minister for Fisheries and Marine Resources of the Federal Government of
Somalia, Abdirahman M. Abdi Hashi, emphasized the importance of supporting the
Federal Government’s judicial capacity and its current efforts to address the issue of

4/18

17-17848

S/2017/859

illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, which he c haracterized as having
devastating implications for the alleviation of poverty in Somalia. The Minister
highlighted the ongoing work of the Federal Government with federal member states
in addressing the lack of economic opportunities, especially through n ew projects that
targeted youth. He acknowledged the need for support to the Federal Government in
addressing maritime crime, especially within the Galmudug region.
18. As part of the effort to address the complex linkages between illegal, unreported
and unregulated fishing and piracy, the Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources
continued to identify fishing activities in its exclusive economic zone through
information collected from various sources, with assistance from FAO. During the
reporting period, the European Union shared with the Somali Ministry information
collected by EU NAVFOR vessels on sightings of fishing vessels operating in the
exclusive economic zone of Somalia, and in 2016 Somalia became the eighth member
of the FISH-i Africa task force, a group of countries in the western Indian Ocean that
share information in order to combat and eliminate illegal, unreported and
unregulated fishing activities in the region. Somali authorities used that information
to halt the activities of some of the vessels identified. However, a weak legal
framework and inadequate enforcement capacities often prevented effective follow -up
action by the authorities.

IV. International cooperation
A.

Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia
19. The Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia held its 20th plenary
session in Mauritius from 5 to 7 July 2017, under the theme “Leaving a lasting legacy
for the region”. The plenary session was attended by the following countries:
Australia, China, Denmark, Djibouti, Greece, France, India, Italy, Japan, Kenya,
Mauritius, the Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, the Republic of Korea, the
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka,
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America. The Somali delegation included representatives from the Federal
Government and the federal member states of Galmudug, Puntland, HirShabelle and
the Interim South-West Administration, and from “Somaliland”. Many other
international, regional and private sector organizations also attended. It was co -hosted
by the Indian Ocean Commission under the Chairmanship of Seychelles.
20. The Contact Group remains a vital mechanism and point of contact for the
international coordination of all States, international and regional organizations and
non-State actors involved in addressing piracy off the coast of Somalia in line with
Security Council resolution 1851 (2008). The Contact Group’s plenary session
reiterated the importance of its working groups and other groups when implementing
the work of the Group. The key agreements made by the Contact Group during its
plenary session are detailed below.
21. The Contact Group remains committed to the objective of “zero seafarers and
zero ships” in the hands of Somali pirates, through the continued efforts of the
international community. To achieve that objective, six key elements remain:
(a) deterrence, monitoring and maritime surveillance and patrols at sea;
(b) compliance with the Best Management Practices; (c) legally deployed armed
guards on board merchant vessels after the conclusion of a risk assessment;
(d) reporting networks to establish adequate maritime situatio nal awareness; (e) the
finalization of a legal framework to enable the arrest and prosecution of suspected
pirates; and (f) the disruption of onshore pirate networks and financiers.

17-17848

5/18

S/2017/859

22. The Contact Group acknowledged the work of the International Seafarers
Welfare and Assistance Network and the Maritime Piracy Humanitarian Response
Programme, as well as the Contact Group’s Piracy Survivor Family Fund, which
provides funds for the survivors of Somali piracy and their families so as to enable
them to obtain a range of support during and after captivity. The Contact Group
recognized the need to continue supporting those initiatives and contributing funds to
them, acknowledging that piracy survivors need post-trauma intervention, and that
many families have fallen into poverty in the absence of their income sources.
23. The Contact Group supported the outcome of the third London Conference on
Somalia, held on 11 May 2017, and the commitment of the Federal Government and
the federal member states of Somalia to develop their maritime security capabilities
with a capable coastguard function and appropriate anti -piracy legislation.
24. The Contact Group noted the efforts of the Federal Government, the federal
member states, “Somaliland”, and regional organizations ai med at eliminating piracy
activities off the coast of Somalia, in the Gulf of Aden and in the wider Indian Ocean.
Of note are the respective achievements against piracy of the Puntland and Galmudug
local authorities, which helped to free the crews of the Aris 13 and the Al Kausar. The
Contact Group called upon the Federal Government and federal member states to use
all possible influence on Somali clans and communities to obtain the release of all
hostages. The Contact Group also considered the need to provide support for seafarers
held hostage, both during and after captivity, and for their families.
25. The Contact Group commended the establishment of a regional centre for
operational coordination in Seychelles on 1 July 2017, and the establishment of the
Regional Maritime Information Fusion Centre in Madagascar, in line with the
Djibouti Declaration on Maritime Safety and Security in the Eastern and Southern
Africa and Indian Ocean Region of 2016. The new centres will augment the existing
Djibouti Code of Conduct information network. The Contact Group also
acknowledged regional African efforts to cooperate in tackling piracy and related
maritime crimes, in particular through the conclusion of the negotiations over the
African Union Lomé Charter in October 2016, and the adoption of the Jeddah
Amendment to the Djibouti Code of Conduct in January 2017.
26. The Contact Group noted the threat posed by unregulated floating armouries to
maritime security, and the paper presented by India entitled “Proposed draft
guidelines for floating armouries to the Maritime Safety Committee” that urged IMO
to take early action to reduce that threat. The Contact Group also noted industry
concerns with regard to the threat to seafarers and ships from non -piracy actions in
the Bab al-Mandab strait resulting from the recent Shared Awareness and
Deconfliction threat assessment. Those waters, including off the Gulf of Aden and the
southern Red Sea, remain critical international trade and supply routes. The Contact
Group acknowledged the productive efforts of the Maritime Security Coordination
Committee on coordinating the plethora of maritime issues, while noting its need to
meet more regularly, which was followed up on by members of the Committee at their
annual meeting on 31 July.
27. The Contact Group continued to draw upon its membership network to
galvanize international and regional responses to address changing threat conditions
in the region. The Contact Group agreed that future Chairs should have a mandate
lasting one term of no fewer than two years and should come from the region. The
Contact Group will also deliver a strategic communications plan to strengthen its
reputation and profile. In addition, it will establish better channels of information and
communication for all its members to ensure better access to information on threats
and to make progress on counter-piracy work, while highlighting regional successes
and contributions to deterrence by relevant action groups.
6/18

17-17848

S/2017/859

B.

United Nations trust fund to support the initiatives of States
countering piracy off the coast of Somalia
28. The trust fund to support the initiatives of States countering piracy off the coast
of Somalia, established in 2010 by the Contact Group, continued to provide Somalia
and other Indian Ocean regional States with financial assistance to strengthen their
judicial capacity to combat piracy. The members of the Board of the trust fund for
2016/17 were Djibouti, Germany, the Netherlands (with Norway), Japan, Kenya,
Seychelles, Somalia, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom and the United
States. The Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) was elected as an
observer.
29. On 5 July 2017, the Board held its 19th meeting in Mauritius, under the
chairmanship of the Department of Political Affairs of the Secretariat. It established
new project funding proposal guidelines (see para. 33 below) and approved three new
projects amounting to $741,564. Project No. 85 ($119,091) will provide support to
the Contact Group’s Law Enforcement Task Force activities, with the support of
UNODC. Project No. 86 ($380,920) will provide support to address maritime crime
in Galmudug, Somalia, with the support of UNODC. Project No. 87 ($241,553) will
provide support to a piracy prosecution readiness plan in Seychelles. The
Governments of Seychelles and Norway stressed the impor tance of the project, while
the Board determined, on the counsel of Federal Government, that a similar project
should be undertaken in Somalia as well. While the Board approved the project, the
disbursement of funds will not take place until enough new con tributions have been
received. During the reporting period, several projects encountered delays as a result
of the complex security and political environment in Somalia. Implementation
remained ongoing through Board-approved extensions.
30. Since December 2012, the trust fund has received a total of $14,006,227 from
18 donors. As at 31 May 2017, the trust fund had a total balance of $616,753. For
2016, the delivery rate on project expenditures by participating organizations was
75.25 per cent, which was notably higher than the 65.98 per cent delivery rate in 2015
and the delivery rate of 37.64 per cent in 2014. Notable trust fund project
achievements reported in late 2016 included the registration of 4,468 fishers and
1,470 fishing vessels from eight coastal districts in Puntland, 1,244 fishers and
156 vessels in Mudug and Jubbaland, and 1,244 fishers in “Somaliland”. The
registrations have enabled authorities to distinguish legitimate fishers from pirates.
Trust fund projects also contributed to an increased number of patrols in Somali
waters, which enabled authorities in “Somaliland” to interdict at least 51 illegal
fishing expeditions and 1 illegal weapons shipment. The projects also allowed
Boosaaso port police in Puntland to interdict illegal shipments o f fuel from Yemen.
In 2017, a trust fund project enabled Maritime Police Units to launch patrols of
Somali waters around Mogadishu following a 20-year hiatus.
31. However, progress was slower in the south of Somalia, where political
challenges and insecurity delayed a project intended to strengthen the capacity of the
judiciary to conduct piracy trials, as well as the reconstruction of the Benadir court
complex that was attacked by Al-Shabaab in April 2013. Challenges also remain in
the area of piracy prosecutions, to which the trust fund allocates approximately 19 per
cent of its funds. While progress has been made over the past few years in the arrest,
transfer, prosecution, detention and conviction of piracy suspects after trial, pirate
kingpins remain at large and criminal networks continue to operate. Those challenges
underscore the importance of the international community’s continued support of the
trust fund’s work in that vital area.

17-17848

7/18

S/2017/859

32. At their meeting on 5 July, trust fund Board members noted tha t the main trend
in maritime piracy during March and April 2017 was the hijacking of large
commercial vessels, and noted the real risk that hijackings could resume. It also noted
the expanding scope of hijackings for ransom of smaller dhows and fishing ves sels
beyond the territorial waters of Somalia. The Board was of the view that those
developments indicated that the progress made in addressing piracy, while significant,
remained fragile and reversible.

C.

Strategic review of counter-piracy projects in Somalia and
the region
33. The strategic review of trust fund project No. 78, carried out by Bauman Global
LLC at the request of Board members, included an assessment of trust fund -supported
projects to determine if they aligned with the changing pira cy context. In addition,
the review identified programmatic gaps and how the trust fund or other actors might
be able to fill them. The review was completed in January 2017 and its findings were
approved by the Board in July 2017. The findings noted that new projects should meet
some or all of criteria set out below.
• Encourage international cooperation against pirate kingpins.
• Encourage other Somali development mechanisms, drawn from the national
development plan for Somalia, to produce targeted programmes for the
prevention of piracy.
• Fund small pilot projects in neglected or underserved areas in regions such as
Himan and Heeb and Galmudug. The projects should be designed to avoid
recruitment to piracy and ensure a path to handover and sustainabili ty.
• Support research, analysis, monitoring and evaluation to establish effective
piracy prevention approaches.
Board Members discussed the findings and agreed on a moderate shift in focus for
future trust fund projects, in which funded projects played a more catalytic role in
piracy prevention, in line with the recommended criteria above.

V. Strategic maritime security activities
A.

International capacity-building
34. The Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the Office of Legal
Affairs is continuing to implement its capacity-building programme for Somalia
under trust fund project No. 61. The Division is currently working with the Federal
Government of Somalia and UNSOM to deliver, by the end of 2017, a second briefing
for members of the Somali Parliament on issues related to ocean affairs and the law
of the sea, which will also allow the introduction of a gap analysis of the Somali
legislative and policy framework for oceans to all relevant officials.
35. The Somali Maritime Resource and Security Strategy remains at the core of
capacity-building efforts, providing a road map of implementable tasks arranged into
strategic groups with lead implementers FAO, UNODC and UNSOM coordinating
different agencies towards identified goals. Coordination of the process between
recipients at State and regional levels is done by the Maritime Security Coordin ation
Committee, chaired by the Federal Government and supported by IGAD through the
European Union Programme to Promote Regional Maritime Security in the Eastern
and Southern Africa-Indian Ocean (EU MASE). Overall coordination of the Somali

8/18

17-17848

S/2017/859

Maritime Resource and Security Strategy remains with Oceans Beyond Piracy.
Coordination of the wider region’s anti-piracy capacity-building beyond the waters
of Somalia is undertaken by a regional capacity-building working group of the
Contact Group, supported by UNODC and Oceans Beyond Piracy.
36. The Global Programme against Money-Laundering, Proceeds of Crime and the
Financing of Terrorism, located within UNODC, while not focused on piracy and
having a limited involvement in Somalia, has helped the Somalia Financial Reporting
Center strengthen its analytical and reporting capacity, in cooperation with other
United Nations teams involved in Somalia. The Global Programme agreed to conduct
a financial disruption training course with the Center and the UNODC Global
Maritime Crime Programme at the airport in Mogadishu during October 2017. The
course will be held for Center and Somali National Intelligence and Security Agency
personnel, and bring together international experts such as personnel from the United
States Africa Command to focus on counter-terrorist financing and the nexus with
organized criminal activities such as wildlife and environmental crime.

B.

Naval activities off the coast of Somalia
37. NATO ended its Operation Ocean Shield on 16 December 2016, after more than
seven years of counter-piracy patrolling in the Indian Ocean. However, NATO
continued its engagement in the area, albeit in different forms, thereby lending its
support to the international community’s efforts to combat piracy. It retains its
maritime situational awareness and close links with other international counter-piracy
actors, including the NATO Shipping Centre in the United Kingdom, which regularly
interfaces with the global shipping community. NATO continued its partnerships with
various counter-piracy actors and remained active in counter-piracy forums such as
the Shared Awareness and Deconfliction mechanism and the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia. In late 2017, NATO will consider options for renewing its
operational role in counter-piracy by considering the evolving piracy situation and
ongoing efforts by key naval actors in the region, including EU NAVFOR and
Combined Task Force 151.
38. EU NAVFOR continued to counter piracy under Operation Atalanta, which
typically involves up to three warships, two maritime patrol aircraft and up to 1,000
personnel, covering an area from the Red Sea to the Arabian Sea into the Indian
Ocean, down to the Mozambique Channel. EU NAVFOR was augmented in 2017
through the periodic inclusion of warships from the Republic of Korea. Operation
Atalanta is home to the Maritime Security Centre-Horn of Africa, which provides
maritime situational awareness in assessing vessel vulnerability, categorizing convoy
and protection requirements in the Bab al-Mandab strait and the Internationally
Recommended Transit Corridor, releasing periodic threat assessments and assuring
the shipping industry of a military response to pirac y in the region.
39. EU NAVFOR continues to co-chair coordination meetings of the Shared
Awareness and Deconfliction mechanism on a rotational basis with the Combined
Maritime Forces, working in partnership with regional navies and independent
contributors, which include China, India, Japan, the Republic of Korea, the Russian
Federation and Turkey, among others. Since 2008, EU NAVFOR has protected ships
delivering more than 1.5 million tons of World Food Programme aid to Somali ports,
as well as AMISOM support vessels. No ship operating for either organization has
been seized by pirates. At the end of 2016, the EU NAVFOR mandate for Operation
Atalanta was extended to 31 December 2018, pending a review for commitment
beyond that date.

17-17848

9/18

S/2017/859

40. During the reporting period, EU NAVFOR, the Combined Maritime Forces and
NATO each continued to operate under a dedicated multinational naval counter-piracy
partnership comprising 31 members with missions to protect merchant vessels and
deter pirate activity in the Gulf of Aden and the western Indian Ocean, as authorized
by the Security Council under its resolution 2316 (2016). The Combined Maritime
Forces, operating as Combined Task Force 151, continues to patrol the Red S ea, the
Gulf of Aden, the Arabian Sea, the Somali Basin and the northern Indian Ocean. EU
NAVFOR and the Combined Maritime Forces presented their latest joint threat
assessment to the shipping industry at the Shared Awareness and Deconfliction
meeting in Bahrain in May 2017 and to government representatives at the Contact
Group meeting in Mauritius in July 2017. Both EU NAVFOR and the Combined
Maritime Forces have made the assessment that, despite the recent spike in incidents
in the inter-monsoon period, the tactical indicators and warnings do not point to a
resurgence in piracy.
41. In addition, the naval forces of individual Member States, such as China, India,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Russian Federation and Turkey, continued to uphold
security in the seas around Somalia by protecting and escorting commercial vessels
in order to deter piracy activities. The annex to the present report lists several
contributions by Member States in relation to combating piracy and armed robbery
off the coast of Somalia.

C.

Improving maritime security and law enforcement
42. The Oceans Beyond Piracy report entitled “Stable seas: Somali waters” of May
2017 shows that, while counter-piracy efforts have been largely successful as a result
of issue-specific approaches on maritime governance, they address only narrow
problems without fundamentally undermining or transforming the pirate networks
responsible for attacks. Criminal networks are adaptive and will seek new ways to
profit from poor maritime governance. As demonstrated by recent incidents (see
para. 4), Somalia remains fragile and open to influence by militant and criminal
networks. The disruption of onshore piracy networks and financiers is pivotal to
uprooting piracy from the region. Until international and Somali stakeholders seek
holistic strategies for building up the country’s maritime security sector, including by
improving national capacity to manage and patrol its extensive territorial waters over
the long term, criminal networks can adapt to the prevailing circumstances by shifting
criminal activities and operational bases to avoid international interference, guided
by profit-driven motives.
43. IMO continued to assist signatory States to the Djibouti Code of Conduct in the
implementation of capacity-building activities. The activities included a range of
maritime security table-top contingency planning exercises aimed at highlighting the
need for an integrated multi-agency approach to the implementation of maritime
security measures, utilizing a range of security-related scenarios involving policy
decisions and crisis/emergency management and response. IMO, in cooperation with
the NATO Maritime Interdiction Operational Training Centre, the Saudi Arabia
Border Guard, the European Union, UNODC and other entities, continued its support
of regional training efforts, including maritime interdiction and coastguard training
at sea.
44. During the reporting period, UNODC was appointed as the secretariat for the
Law Enforcement Task Force by the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia, and revived Task Force coordination meetings after a lapse of two years.
The Task Force meeting was held in The Hague on 19 May 2017, and included senior
investigators and prosecutors from seven countries and three international
organizations. That meeting provided an opportunity for la w enforcement agencies

10/18

17-17848

S/2017/859

and prosecutors from each participating State to update the group on the status of
investigations and progress since the last meeting. There were investigations by
multiple jurisdictions on common targets, and the Task Force meeting provided a
forum for information-sharing among law enforcement agencies on the specific
targets. The revived Law Enforcement Task Force plans to meet more regularly with
the support of UNODC as its secretariat, and it will continue to pursue and bring to
justice pirate leaders and financiers.
45. Under the European Union-funded Critical Maritime Routes Law Enforcement
Agency Project, 64 Somali law enforcement personnel received training on
INTERPOL policing capabilities and investigative techniques between June 2016 and
June 2017. Training sessions were given to officers of the Criminal Investigative
Department in Mogadishu. AMISOM, in partnership with the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police, who contributed 10 laptop computers, provided basic information
technology equipment to the Somali federal police to enable them to work more
efficiently.
46. With regard to the financing of and money-laundering by criminal networks, the
projects of EU MASE and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
(COMESA) are currently being driven by INTERPOL in an effort to stem the parallel
crime network structures that support piracy operations. Following calls by the
international community to target terrorism financing, money -laundering and the
support structures on which the piracy networks survive, INTERPOL designed and
launched a European Union-funded project that aims to develop and enhance the
financial investigative capacity of COMESA member States and Somalia. It is being
implemented over a period of 18 months, with the aim of providing different levels
of training and capacity-building to law enforcement agencies to combat moneylaundering and terrorism financing activities stemming from maritime -related crimes.
Djibouti, Kenya, Mauritius, Seychelles and the United Rep ublic of Tanzania have
already observed a sharp increase in the number of relevant investigations undertaken.
47. In December 2016, EUCAP Nestor was rebranded as EUCAP Somalia and given
a new, broadened civilian maritime security mandate: to assist Somali a in
strengthening its maritime security capacity to enable maritime law to be enforced
more effectively. EUCAP Somalia aims to advise Somali federal and regional
authorities in the development of their coast guard and maritime policing functions,
both on land and at sea. It provided strategic-level advice to both the National Security
Office, the National Maritime Coordination Committee and the Maritime Security
Coordination Committee, as well as specialized training and mentoring, including on
specific rule of law and security niches such as cooperation between the police and
prosecutors and on the drafting of laws to civilian maritime law enforcement
agencies, the judiciary and prosecutors. Such activities ensured a focus on the
development of resilient and sustainable maritime security architecture and of a
national priority to establish a civilian federal coastguard model. EUCAP Somalia
worked with international partners, such as UNODC and the AMISOM Marine Unit,
to respond more effectively to the country’s priorities and support the implementation
of a comprehensive national maritime strategy, in line with the European Union
Strategic Framework for the Horn of Africa and the European Union Regional Action
Plan 2015-2020.

D.

Emerging issues in the Indian Ocean rim
48. The Department of Political Affairs took steps recently to strengthen its
cooperation with the Indian Ocean Commission. Following a joint workshop in
Mauritius on 8 and 9 August 2017, a draft framework of cooperation was developed
to address the unique needs and maritime security challenges of African island States,

17-17848

11/18

S/2017/859

which include: the prevalence of illicit flows of narcotics (some 40 per cent of the
global supply passes undetected through the area); repercussions from the rise of
piracy off the coast of Somalia; and risks of violent extremism. The framework and
its aligned action plan focus on the priority areas of mediation and preventive
diplomacy, counter-terrorism and the prevention of violent extremism, transborder
security, electoral support, and women, peace and security. The framework envisages
cooperation between the two organizations and is expected to be endorsed at the next
meeting of the Council of Ministers of the Indian Ocean Commission in November
2017.
49. Concerned by the emerging threat of criminality in the Indian Ocean, the Indian
Ocean Forum on Maritime Crime of UNODC established the Southern Route
Partnership as a regional platform to counter drug trafficking at sea. In Colombo, on
29 October 2016, the Partnership convened a high-level meeting of Interior Ministers
of the Indian Ocean region to counter drug trafficking, which was co -hosted by the
Government of Sri Lanka and UNODC. The meeting was attended by representatives
of 18 littoral States of the Indian Ocean region, including seven Ministers and Deputy
Ministers for Interior/Home Affairs and special envoys and senior officials. The
meeting was attended by seven international organizations/partner agencies and
United Nations agencies engaged in counter-narcotics initiatives in the region. The
participants discussed the development of a regional approach and cooperation to
combat the growth in drug trafficking in the region. Special attention was paid to the
threat of narco-criminality infiltrating Indian Ocean States. As a result, States agreed
on a regional approach called the Colombo Declaration. In June 2017, the Partnership
convened a meeting of the heads of drug enforcement agencies to coordinate plans
for the upcoming post-monsoon period (September to November 2017).

VI. International legal and judicial issues, including human
rights considerations
A.

Legal frameworks
50. The signatories to the Djibouti Code of Conduct held a high -level meeting in
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, hosted by Saudi Arabia and IMO, with support from UNODC
and INTERPOL. Participants adopted a revised and broadened Code of Conduct,
known as the Jeddah Amendment to the Djibouti Code of Conduct, 2017. Signed by
13 States, the Jeddah Amendment addresses other illicit maritime activities t hat
threaten regional maritime safety and security, such as the trafficking of arms, drugs
and wildlife; maritime terrorism; illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing; illegal
oil bunkering; crude oil theft; human trafficking; and illegal toxic waste dum ping.
The new agreement includes all the existing provisions of the Djibouti Code of
Conduct and considers the relevant aspects of Security Council resolutions, General
Assembly resolutions, Conventions, IMO guidance and regional agreements that
apply to the maritime domain beyond addressing piracy and armed robbery at sea,
including the need for effective maritime governance.
51. At its fifth session, in December 2016, the open-ended intergovernmental
working group to elaborate the content of an internatio nal regulatory framework on
the regulation, monitoring and oversight of the activities of private military and
security companies of the Human Rights Council discussed the operations of those
companies in maritime and other contexts (see A/HRC/WG.10/5/2). At the conclusion
of its sixth session, in May 2017, the working group recommended that the Human
Rights Council consider establishing a new intergovernmental working group,
mandated to commence elaborating an international regulatory framework to protect
human rights and ensure accountability for violations and abuses relating to the

12/18

17-17848

S/2017/859

activities of private military and security companies, informed by the discussion
document presented by the Chair-Rapporteur, with further inputs from Member States
and other stakeholders (see A/HRC/36/36).

B.

Hostage release and support efforts
52. Since January 2016, 26 hostages have been rescued through the efforts of the
Hostage Support Partnership, including the Filipino crew of the Naham 3, who were
released after five years of captivity. The Partnership is leading efforts to obtain the
release of eight Iranian hostages from the Siraj, who remain alive but in poor
condition, having been held for more than two years in Galmudug by two separate
pirate groups. In addition, several non-maritime hostages are being held by former
pirate groups, including two Kenyan contractors who were captured while building a
petrol station in Mogadishu and are currently being held near Xarardheere under the
criminal kingpin known as “Garfanje”.
53. INTERPOL continued to implement its Hostage Debriefing Initiative. Under the
Initiative, 12 seafarers kidnapped and held hostage by Somali pirates from five
different merchant vessels hijacked off the Horn of Africa (the Eglantine, the Free
Goddess, the Leopard, the Naham 3 and the Smyrni), were debriefed in Manila in
December 2016. The debriefings were conducted by expert law enforcement
personnel of the United States Naval Criminal Investigative Service and attended by
representatives of the Philippine National Police, the Philippine Center on
Transnational Crime, and the Maritime Industry Authority of the Philippines. Data
obtained from debriefings were incorporated into the INTERPOL Global Database on
Maritime Piracy, resulting in analytical reports on hijacking incidents that have been
shared with law enforcement agencies internationally to support the prosecution of
those who illicitly finance, plan, organize or unlawfully profit from pirate attacks off
the coast of Somalia.
54. The International Seafarers Welfare and Assistance Network led efforts to
support the families of hostages during and after captivity. A number of human rights
and international labour issues remain, however, especially with regard to the
responsibilities of employers for crewmembers and their families and, in particular,
in situations where those vessels engage in illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
off the coast of Somalia, concerns about employers requiring crews to operate in
known high-risk areas.

C.

Cooperation on piracy-related prosecutions
55. The timely sharing of maritime threat and risk assessments and situation
awareness reports remained insufficient across all critical stakeholders. One example
of the importance of the work is the recent identification of a suspect among refugees
arriving in Europe from Africa who was successfully identified using the INTERPOL
database of piracy suspects. Belgian prosecutors successfully convicted Mohamed
Abdi Hassan, also known as Afwenye, who received a 20 -year prison sentence, and
his associate Mohamed Moalin-Aden, also known as Tiiceey, who received a 10-year
prison sentence. The work of the Police and Piracy Intelligence Cell and the Attorney
General of Seychelles led to indictments against Mohamed Garfanji, Abdukadir
Mohamed (Afwenye’s son) and Mohamed Abdi Hiyir, an achievement that was also
noted at the meeting of the Law Enforcement Task Force in May 2017.
56. During the reporting period, a piracy prosecution readiness plan was established
in Seychelles under UNODC, in partnership with EU NAVFOR and the Regional
Fusion and Law Enforcement Centre for Safety and Security at Sea. That initiative

17-17848

13/18

S/2017/859

brings together the expertise and involvement of international partners to ensure that
the capacity, including skills, equipment and facilities, for piracy prosecutions is
further sustained and developed for the region. As a result of those efforts, Seychelles
has become a leading regional prosecution centre with regard to countering maritime
piracy. Belgium, India, Mauritius and Seychelles have all successfully convicted
pirates in the past 12 months. The successful convictions of pirates by Member States,
the repatriation of pirates to serve prison terms in Somalia and the reintegration of
former pirates back into Somali society all contribute to reducing acts of piracy. The
Federal Government of Somalia still requires support to complete the full
development of its legal framework in order to enable it to expedite the arrest and
prosecution of pirate and criminal kingpins and financiers.

VII. Observations
57. I welcome the significant progress made to date on counter-piracy efforts off
the coast of Somalia. Ownership of counter-piracy measures by the Somali people is
critical, since without their full support no lasting solution can be realized. Ultimately,
the lasting solution to countering piracy lies onshore, through the creation of
economic opportunities and alternative revenue generation for would-be pirates,
together with improved prospects for current and future generations of Somali coastal
communities and support for entities currently engaged in that difficult task. Somali
authorities must be supported in developing a legitimate fishing economy and ending
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing by foreign fleets; building their own
sustainable fisheries industry that could improve coastal livelihoods and provide
relief from food shortages; and creating an alternative to piracy and other crimes.
Piracy cannot be tackled in isolation from sustainable development, which includes
ensuring a more stable and secure future for Somalia. The United Nations stands ready
to assist the Federal Government and the people of Somalia in that regard.
58. I recognize and appreciate the collective efforts to tackle the root causes of
piracy off the coast of Somalia, particularly poverty in coastal areas, and to reduce
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and the presence of foreign fishing vessels
within the exclusive economic zone of Somalia, especially through the
implementation of a transparent fishery licensing regime.
59. I am concerned about the incidents of piracy that have occurred over the past
eight months, which were the first in five years. They are a clear reminder that the
root causes of piracy have not been fully addressed either within Somalia or at sea,
and that the country remains vulnerable to acts of piracy. I welcome the swift response
to the incidents, particularly by Somali authorities. The limited number of incidents,
however, also demonstrates the at least partial effectiveness of counter-piracy
measures, including international naval presence and escorts; multinational counter piracy operations; continued vigilance by vessels transiting the Indian Ocean and
adherence to the Best Management Practices; and building the maritime policing and
coastguard capacities of Somalia. The latter are among the best means to deny pirates
opportunities and deter further attacks.
60. I appreciate the continued efforts of the Somali authorities and partners to
strengthen long-term resilience against piracy, including the development of
governance and judicial mechanisms for tackling piracy, as well as the ongoing efforts
to revise the Somali Maritime Code and develop the new Somalia Maritime
Administration Department. I also commend the work of the Law Enforcement Task
Force of the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, and the Indian Ocean
Prosecutors Network of the Indian Ocean Forum on Maritime Crime, which enables
the effective prosecution of transnational maritime crime across the Indian Ocean.

14/18

17-17848

S/2017/859

Together we must strive to combat piracy by reducing related transnational organized
crime, including financing, money-laundering and other support structures that piracy
networks need to survive. Targeting pirate kingpins and criminal networks must
remain a priority.
61. I reiterate my call to the Federal Government of Somalia to implement
international standards by becoming a State party to the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, strengthening its law enforcement capacity
and enhancing collaboration with other countries, including on extradition
agreements.
62. I reiterate my call for the immediate and unconditional release of all seafarers
and other civilians held hostage in Somalia. In that regard, I commend the work of
the Hostage Support Partnership. I renew my call to governments, industry and
humanitarian organizations to reduce the burden on piracy survivors and their
families, including through contributions to the Piracy Survivor Family Fund. I
particularly commend the actions of the Chinese and Indian navies in freeing the crew
of the OS-35.
63. I thank Seychelles for its ongoing leadership in its role as Chair of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia for 2016/17 and the Indian Ocean
Commission for its role as co-host. I applaud the ongoing work of the Contact Group,
international naval forces, the international community and the federal and regional
authorities of Somalia for their continued efforts in fighting piracy off the coast of
Somalia and around the region more generally.
64. The achievements made demonstrate high levels of local, national, regional and
international cooperation in addressing piracy, which remains a threat to international
peace and security.

17-17848

15/18

S/2017/859

Annex
Contributions of Member States in relation to combating
piracy and armed robbery off the coast of Somalia
Bilateral contributions to the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2246 (2015) and 2316 (2016) during the reporting period
Burundi
The Government of Burundi, with regard to the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2316 (2016), has taken many actions, as set out below.
• Sponsored a study based on the International Conventio n for the Safety of Life
At Sea and the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue.
• Is a signatory to the Djibouti Code of Conduct as at 29 January 2009.
• Established search and rescue coordination centres with an inter-ministerial risk
and disaster management commission, which is the high -level body for overall
coordination management across several Ministries, including the National
Police of Burundi. Established a national search and rescue service to create
synergies between the various players involved in crisis management at sea.
• Established a maritime port authority that includes the creation of a marine
police unit responsible for regulating and controlling traffic in the transport
corridors and inland waterways and for training and capacity-building.
China
Since 2008, and up to July 2017, the Navy of the People’s Liberation Army of
China has dispatched 26 escort task forces, involving 83 vessels and 22,000 soldiers,
to carry out escort missions in these locations. The Navy has escorted about 6,400
ships, many of which were foreign or World Food Programme ships, and has helped
more than 60 Chinese and foreign ships by preventing some 3,000 suspected pirate
ships from launching attacks, which helped to secure this important in ternational
trade route. On 9 April 2017, the frigate Yulin of the 25th Chinese naval escort force
received a message that the OS-35 had been hijacked by pirates. The Yulin sailed
towards the waters north-west of the Socotra Islands at high speed, and 16 special
operations soldiers rescued 19 crew members and captured three pirates.
European Union
The European Union supports the implementation of the Somali Maritime
Resource and Security Strategy and the functioning of the Maritime Security
Coordination Committee.
Lithuania
Lithuania has been contributing to European Union Naval Force (EU NAVFOR)
Operation Atalanta since early 2011. Starting January 2018, Lithuania will
significantly increase its contribution to the Autonomous Vessel Protection
Detachment that works to protect World Food Programme vessels.
Mexico
Transactions with illegal proceeds from crimes (money-laundering, including
from criminal acts related to piracy) can be prosecuted under the country’s Federal
Criminal Code. Piracy offences, in accordance with article 146 of the Code, can be
16/18

17-17848

S/2017/859

prosecuted under Article 400 bis. Since 2004, Mexico has had a Financial Intelligence
Unit attached to the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit. Its main function is to
receive, analyse and disseminate information from financial reports/notices presented
by the reporting entities, whether financial institutions or designated non -financial
businesses and professions. Mexico is also an active participant in various
intergovernmental, multilateral, regional and bilateral forums dedicated to the
prevention, detection and combat of money-laundering and financing of terrorism
including:
• Financial Action Task Force
• Financial Action Task Force of Latin America
• Caribbean Financial Action Task Force
• Egmont Group of Financial Intelligence Units
Netherlands
The Netherlands has undertaken a number of efforts to implement Security
Council resolution 2316 (2016). Contributions include:
• Since 2009, supported EU NAFVOR Operation Atalanta with multiple military
vessels. Also supported the European Union military mission to contribute to
the training of Somali security forces (EUTM Somalia), which focuses on the
military training of Somali National Army and advises the staff of the Somali
Ministry of Defense. In 2017, contributed 15 military staff to the mission.
• Through the European Union Mission on Regional Maritime Capacity-Building
in the Horn of Africa (EUCAP Somalia), provided strategic advice and
mentoring of Somali counterparts, and expanded the capacity of Somali
institutions to increase stability on land and off the coast of Somalia. In 2017,
contributed 10 civil experts to EUCAP Somalia.
• Contributed 15 million euros from 2014 to 2017 to the New Deal for Somalia
programme for the development of basic services in the health care, education,
infrastructure and security sectors.
• Contributed to the Addressing Root Causes Fund on conflict and migration root
causes, through two Dutch non-governmental organization consortiums.
• Contributed 1 million euros to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
programme to develop and build prisons and judicial courts in Somalia.
• From 2010 to 2012, prosecuted and convicted 23 suspected pirates in the
Netherlands; 22 were returned to Somalia.
• Provided training to African Union Mission in Somalia military forces deployed
in United Nations peacekeeping missions through the African Contingency
Operations Training and Assistance programme of the United States of America.
• Contributed a ship to Operation Ocean Shield between 2010 and 2014.
• Contributed 6.4 million euros from 2012 to 2016 to the Somalia Stability Fund
to support stability-generating actions in areas taken from Al-Shabaab.
• Supported the Federal Government of Somalia with 1.5 million euros to
strengthen the capacity of the Federal Parliament in Mogadishu and the
Parliaments of “Somaliland” and Puntland, and to strengthen the Somali judicial
sector more generally.

17-17848

17/18

S/2017/859

Sweden
Sweden continues its support in countering piracy in the region by stationing
five officers at Operation Atalanta headquarters. Parliament decided on a Swedish
troop contribution to Atalanta starting in August 2017, with up to 135 military
personnel. Sweden is one of the main contributors of personnel to EUCAP Somalia.
Turkey
Turkey considers piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Aden and off the coast
of Somalia as a continuing threat to international security. Its active role in the area
includes:
• Turkish naval vessels in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Operation
Ocean Shield until its conclusion in 2016. Turkey held command of this
operation (Combined Task Force 508) on a rotational basis from December 2011
to June 2012.
• Turkey was part of the Combined Maritime Forces, an initiative led by the
United States, and currently commands the Combined Task Force 151 for the
fifth time.
• In accordance with resolution 2244 (2015), the mission of Combined Task Force
151 has been widened to include implementation of the charcoal ban to target
the financing of terrorist organizations such as Al-Shabaab.
• To date, the Turkish Navy has carried out 26 operations in areas where it has
escorted the vessels of different countries, provided secure and safe passage to
vessels transporting humanitarian aid to Somalia and engaged with pirates in
the exercise of its mission.
• Turkey has a comprehensive approach to fighting piracy and armed robbery at
sea off the coast of Somalia that includes humanitarian assistance and
development efforts, totalling more than $500,000,000, that aim to address the
root causes of the problem.

18/18

17-17848
