United Nations

A/RES/63/192

General Assembly

Distr.: General
24 February 2009

Sixty-third session
Agenda item 64 (e)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2008
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/63/430/Add.5)]

63/192. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
and the Optional Protocol thereto
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous relevant resolutions, the most recent of which was
resolution 62/170 of 18 December 2007, as well as relevant resolutions of the
Human Rights Council, the Commission for Social Development and the
Commission on Human Rights,
Welcomes the entry into force of the Convention on the Rights of Persons
1.
with Disabilities 1 and the Optional Protocol thereto 2 on 3 May 2008;
0F

1F

Also welcomes the fact that, since the opening for signature of the
2.
Convention and the Optional Protocol on 30 March 2007, one hundred and
thirty-seven States have already signed and forty-five States have ratified the
Convention and eighty States have signed and twenty-seven States have ratified the
Optional Protocol, and that one regional integration organization has signed the
Convention;
Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to consider signing and
3.
ratifying the Convention and the Optional Protocol as a matter of priority;
Welcomes the holding of the first session of the Conference of States
4.
Parties to the Convention on 31 October and 3 November 2008, and the establishment
of the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities;
5.

Also welcomes the report of the Secretary-General; 3
2F

Further welcomes the Joint Statement of Commitment to the Convention
6.
of the Inter-Agency Support Group on the Convention; 4
3F

Invites the Secretary-General to intensify efforts to assist States to
7.
become parties to the Convention and the Optional Protocol, including by providing
assistance with a view to achieving universal adherence;
_______________
1

Resolution 61/106, annex I.
Ibid., annex II.
3
A/63/264 and Corr.1.
4
Available from www.un.org/disabilities/documents/iasg/soc.pdf.
2

08-48231

A/RES/63/192

8.
Requests the Secretary-General to provide the staff and facilities
necessary to support the effective performance of the functions of the Conference of
States Parties and of the Committee established under the Convention and the
Optional Protocol, as well as for the dissemination of information on the
Convention and the Optional Protocol, taking into account the provisions of the
Convention, in particular on accessibility;
Also requests the Secretary-General to continue the progressive
9.
implementation of standards and guidelines for the accessibility of facilities and
services of the United Nations system, taking into account relevant provisions of the
Convention, in particular when undertaking renovations, including interim
arrangements;
10. Further requests the Secretary-General to take further actions to promote
the rights of persons with disabilities in the United Nations system in accordance
with the Convention, including the retention and recruitment of persons with
disabilities;
11. Requests United Nations agencies and organizations, and invites
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations, to continue to strengthen
efforts undertaken to disseminate accessible information on the Convention and the
Optional Protocol, including to children and young people to promote their
understanding, and to assist States parties in implementing their obligations under
those instruments;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session a report on the status of the Convention and the Optional
Protocol and the implementation of the present resolution.
71st plenary meeting
18 December 2008

2
