UNITED NATIOliLS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
w

THIRTY-E,IGHTH

YEAR

MEETING:

LIBRARY

JhJ 2.; 1992

20 DECEMBER

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2507) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
/
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 2983 from the Permanent Representative of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16216) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..................
. ... ... ... .. ... ... .. ..

1

1

YPV.2507

‘7

r.7’

Symbols of U,&eh $a&rs’d&ments
are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates ,a reference to a United
;.,
Nations document. r , t. : I ,
_
.-.
Documents of the Security Council, (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemerits of the Offi&$ &e%ds of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates’.&
supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The .resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the’security
Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

..

2507th MEETING
Held in New York on .Tuesday, 20 December 1983, at 11 a.m. !.

President:

Mr. Max VAN DER STEEL
(Netherlands).

Mr. Anyaoku (Nigeria),
Mr. Medina
(Portugal),
Mr. Adan (Somalia),
Mr. von Schirnding
(South
Africa), Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took
the places reserved for them at the side pf the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua,. Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

21 .The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Zambia. I invite him to take a place at the
[Council table and to make his statement.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2507)

3. Mr. LUSAKA (Zambia): Mr. President, may I begin by thanking you and the other members of the
Council for allowing my delegation to participate in this
important debate on the complaint by Angola against
South Africa. Furthermore, it gives me great pleasure
to extend to you, Mr. President, my delegation’s congratulations on your accession to the presidency of the
Council for the month of December.

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16216).
The meeting

was’called

to.order

at II:30

4. I svish also to pay a tribute to your predecessor,
Mr. Victor Gauci of Malta, who so ably presided over
the work of the Council last month.

a.m.

Adoption of the agenda

5. Members of the Council are well aware that racist
South Africa pursued a policy of aggression against
Angola even before that country attained its independence. The racist South African troops had invaded
Angola several weeks prior to the proclamation of
independence on 11 November 1975. This policy was
transformed into one of permanent illegal occupation
when, in August 1981, racist South Africa invaded and
occupied some parts of southern Angola. That illegal
occupation is being maintained now and is the reason
for the Council’s meeting.

The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16216)
,
i.
1. The PRESIDENT:, In accordance with the- decisions taken at previous meetings on this item [2.50&h to
2506th meetings], I invite the representative of Angola
to take a place at the Council table. I invite,the representatives of Argentina, Benin, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Egypt, Ethiopia, the German Democratic
Republic, India, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mauritania, Mozambique, Nigeria, Portugal, Somalia,
South Africa, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. Last Friday my colleague and brother, Mr. Elisio
de Figueiredo, of Angola, clearly and convincingly
presented the case of his Government against South
Africa [250&h meeting]. Angola has once again come to
the Council to ask this body, which has the primary
responsibility .for the maintenance of international
peace and security, to act decisively to put an end to the
illegal and untenable continued occupation of part of its
territory by racist South Africa.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table;.Mr. Mutiiz
(Argentina), Mr. Ogouma(Benin),
Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Maciel (Brazil), Mr. Pelletier (Canada),
Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Deressa (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott
(German Democratic Republic), Mr. Krishnan (India),
Mr., Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Ould
Hamody (Mauritania),
Mr. DOS Santos (Mozambique),

7. I+thermore, at the same meeting we had occasion
in the Council to listen to the representative of the racist
Pretoria regime engage in his country’s characteristic
subterfuge and deception in diverting attention from the
real issue of its illegal occupation of Angola to irrelevant issues. He sought, inter alia, to link the dis1

12. In fact, racist South Africa has distinguished itself
as the rogue State that it is in the whole region through
its naked aggression against, and destabilization of, its
peace-loving neighbours. This sustained commitment
to violence betrays an insidious design by the racist
Pretoria regime to impede and obstruct the processes of
national reconstruction of its neighbours. In addition, it
is also aimed at weakening the unrelenting support of
the front-line States for the liberation movements in
Namibia and South Africa. There is no doubt, however,
that the liberation movements will triumph in spite of
the machinations of the racist South African regime.

engagement of his country’s forces of occupation in
Angola and the independence of Namibia to the simultaneous withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola. He
made no attempt to address the issue at hand-which
is
a clear indication that the racist Pretoria regime has had
no valid reason whatsoever for its occupation of the
independent State of Angola other than to perpetuate
its illegal occupation of Namibia and the inhuman system of apartheid.
8. Zambia, which has also been a victim of racist
South Africa’s aggression, is aware of the magnitude of
the invasion and occupation of Angola, which is under
consideration.
It involves the indiscriminate
committing of brutality and acts of genocide by the racist
troops of Pretoria. It also involves extensive damage to,
and destruction of, property. The occupation forces
have literally plunged Angola into permanent distress,
given the massive and tragic losses of human life that
the racists continuously wreak upon the peace-loving
people of Angola.

13. The inescapable conclusion that can be drawn
from the racist Pretoria regime’s policy of unprovoked
aggression against, and destabilization and occupation
of, parts of neighbouring
States is that racist South
Africa has never been interested in creating conditions
of justice, peace and stability, which are essential for
good-neighbourliness.
I
14. The illegal occupation of some parts of southern
Angola by racist troops is a challenge to the efficacy of
the Council, whose primary responsibility
is to maintain international peace and security. To that end, the
Council must move from mere expressions of pious
support for Angola to taking concrete action which
must culminate in dislodging racist South Africa from
Angolan soil. This is as it should be, because it is the
duty of the Council to come to the rescue of countries
such as Angola whose peace and security have been
gravely jeopardized.
The Council ,should, therefore,
take urgent measures aimed at securing the immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal of racist South Africa’s
military forces from Angola.

9. This situation shows no sign of abating. It is only
proper, therefore, to recall that in 1981 the Council met
to consider this same issue [229&h to 2300th meetings]
but, regrettably, failed to take appropriate action because of a veto cast by a permanent member. This was
notwithstanding
Council resolution 475 (1980), paragraph 7 of which relates to the decision made
: ’
“to’meet again in the event of further acts of violation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola by the South African racist
regime, in order to consider the adoption of more
effective measures in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof.”

15. I shpuldlike to take this opportunity to remind the
Council that the support given racist South Africa
by some ~major Western countries has, undoubtedly,
encouraged that regime’s belligerent and intransigent
behaviour. Zambia calls upon those major’ Western
countries on the Council to join with the other members
of the Council in taking such measures as will not only
bring about the ‘withdrawal of South African troops
from Angola, but also ensure that henceforth racist
South Africa shall respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola.

10. Since the adoption of that resolution-more
than
three years ago-the situation has worsened. The racist
Pretoria regime hasincreased its acts of violence, brutality, murder and. wanton destruction of property
in Angola. It has also maintained the occupation of
Angola, thus violating beyond measure the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Angola. Withoutdoubt,
these
acts of violence and occupation constitute a gross and
flagrant violation of international law, particularly Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United Nations.

.16. I wish to conclude’ by reiterating my country’s
support for and solidarity with the Government and
peopleof Angola; which have suffered the indignities of
occupation with such indomitable
courage that it has
won them the admiration of their brothers and sisters in
Zambia. We cannot but ask the Council to put an end to
such indignities. Failure by the Council to take appropriate action in the interests of justice and peace would
be a gross abdication of its responsibility for the maintenance of international peace. and security.

11. In this connection, I wish to place on record my
country’s considered view that no principle enshrined
in the Charter could be more fundamental to the maintenance of good and harmonious relations between
States than mutual respect for the territorial integrity
of all States. South Africa’s disregard with impunity of
the Charter and of norms of international law has culminated in that racist regime’s acts of aggression
against, and destabilization
of, the independent States
in the region. The Council must surely find this situation intolerable and should, therefore, feel duty-bound
to act decisively in the interest of peace and justice in
that beleaguered region.

17. Mr. LING
Qing (China) [interpretation
frmz
Chinese]: At the outset, Mr. President, I wish to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
for
.2

.

this month. I am sure that, with your wide diplomatic
experience and outstanding.abilities,
you will steer the
Council successfully through the final monthof its work
for this year.

-racist troops in violation of the national sovereignty,
independence andterritorial
integrity of the People’s
Republic of Angola . . .; demanded the immediate
.and unconditional
withdrawal of South African
troops from Angolan territory
and decided to
increase support for and solidarity with the people
and Government of Angola” [S/15675, annex, sect. I,
.para. 621.

18. I also wish to take this opportunity-to express my
appreciation and thanks to the President for last month,
Mr. Gauci, of Malta, for the distinguished manner in
which he carried out his duties.

22. Not long-ago, the current session of the General
Assembly adopted a resolution on the effects of upartheid on the countries of southern Africa [resolution 38139 C of 5 December 19831, which also condemned the acts of aggression against Angola and other
countries in southern Africa by the South African
authorities and demanded the withdrawal of South
African troops from Angola. We maintain that the
Council should undertake the responsibility
of preserving international peace and security, strongly condemn South Africa’s armed aggression against Angola
and demand that South Africa respect the sovereignty
and territorialintegrity
of Angola and withdraw all its
troops immediately
and unconditionally.

19. More than two years have passed since the racist
regime of South Africa launched an armed invasion
against Angola and occupied parts of its territory.
Ignoring the fact that the international community has
strongly condemned the criminal acts of South Africa
and demanded an immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of South Africantroops from Angola, the South
African authorities have openly flouted the solemn and
just demand of the international community. They have
refused to pull out their aggressive troops from Angola
and further intensified their aggressive activities there,
which has not only constituted a flagrant violation of
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola, but
also posed a grave threat to peace and security throughout southern Africa. The Chinese delegation therefore
fully supports the Government of Angola in requesting
emergency meetings of the Council to review this serious situation,

23. The Chinese delegation will, as always, resolutely
uphold the just struggle of Angola and other countries in
southern Africa against South African aggression and
firmly support the Namibian people and the South African people in their struggle for national liberation until
they win the final victory. _

20. On23 August 198 1, South Africa launched a frenzied and massive invasion into Angola and sent in its
armed forces. It has incessantly intensified its acts of
aggression since then. The South African troops have
on several occasions launched air and ground. attacks
on main communication
lines, towns and villages inside
Angola, inflicting
immeasurable
losses of life and
property on the Angolan people. To date, South Africa
is still occupying large tracts-of land in Cunene province
in southern Angola. The South..African aggressors have
met with strong resistance from the Angolan people.
While stepping up their aggression, the South African
authorities have of late resorted to the manoeuvre of
feigning the:easing of tension by proposing the so-called
disengagement between the military forces of the two
sides in Angola. In making that proposal, South Africa
is obviously trying to confuse the aggressors and the
victims of aggression, dodge. its responsibilities
for
aggression and legitimize its occupation of Namibia and
the territories in southern Angola. This scheme will
never succeed.

24. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of the German Democratic Republic. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
25.. Mr.
OTT (German. Democratic
Republic):
Mr. President, I thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak in this debate of the Security Council. My delegation has followed with appreciation the
manner in which you have used your diplomatic skills
in the discharge of your responsible task as President
of the Council. We wish you further success in your
high office, in particular with a view to the required
achievement of a satisfactory and peace-securing solution to the important issue before us.

26. Our appreciation goes also to your predecessor,
the representative of Malta, Mr. Gauci, who fulfilled his
duties so excellently.
.
21. A just cause enjoys abundant support, while an
:
unjust cause finds little support. South Africa has, by its
27. Once again the Council has to deal with the
acts of aggression, gravely trampled underfoot the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and interincreasing acts of aggression perpetrated by South
national law and it has naturally met with stem condemAfrica against independent, sovereign Angola. The folnation by the international community.
In its Political
lowing questions arise. How long will it still be possible
Declaration, the Seventh Conference of Heads of State
for South Africa to continue this sordid war against
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New ~ Angola and the other front-line States? How long will it
still be possible for the racist regime to provoke the
Delhi from 7 to 12 March this year
whole.of mankind without being punished? Worid pub“strongly condemned the continued military occupalit opinion expects this body to take resolute measures
tion of part of Angolan territory by the South African
and to answer those questions.
3

--

28. Last Friday [2504th meeting], the representative
of Angola, Mr, de Figueiredo, explained the consequences of the persistent acts of aggression by Pretoria.
Angola, a country which, after having suffered for centuries under colonial rule, has the firm will to use all its
strength and the energy of its people to construct a
happy future, a country which is longing for peace
because that is the prerequisite of all its endeavours,
continues to be forced to spend considerable amounts
for the defence of its sovereignty, .territorial integrity
and independence. Worse still, it daily suffers irreplaceable losses of human life as well as incalculable
material damage.

troops from Angola: an end to the misuse of the Territory of Namibia as a spring-board for aggression: the
termination of all assistance for and any collaboration
with the gangs of UNITA [Unia’o National para a
Zndepende^ncia Total de Angola&an instrument of
South African policy; and reparations for all damage
caused by the aggressor. Most recently, with the adoption of resolution 539 (1983)-there is almost no need to
refer to this fact-it was agreed that the fulfilment of
those demands must in no way be linked to the presence
of Cuban internationalist forces in Angola. The threat
to that country continues to exist, and thus there continue to exist the conditions which induced Angola to
request foreign assistanceunder Article 51 of the Charter. In contrast, it is absolutely imperative to force
South Africa to compIy with those demands through the
imposition of sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter. This is the answer to the questions I raised at the
very outset.
34. .However, a realistic assessment,of the situation
requires us to point to allthose forces which encourage
the apartheid regime to pursue its provocative policy.
As we persistently have to witness-be it in the Middle
East, in Central America or in the Caribbean-imperialist’ circles make every ,effort to stop peoples’
embarking upon the road to a’future in peace, freedom
and independence, and make every effort to regain lost
territories and to incorporate them anew in their sphere
of dominance. All sorts of means are suitable when
great-Power interest is to be realized. Unrestrained
hatred against socialism; against progress, against the
peoples’ striving for a life without colonial oppression
and without exploitation, against everything that limits
imperialism’s field of action, dictates the measures.
The. policy of confrontation and super-armament pursued by the mostaggressive circles of the United States
and its allies, the deployment of medium-range missiles
in Western Europe, the stirring up of new hotbeds of
conflict, are theI direct results of this.
3s. There is no doubt that the situation in southern
Africa is, together with that in the Middle East, partitularly dangerous at present. The United States
makes every effort to preserve the racist regime, its
most important bridgehead on the African continent. It
openly recognizes Pretoria as its ally, and prevents
decisive measures being taken by the Council. This
policy is responsible for the fact that the apartheid
system continues to exist, and that South Africa
is enabled to continue its acts of aggression against
Angola. This policy is also. responsibIe for the fact
that-against the will of the .majority of States-no
solution of the Namibian problem is yet foreseeable.
36. The recent statement by South African Defence
Minister Malan on preparatory work to be carried out
for the deployment of medium-range missiles in Cape
province demonstrates that South Africa is willing to
continue its policy of threat and aggression against
Angola; Lesotho, Mozambique and Zimbabwe. That
means that without the termination of imperialist collaboration there will be no end to the apartheid terror.

29. As early as 15August 1983, theDeputy Minister of
External Relations of Angola, in his cable to .the Secretary-General [S/25929], informed us about the racist
regime’s occupation of Cangamba in the province of
Mexico. That criminal act .was preceded by heavy air
strikes and artillery fire, claiming numerous victims
among the civilian population, as well as causing considerable material damage. The attack, designed to relieve the counter-revolutionary gangs, exposes as a
gross deception of world public opinion the -statement
by South African Prime Minister Botha on the alleged
readiness of his Government to conduct a dialogue with
the neighbouring States and to conclude a non-aggression treaty.,
_’

_, ‘,.-

30. The German Democratic Republic resolutely condemns the new act of aggression, and declares its firm
solidarity with the people of Angola, which is determined to repel the invaders and to recover its original
boundaries.
31. Since 1979 my country has been closely linked
with the courageous people of Angola by the bonds of a
treaty of friendship and co-operation. It therefore fully
supports the position expressed by the front-line States
at the summit meeting held at Lusaka on 12November
1983, on the repulse of the South African aggression
and the defence of the territorial integrity of Angola.
32. However, to achieve its legitimate objectives,that
country needs the support of all decent people. But it
also needs appropriate decisions by the Council finally
to put an end to the crimes the apartheid regime has
perpetrated in contravention of international law..
,
33. We know that we are not alone in expressing this
view. In the debates on General Assembly agenda items
entitled “Policies of apartheid ofthe Government of
South Africa” and “Question of Namibia”; States’
representatives almost unanimously condemned Pretoria’s’ policy of destabilizatidn, aggression and occupation, and demanded its termination. It has been convincingly proved that it. is not South ,Africa, but the
sovereign and independent neighbouring States-in
particular, Angola-which. are threatened and which
are the victims in that region. This entails a strict call for
the unconditional-I repeat “unconditional”-immediate and complete withdrawal of all South African
4

37. It is high time the imperialist States became aware
of the danger of their policy and recognized that it has
no perspective. The adventurist policy of Pretoria cannot in the long run hold up the progress of history in the
south of the African continent. But it can drive the
whole continent to the verge of the disaster of a war. It
carries murder and aggression over the borders of
independent, sovereign States.

45. All these pronouncements of the Council have,
unfortunately, not inhibited the racist regime from pursuing with even increased frequency and total impunity
its wanton acts of aggression. Whilei under the circumstances, the logical course of action would have been
the imposition of enforcement measures under Chapter VII of the Charter, the veto power exercised by the
Western permanent members has paralysed the Council and prevented it from taking any meaningful measures and made a mockery of its responsibilities tmder
the Charter.

38. Nobody can ignore this reality. The present situation prevailing in southern Africa and particularly
around Angola requires the utmost vigilance by all
peace-loving States, but at the same time extensive
means must also be provided to assist the Angolan
people. My delegation once again assures Angola and
the other front-line States of the firm and fraternal
solidarity of the German Democratic Republic in their
just struggle, serving world peace against the racist and
colonial apartheid regime.

46. Today the rule of law in the conduct .of international relations is losing ground and the dangerous
policy of “might makes right” is in the ascendant. If
this trend were to continue unchecked, the horrible
consequences would not be difficult to imagine.
1
47. It is this concern for the future and a deeply felt
sense of solidarity with the Government and people of
Angola that have compelled the Ethiopian delegation to
participate in the current deliberations’of the Council
and to express once again its indignation, and indeed
the indignation of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and its member States, at the continuing acts of
aggression perpetrated by the racist regime against Angola. We are convinced that the situation under consideration is one in which the Council, by upholding the
principles of the Charter and by .activating its
enforcement procedures, can help to check and reverse
the current trend towards global anarchy. Angola’s
complaints therefore have to be ‘given the very serious consideration they deserve. South Africa has to
be told in no uncertain terms that it cannot henceforth
be allowed to violate with impunity the norms and
principles of international law. Furthermore, that regime must be told to withdraw immediately and unconditionally from the territory
.c . of Angola.
48. .At this juncture, .I should like to comment briefly
on the much-publicized, yet clearly *deceptive; diplomatic overtures of the .South African regime. In his
letter to the SecretaryiGeneral dated 15 December,
Mr. R. F. Botha stated: 1.

39. We wish to express our hope that the Council will
meet the legitimate demands of Angola, as expressed
by its representative.
40. ‘,The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the’repre:
sentative of Ethiopia. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
41. Mr. DERESSA (Ethiopia): Permit me at the very
outset, Mr. .President, to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of December and to wish you every successin
your endeavours.
42. Our congratulations go also to your predecessor,
Mr. Gauci, the representative of Malta, on the wise and
effective manner in which he presided over the delib.
erations of the Council last month.
..
43. Once again Angola is back in the Council to complain about the unceasing and unprovoked acts of
aggression as well as the illegal occupation of its
territory by the racist regime of South Africa. That
Angola has once again resorted to the peace-making
and peace-keeping procedures of the Council is testimony to that country’s abiding faith in the Council and
to its loyalty to the purposes and principles of the
United Nations.

“Further to my letter of 22 November. 1983, and
with a view to facilitating the process of achieving a
peaceful settlement of the South West Africa/Namibia issue, the Government of South Africa is prepared to begin a disengagement of forces which from
time to time conduct military operations .against
SWAP0 in Angola, on 31January 1984, on the understanding that this gesture would be reciprocated by
the Angolan Government, which would assure that
its own forces, SWAP0 and the Cubans, would not
exploit the resulting situation, in particular with regard to actions which might threaten the security of
the inhabitants of South West Africa/Namibia.” [See

44. So far, however, the Council has not lived up to
that trust and indeed has not even been able to discharge its primary responsibility in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Since 1975 South
Africa has violated the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Angola so many times that it is difficult, if
not impossible, to keep the exact count. In keeping with
its policy and its respect for the law, Angola has, however, always resorted to the established procedures of
the Council both to put an end to South Africa’s, aggression and to seek compensation for the damages suffered. The Council, more often than not, has responded
by condemning the acts of aggression and calling for the
withdrawal of the invading forces.

S/16219, annex I.]

‘I

49. This letter, coming as it does on the eve of the
Council debate on Angola’s complaint against theracist
5

.

regime of South Africa, is a transparent but clever
attempt to forestall any meaningful action by the Council. Moreover, it is again a transparent and a seemingly
clever attempt on the part of the racist Pretoria regime
to link its illegal occupation of parts of southern Angola
with the implementationof the United Nations plan for
the independence of Namibia.

55. Mr. KOROMA: On behalf of the Special Committee on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, I wish to express my appreciation to
you, Mr. President, and the other members for this
opportunity to address the Council in connection with
its consideration of the complaint by Angola.

SO. South Africa’s seemingly clever proposal, furthermore, is not only vague but overburdened with
unacceptable implications. In this regard, it has to be
stated that inasmuch as South African forces are occupying the territory of Angola illegally, they have to
withdraw immediately and unconditionally. In short,
South Africa cannot make conditions for the withdrawal of its forces from Angolan territory. Furthermore, once those forces are withdrawn,. the Angolan
Government should be able to exercise its legitimate
authority over all its territory, in keeping with its sovereign rights.

56. In the same vein, I should like to express my
felicitations to Mr. Victor Gauci of Malta for the commendable manner in which he presided over the affairs
of the Council last month.
57. This is not the first time that the Council, whose
primary responsibility is the maintenance of peace and
security, is meeting to consider a complaint by Angola
about further acts of military aggression against, its
territory and occupation by the armed forces of the
racist minority regime of South Africa.
58. Over the years the .Council has’ repeatedly
adopted resolutions and decisions concerning the blatant breach of the territorial integrity of independent
countries by the South African regime, notably those
adopted in 1978,1979 and 1980(resolutions 428 (@78),
447(1979), 454 (1979) and475 (1980)], in specific regard
to Angola.

51. Ethiopia believes that, unless the Pretoria regime
elaborates on its proposal, the internationalcommunity
should not give it any serious consideration. And unless
such an elab.oration clearly shows that there are no preconditions which could detract ,from Angolan sovereignty, and that there is no linkage with Namibia’s
independence, the international community should reject the proposal as another ruse that has become the
hallmark of Pretoria’s diplomacy.

59. In those resolutions, the Council in particular condemned strongly the minority racist regime of South
Africa for its premeditated, persistent and sustained
armed invasions of Angola, which constitute a flagrant
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of that. country, as well as a serious threat to international peace and security. The Council strongly condemned, also, South Africa’s utilization of the international Territory of Namibia as a spring-board for
armed incursions and invasions and for the destabilization of Angola.

52. Finally, I should like to reaffiim the full support
and fraternal solidarity which Angola enjoys in my
country, Ethiopia, and, indeed, in the African family
of nations. In this connection, I am happy to refer to
the resolution adopted by the nineteenth session of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity held at Addis Ababa
from 6 to 12June, in which the military occupation by
South African troops of part of the territory of Angola
was strongly cond,emnedand the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of the occupation forces from
Angolan territory demanded. Furthermore, the leaders
of Africa have, in that resolution, fully supported

60. It is three years now since the .adoption of the
Council’s latest decision. We note with deep regret and
consternation that we are still confronted with the same
situation of continuing .defiance by the South African
racist minority regime of its solemn obligations under
the Charter of the United Nations. The South African
forces are still illegally occupying Angolan territory and
using the international Territory of Namibia as a springboard for armed invasions and acts of aggression and
thus intensifying the threat to the peace and security of
the region.

“the measures taken by the Angolan Government, in
accordance with Article 51 of the Charter of the
United Nations, in order to gtisrantee and safeguard
the territorial integrity and national sovereignty of
the People’s Republic of Angola”.*
53. That said, I should liketo’ express the hope that
the decision in the Council on the complaint of Angola
against South Africa will be such that it will contribute
to the realization of the aspirations of the fraternal
people of Angola to live in peace and prosperity.

61. The justification constructed by the South African
regime for this illegal act must be rejected. The international community cannot accept, even by the furthest
stretch of imagination, such an act of aggression perpetrated by the illegal occupier of the international
Territory of Namibia under the pretext of the so-called
protection of the best interest and security of the people
of the Territory whose fundamental rights it has flagrantly denied and continues to deny.

-54. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declarationon the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, Mr. Abdul G. Koroma. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
6

62. The Special Committee categorically rejects the
justification
constructed by the Pretoria regime for its
illegal acts.

sion against neighbouring independent African States.
Indeed, the Special Committee holds the view that it is
through implementing
the provisions of Chapter VII
that peace, justice and freedom can be speedily restored to the peoples of southern Africa.

63. On the other hand, this dastardly armed invasion
and occupation of Angolan territory is the latest and
most serious in a long series of deliberate acts of aggression committed
by the Pretoria regime against the
neighbouring independent States, including Lesotho,
Mozambique and Zambia.

69. The situation in southern Africa remains one of
the most critical issues confronting the Organization.
The current developments make it more than clear that
the United Nations, which has the direct responsibility
for Namibia until the Territory achieves self-determination and independence, can no longer afford the flouting
of its decisions. The dangerous situation brought about
by the latest acts of aggression against Angola underscores once again the solemn responsibility of the international community to act in conformity with the Charter to eradicate, once and for all, this serious threat to
peace and security. To accept, let alone collaborate
with, the Pretoria regime’s colonial occupation of
Namibia is to admit the impotence and ineffectiveness
of the Organization.
Failure by the Council to curb
South Africa’s aggression weakens its authority.

64. South Africa has continued to deploy its army in
the region in order to intimidate the neighbouring African States into silent accomplices while it continues
with its colonial occupation of Namibia and attempts to
paralyse and destroy Angola in the process.
65. Coming at this time when the international community is intensifying its continuing efforts to bring
about a peaceful transition in Namibia and to work out
an internationally
acceptable solution to the problem,
the South African aggression bespeaks the desperate
and calculated design of the racist regime to block all
avenues towards a negotiated settlement for the genuine independence of the Territory.

70. The attainment without further delay by the people of Namibia of their legitimate aspirations to an
independent and free Namibia is indeed the most critical and urgent challenge which confronts us today, and
I wish to take this opportunity to address an earnest
‘and urgent appeal to the members of the Council to
respond decisively to this challenge.

66. It is incumbent upon the entire international community not merely to condemn in the strongest possible
terms this blatant breach of all norms of international
law and the principles of the Charter by the South
African minority regime, but also to take concrete steps
to redress and to prevent the recurrence of such criminal acts, through the faithful and strict application of
the relevant provisions of the Charter. At the same
time, all possible support and assistance must be given
to the Government of Angola in its efforts to protect and
safeguard its territorial integrity and sovereignty. Such
support and assistance must be given as-well to the
people of Namibia for their courageous struggle for
liberation under the stalwart leadership of the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO).

71. South Africa should not be allowed to replace its
obligation to grant independence to Namibia with its
aggression and illegal occupation of Angola. The Pretoria regime must be left in no doubt of the international
community’s determination
to ensure Namibia’s independence and the restoration of peace, justice and
equality in southern Africa.
72. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) [interpretation
from Russian]: Permit me
first of all to welcome you, Mr. President, to the important post of President of the .Council. We note with
satisfaction that you are successfully making use of
your rich qualities of statesmanship and diplomatic skill
in conducting the proceedings of the Council in this last
month of 1983.

67. I wish to stress once again the gravity of the situation brought about by this latest act of aggression
against Angola. The international
community
has a
solemn responsibility
to act, and act positively, to put
an immediate end to the serious threat to international
peace and security in the region. It would be not only
immoral but also disastrous if the United Nations were
to remain neutral in regard to South Africa’s aggression
and continued occupation of the territory of a Member
State. It would also be incompatible with the very ruison d’brre of the Organization and with the system of
collective security stipulated in the Charter.

73. Permit me also to express our gratitude to your
predecessor, Mr. Victor Gauci, who with such great
skill discharged the functions of President last month.
74. The Council is once again considering the question of the aggression of the racist Pretoria regime
against the sovereign, independent State of Angola.
These acts of aggression, as we know, began as far back
as the period when Angola won its independence in
1975, and since that time they have not ceased for a
single day. Major incursions on the part of South African armed forces into the territory of Angola have been
accompanied by constant attacks on Angolan towns
and populated areas by airborne units of South Africa,

68. In this connection, the Special Committee
has
long called for the full and effective application of measures under Chapter VII of the Charter, bearing in mind
the continuing defiance by South Africa of its obligations under the Charter and its persistent use of force
to perpetuate its illegal domination of Namibia, as well
as its repeated and increasingly savage acts of aggres7

by bombers and artillery fire; there is a policy of military terror on the part of the racists in all the southern
provinces of Angola. Recently the enemies of Angola
have stepped up their aggressive actions. Pretoria has
now embarked on military actions, new in terms of both
scale and quality, with the idea of disrupting the democratic system in Angola and striking blows at the
national liberation
movement
throughout
southern
:.
Africa.

the representative of South Africa, who said that in
waging war against neighbouring independent African
countries Pretoria, in his words, was defending the
interests of the whole of Africa [ibid., paru. 461.
80. That song is too old, and too familiar: first they
raise a hue and cry about the “red peril’* or the “hand of
Moscow”, and then they say, “We have to save Westem civilization”.
Under the cover of this propaganda
smoke-screen, they carry out their deliberately planned
aggression against neighbouring countries. Such plans
are used not only in southern Africa, but also in Central
America, in the Caribbean, in the Middle East and in
other parts of the world. Incidentally,
that is what was
done in the 1930s by various parties, when they concluded the notorious anti-Comintem
pact and raised
such a furor throughout the world about the “danger
from the East”. They then sent their military machine,
first of all, to a place which was certainly not in the
East.

75. The area of military intervention has expanded.
Formerly it was carried out in’ the southern provinces. Now the targets of aggression are the central
and eastern portions of the country. Beginning with the
tactic of episodic, spasmodic raids, the enemy has now
embarked on attempts to consolidate itself in strategically important points and to create strong points
there. The racist invasion forces, particularly the air
force and mechanized and airborne units, are operating
openly and arrogantly, together with terrorist gangs of
UNITA being sent into Angola from Namibia, which is
occupied by the racists. Along with this, military operations are going on against other front-line States.

81. Claims that the situation in southern Africa is a
reflection of an East-West confrontation are believable
today only to the very credulous. In fact, the essence of
the conflict in that region lies in the struggle between,
on the one hand, the national liberation movements of
the African peoples, supported by progressive countries throughout the world, and, on the other hand,
the combined forces of imperialism,
racism and coionialism.

76. As a result of all this, the situation in southern
Africa has now considerably worsened. The aggressive
actions of the racist Pretoria regime against Angola
and other African States constitute a serious and evergrowing threat to their sovereignty and territorial
integrity and a threat to international
peace and
security.

82. Rather than proposing an unconditional
halt to
aggression in Angola and the withdrawal of its troops,
Pretoria is now proposing a sort of “disengagement”
and the imposition upon Angola of limitations on its
sovereign rights in its own territory, limitations which
include “linkage” -that notorious linkage which has
been rejected by practically everyone. As was stated
quite clearly by the representative of Angola, Mr. de
Figueiredo, Angola’s sovereignty cannot be the subject
of negotiations [ibid., pat-u. 27J. South African troops
must be withdrawn from Angola immediately,
unreservedly and unconditionally,
and Angola’s sovereignty and territorial integrity must be respected by all,
including South Africa.

77. Namibia,
which is illegally occupied by South
Africa, is a spring-board for the waging of war against
Angola and other African States. Recently we have
seen exposed more and more clearly South Africa’s
ambition to prevent the Namibian people’s attainment
of true freedom and independence and to crush by
means of cruel repression the liberation struggle of that
people and to prevent the coming to power in Namibia
of the patriotic forces under the leadership of SWAPO,
the sole legitimate
representative
of the Namibian
people.
78. The provocative conduct of the South African
regime, which has manifested itself again in the statement made by the representative
of South Africa
[2504th meeting], is to be explained by the fact that
Pretoria is benefiting from the patronage of the United
States and certain other countries which are members
of the North Atlantic Treaty. Organization. They are
calling for patience and understanding with regard to
the policy of South Africa and are impeding the adoption by the Council of effective measures against the
aggressor. As a result of this, the Pretoria authorities
are stepping up even further their aggressive actions
against neighbouring African States.

83. In recent years, the Council has had repeated
occasion to discuss the situation which has arisen as a
result of the many years of undeclared war that Pretoria
has been waging against Angola. It has already condemned the racist regime of South Africa five times for
its deliberate, incessant armed intrusions into Angola,
describing them as a serious threat to international
peace and security [resoZutions 387 (1976), 428 (1978),
447 (1979), 454 (1979) and 475 (1980)]. In its resolutions, the Council has also demanded that South Africa
unswervingly respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Angola.

79. Pretoria and Washington are attempting to cover
up their imperialist policy in Africa by claims that the
conflict in southern Africa represents a confrontation
between East and West. Last week we heard this from

84. Further, in paragraph 7 of resolution
the Council decided:
8

475 (1980),

“to meet again in the event of further acts of violation
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola by the South African racist
regime, in order to consider the adoption of more
effective measures in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof ‘.

the maintenance of international peace and security,
must do its duty. It must categorically condemn the
racist regime of South Africa, demand that it call a halt
forthwith to‘its aggressive actions against Angola and,
immediately and unconditionally, withdraw its troops
from Angolan territory.
92. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

85.. The representatives of Angola and other African
and non-aligned. countries who have spoken in the
Council, in particular the representative of India,
speaking on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
have condemned South Africa’s aggressive actions
against Angola and have demanded that the Council
finally take effective measures to force the racist
aggressors to halt their atrocities against neighbouring
African peoples and to yield to the opinion of the world
community.

93. Mr. KHALIL
(Egypt) [interpretation
from
Arabic]: Mr. President, I should like to express my
gratitude to you and the other members of the Council
for giving the delegation of Egypt the opportunity to
participate in the debate on this subject, which is of
great importance to international peace and security in
general and to Egypt as an African country in particular.

86. The Soviet delegation associatesitself with those
demands. We believe that it ishigh time to adopt effective measures against South Africa in accordance with
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

94. At the outset I should like to congratulate you on
your accession to the presidency of the Council for this
month. On this occasion we would express our pleasure
that Egypt and the Netherlands have always enjoyed
relations of friendship and co-operation. We are confident that under your wise leadership the Council will
be able efficiently to carry out the important task before
it.

87. In the years of the independent existence of its
country, the Angolan people has had considerable successin carrying out social and economic reforms and in
building a popular democratic State. But the Angolan
people has had to build its new life inextremely difficult
conditions.

95. I should also like to express our thanks to your
predecessor, Mr. Gauci, the representative of Malta,
and President last month, for the skill and diplomatic
competence he demonstrated in conducting the business of the Council.
,
96. Once again Angola finds itself compelled to bring
to the attention of the Council the question of the continuing occupation of parts of its territory by the forces
of the racist Pretoria regime. As is well known, the
aggression by the forces of that regime against Angola
started in the first hours of that country’s independence. That aggression continued in varying degrees
until, in 1981, it was transformed into permanent occupation of some of the southern parts of Angolan territory, giving categorical evidence, if the international
community needed such evidence, that the racist South
African regime, in its aggression against Angola and its
occupation of parts of its territory, seeks the achievement of a single goal: compelling thatcountry to accept
without any opposition its colonialist and racist:policies
and schemes in the region. That explains the material
and moral support the Pretoria regime gives to the
terrorist movements working against the legitimate regime in Angola.

88. Angola is in the front ranks of the struggle against
imperialism, colonialism and racism. The foes of independence and freedom for all of Africa are massed
against Angola, but Angola is not alone. It has many
friends. The valour of the Angolan people in the struggle against the designs of external and internal foes and
for the defence of its country has won it the profound
respect of the entire world. The struggle of the Angolan
people in defence of a just cause, relying on the solidarity of all progressive forces in the world, will without
any doubt be crowned with victory.
89. The position of the Soviet Union on the question
under discussion could not be clearer. Our sympathy
and support go to free and independent Africa, to the
African peoples struggling for freedom and independence. The Soviet Union categorically condemns
South Africa’s aggressive policy against Angola, the
occupation by South African troops of part of Angola’s
territory, and the direct participation of those troops on
an ever-growing scale in military actions making use’of
UNITA gangs.
90. The Soviet Union is linked to.Angola by a treaty of
friendship and co-operation; it has been providing and
will continue to provide every possible support in the,
defence of Angola’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity,

97. Angola-has never constituted a threat to South
Africa; it does not constitute such a threat now, and it
never will. That is clear.

91. We believe that in the present circumstances the
Council, as the organ with primary responsibility for

98. First, on several occasions since Angola’s independence, its Government has expressed its sincere
wish to achieve peace and stability in southern Africa
9

:
_’
‘,
‘.‘_
‘.‘.
:.
._
:-.
:._-.
:_._
: -.
.’
:_

:.

;.

occupation of a part of Angola, and the outcomes and
consequences of continuing the present situation, not
only for southern Africa but also for other distant and
larger regions, put the Council face to face with its
primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.

and to devote itself to the development process that
Angola, like the rest of the third-world
countries,
urgently needs. Angola has also clearly demonstrated
its wish not to engage in any military confrontation with
the South African regime.
99. Secondly, the huge military superiority of the
aggressive Pretoria regime in itself proves the invalidity
of the allegation that South Africa must be protected.
On the contrary, the front-line States are the ones that
are consistently being subjected to military aggression
by the racist regime.

105. Egypt hopes that the Council will play its role in
complete consonance with what the international community expects of it: clear and categorical condemnation of South Africa’s aggression against Angola. and
occupation of parts of Angola’s territory and the demand that the racist Pretoria regime desist from its
aggression and violation of the territorial integrity of
Angola, immediately and unconditionally
withdraw its
forces from Angolan territory and pay appropriate compensation to Angola for the huge losses of life and
property it has inflicted on that country in past years.

100. Thirdly, it seems the racist Pretoria regime is
continuously attempting to ignore the inescapable geographical fact that it has no common borders with
Angola. There is between Angola and South Africa a
territory that separates them: Namibia, which is illegally occupied by South African forces in defiance of
the will of the international
community and the resolutions of the United Nations. All of this clearly indicates that the main reason for South Africa’s continued
aggression against Angola, and its occupation of parts
of Angolan territory, is not security, as has beenalleged
by the Government of,the racist regime. Rather, it is its
dissatisfaction with the policies of the present legitimate Government of Angola.

106. The Egyptian delegation also hopes that the
Council will consider the imposition on the Pretoria
regime of the sanctions provided for in Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations if that regime fails to
implement the Council’s resolutions.
107. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cuba in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussionof the itemon the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

101. The peoples of southern Africa in general and the
people of Angola in particular have suffered greatly
throughout their history as a result of colonialism and
foreign occupation and the attendant exploitation
of
their material and human resources. They are now in
dire need of stability and security so that they can
devote themselves to the responsibilities
of development, make up for last time and catch up with the march
of progress, of which they have been deprived in years
past.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Roa Kourf
(Cuba) took a place at the Council table.

102. The aggre-ssi.on by the racist Pretoria regime
against Angola and against the front-line States not only
prevents the peoples and Governments of the region
from devoting themselves to the tasks of development;
it also inflicts upon them huge losses in life and property
as a result of the destruction and havoc caused by this
aggression.

108. The PRESIDENT:
Cuba.

I call on the representative

of

109. Mr. ROA KOURI (Cuba) [interpretation
from
Spanish]: Mr. President, my delegation very much
admires the manner in which you are conducting these
meetings of the Council. We are convinced that, with
your acknowledged talent and your diplomatic experience, you will be able to conduct these proceedings
successfully.

103. As for the remark made by the representative of
South Africa in-his statement to the Security Council on
Friday last [250&h meeting], when he said that the acts
carried out by the-forces of the Pretoria regime in the
southern parts of Angola were aimed at protecting
Africa from extemai threat, in the face of such an
allegation my delegation feels in duty bound to reaffirm
here that the acts of aggression and destabilization
carried out by SouthAfrican
troops in southern Africa
in general, and in Angola in particular, in themselves
make possible interference by foreign forces in the
affairs of the African continent.

110. We should like to take this occasion to pay a
tribute to your predecessor, our friend Mr. Gauci of
Malta, on the excellent manner in which he presided
over the meetings of the Council during the month of
November. We should like also to thank the members
of the Council for this opportunity
to speak in this
debate.
111. Since the middle of 1981, when its troops
occupied part of southern Angola, in flanrant violation
of the territorial integrity and national sovereignty of
that country and of international law and the Charter of

104. It is clear that the continued aggression by South
African armed forces against Angola, South Africa’s
IO

the United Nations, the racist regime of Pretoria has
persisted in its policy of aggression and expansion,
which is a threat to regional and international peace and
security.

117. This condition, which repeats demands of their
American allies, has nothing to do with the Angolan
complaint that the Council is considering, nor does it
have anything to do, of course, with the independence
of Namibia, which is not the question before us today.

112. This is, of course, not the first time that the
Council has met to consider the Angolan Government’s
complaints against South Africa. Indeed, a few days
after the declaration of Angola’s independence,
the
racist regime tried to prevent that independence by
launching a large-scale invasion deep into Angolan territory. The determined and effective action of FAPLA
[Forgas Armadas Populares de LibertaGao de Angola]
and the Cuban internationalist
forces, whose assistance
was requested by the then President, Comrade Agostinho Neto, to defend the national sovereignty and
independence that had been so dearly won, thwarted
Pretoria’s criminal designs and repelled the racist
forces.

118. -The problem is not the presence of the Cuban
internationalist
forces in Angola, which are there under
a sovereign agreement between two independent Governments, but the occupation by South African criminals of parts of Angolan territory.

113. Independent Angola has since then, however.
had to protect itself against continued &provoked
South African attacks and aggression and has had to
wage periodic battles in the southern provinces against
bandits armed, trained and directed by the Pretoria
racists and by imperialism.
They are developing a policy of harassment of the civilian population and carrying out sabotage of the national economy, as tactics to divert attention from the ferocious raids of
Mr. Botha’s henchmen on Namibian refugee camps.
114. Since 1976 the Council has adopted various resolutions [resolutions 387 (1976), 428 (1978), 447 (1979),
454 (1979) and 475 (2980)] calling,on South Africa scrupulously to respect the independence, national sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola; to pay compensation for the damage caused to life and property
and forthwith to cease provocative armed invasions
and totally and unconditionally
to withdraw all its
troops from -Angolan territory.
115. As a result of the negative vote of one permanent
member of the Council, the United States, and the
unlimited support its Government gives the Pretoria
racists, the South African forces have repeatedly
ignored the United Nations call and continue to occupy
parts of the southern territory of Angola and to carry
out acts of aggression against various targets in the
country, openly defying the Organization and world
public opinion.
116. Suffice it to read the letter dated 15 December
from Mr. R. F. Botha to the Secretary-General to see,
once again, the insolent and scornful attitude of
the South African racists towards the decisions of the
Council. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the apartheid regime states in his letter that “the South African
Government remains prepared to begin the process of
implementing
Security Council resolution 435 (1978)
upon resolution of the problem of Cuban forces in
Angola” [see S/16219, annex I].

119. The first and, in fact, the only thing that must be
stated by the representatives .of the racist regime is
when they will withdraw their invading troops from the
territory they are occupying illegally within Angola,
and in direct violation of the Charter. This is no more
nor less than what the international
community,
the
Non-Aligned Movement and the Angolan Government
are requesting. Any other reply is irrelevant ‘and can
only be taken as an attempt to confuse the issues and
dodge the principal question.
120. Furthermore,
it has ,been made perfectly clear
that the presence of. my country’s internationalist
forces is a matter that falls exclusively within the purview of the Governments of Angola and Cuba and that
those forces will remain where they are until an end has
been put to the danger to Angolan security, sovereignty
and independence represented by the continued and, of
course, illegal occupation of Namibia and parts of
Angolan territory by South African racists.
121. Mr. Botha’s letter is just one more manoeuvre
by his repressive regime and is motivated solely by
Angola’s complaint to the Council. It has no other
purpose but to set up a smoke-screen around its acts
of aggression and outrage against Agostinho Neto’s
+
homeland.
122. In fact, as we have stated in this forum and in the
General Assembly, the designs of the Pretoria regime
and its allies are perfectly clear, albeit illusory: to keep
Namibia occupied, where they intend to impose a neocolonial solution and prevent the triumph of SWAPO,
the sole, legitimate representative of the Namibian people; and to work to destabilize the Government of the
People’s Republic of Angola, with a view to bringing it
back to neocolonial
and imperialist
domination and
turning it into a vassal regime of South Africa.
123. Such a strategy, including the destabilization,
overthrow or neutralization
of the independent Governments of various neighbouring and front-line States,
is meant to create a zone of neo-colonized countries
around South Africa which would enable it to preserve
and develop its infamous and monstrous system of
apartheid and to strengthen and extend the spurious
interests of imperialism in southern Africa and beyond
the region.
124. The Council must vigorously condemn the racist
regime for its military occupation of the southern part

of Angola, for this is a threat to international peace
and security. It must also demand the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of the invading forces from
that territory.
125. In addition, South Africa must scrupulously respect the territorial integrity, national sovereignty and
independence of Angola and provide speedy and full
compensation to its Government for the serious damagecaused to its infrastructure and to other vital sectors
of the economy and for the loss of life occasioned by the
armed invasion and occupation of its territory.
126. The Secretary-General, who has carefully followed the development of the situation in southern
Africa, must report to the Council on compliance with
whatever resolution is adopted. If South Africa, as it
has done in the past, refuses to abide by this body’s
decisions, then the comprehensive, binding sanctions
provided in Chapter VII of the Charter must be applied
without further vacillation.

task of presiding over the Council’s work during December. It has been, as it usually is in these times, an
arduous period of work for the Council, but its work is
progressing admirably under your most able and experienced guidance.
133. The crisis created by the invasion of southern
Angola by South Africa is an international issue
affecting peace and security in all of southern Africa,
and it has been on the Council’s agenda many times
-be it directly, as in 1981, or when it has been dealt
with within the framework of South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia.
134. Despite the deep concern and alarm expressed
by the international community on these and other
occasions over the continuation of this South African
invasion of large parts of Angolan territory, South
Africa has not hesitated to maintain, and in fact even to
consolidate, its hold over the southern part of Angola.
135. For evidence of the true nature of South Africa’s
intentions on Angola, it will suffice to cast a quick
look-quick so as not to take up too much of our time by
repeating well-known observations-at the area surrounding South Africa. If we do that, we see that South
Africa is engaged in tactics of intimidation, destabilization and eventual domination against all its neighbouring African States. These policies of the South
African Government have been condemned on various
occasions by all the Members of the United Nations.
Concomitantly, it can hardly be denied that these
aggressive policies are part and parcel of South Africa’sdesire to establish supremacy in southern Africa, which
in turn is designed to enable South Africa to eliminate
all resistance to the continuation of its deplorable internal policies of racial discrimination, and its illegal occupation of Namibia.

127. It is high time to bridle the South African aggressors. The trotting-out of spurious and irrelevant arguments to explain away the continuation of a situation
that violates international law and the Charter is a subterfuge which the Council must not go on accepting or it
will become an accomplice in the cheap tricks being
used by the racist regime and in its aggressive and
expansionist policy.
128. The Council must be strict in its decisions: South
African troops must be made to withdraw from Angola,
immediately and unconditionally. If they refuse to do so
then the full weight of international law must be brought
to bear on the Pretoria criminals. This, in our opinion, is
the inescapable responsibility of the Council.
129. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Turkey in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.

136. Under these circumstances, Angola. has every
justifiable reason to call once more on the international
community, and particularly the Council, to ensure the
speedy withdrawal of South African military forces
from its territory. When it is considered that Angola has
been the target of attacks by South Africa ever since the
moment Angola achieved its independence in 1975,and
that these attacks and occupation have increased in
their severity during the past three years, the Council should be prepared to consider effective measures
against South Africa. It becomes evident that only if
South Africa totally reverses its intransigent and belligerent attitude can a solution be found to this situation.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Giikce (Turkey) took a place at the Council table.

130. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Turkey.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

131. Mr. GGKCE (Turkey): Mr. President, I thank
you, and through you the members of the Council, for
giving me this opportunity toaddress the Council on the
question of the occupation of parts of Angola by South
Africa.
NOTE

132. We. have already had the opportunity-last
week-to congratulate you on your assumption of the
,*

t A/38/312, annex, resolution AHG/Res. III (XIX).

12

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente darts-les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vousa
: Nations Unies, Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
KAK

COMO

HOJIYYHTh

CONSEGUIR

H3AAHHR

OPrAHHBAI~HZI

PUBLICACIONES

OG’bEAAHEHHhIX

DE LAS NACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en lib&as
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00300

HAIWR

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,

90-602OCMarch

1!95’2-2,050
