UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/25
19 August 1999
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 4034th meeting of the Security Council, held on 19 August 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Tajikistan of 12 August 1999 (S/1999/872),
submitted pursuant to paragraph 10 of its resolution 1240 (1999) of
15 May 1999.
"The Security Council welcomes significant progress in the
implementation of the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan (S/1997/510), achieved to a great extent due
to the renewed efforts of the President of the Republic of Tajikistan and
the leadership of the Commission on National Reconciliation (CNR). It
particularly welcomes the official declaration by the United Tajik
Opposition (UTO) of the disbandment of its armed units and the decision by
the Supreme Court of Tajikistan lifting the bans and restrictions on
activities by the political parties and movements of the UTO as important
steps contributing to the democratic development of Tajik society. The
Council reiterates its encouragement to the CNR to intensify its efforts
aimed at the institution of a broad dialogue among the various political
forces in the country in the interests of the restoration and strengthening
of civil accord in Tajikistan.
"The Security Council encourages the parties to undertake further
concerted measures to ensure the full and sequential implementation, in a
balanced manner, of the General Agreement, especially all the provisions of
the Protocol on Military Issues (S/1997/209, annex II), including those
related to the reintegration of former opposition fighters. It also
encourages them to continue their active work in creating conditions for
the timely holding of a constitutional referendum and presidential and
parliamentary elections, underlines the importance of the involvement of
the United Nations, in continued close cooperation with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, in this process and welcomes the
intention of the Secretary-General to approach Member States with concrete
proposals on voluntary contributions to support such involvement.
99-23992 (E)

190899

/...

S/PRST/1999/25
English
Page 2

"The Security Council notes with appreciation the work of the outgoing
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Ján Kubiš, and of all
the personnel of the United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan
(UNMOT), and encourages the Mission to continue assisting the parties in
the implementation of the General Agreement. It underlines the need for
UNMOT to operate throughout Tajikistan and to have the necessary personnel
and financial support and requests the Secretary-General to continue to
consider means of ensuring a full and active role for the Mission in the
implementation of the General Agreement up to the strength authorized by
its resolution 1138 (1997) of 14 November 1997 while continuing to observe
stringent security measures. The Council urges the Secretary-General to
appoint a successor to Ján Kubiš as the Special Representative as soon as
possible.
"The Security Council supports the continued active involvement of the
Contact Group of Guarantor States and International Organizations in the
peace process.
"The Security Council welcomes the continued contribution made by the
Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States in
assisting the parties in the implementation of the General Agreement in
coordination with all concerned.
"The Security Council expresses its concern at the precarious
humanitarian situation in Tajikistan. It welcomes the activities of
various international organizations and humanitarian workers related to the
implementation of the General Agreement and addressing the humanitarian,
rehabilitation and development needs of Tajikistan. The Council calls upon
Member States and others concerned to respond promptly and generously to
the mid-year review of the 1999 Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for
Tajikistan."

-----
