VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

-----------------~~---

9. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations sy_stcm
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of those Territories;
10. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementa_ti_on
of the Declaration with respect to Bermuda, Bnt1sh
Virgin Islands, l'vwntse:rat a_nd Turks ~~d. Cai~os_ Islands, including the possible dispatch of vis1tmg missions
in consultation with the administering Power, and to
report to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/30.

Question of the Cayman Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Cayman Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to the Territory,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 27 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory
in April 1977 at the invitation of the administering
Power, the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 28
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 29
1. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Cayman Islands;30
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
the Cayman Islands to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples;
3. Reaffirms its conviction that questions of territorial size, geographical location and limited resources
should in no way delay the implementation of the
Declaration with respect to the Territory;
4. Invites the attention of the administering Power
to the obs:ervations, conclusions and recommendations
of the United Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to
the Territory in April 1977 31 and expresses it appreciation to the members of the Visiting Mission for
the constructive work accomplished and to the administering Power and the Government of the Cayman Is27 Ibid., vol. I, chaps. III and IV, and vol. IV, chap. XXVI.
28 ibid., vol. IV, chap. XXVI, annex.
29 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Fourth Committee, 12th meet-

ing, paras. 12-21.
30 Ibid., Thirty-second Session, Supplement No. 23 (A/32/
23/Rev.l), vol. IV, chap. XXVI.
31 Ibid., annex, paras. 486-511.

167

---------------

lands for the close co-operation and assistance extended to the Mission;
5. Re':fuests the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, as the
administering Power, to continue to take all necessary
measures, in consultation with the Government of the
Cayman Islands, to expedite the process of decolonization in the Territory in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and
the Declaration;
6. Endorses the view of the Visiting Mission that
urgent attention should be given to the diversification
of the economy of the Cayman Islands, as an important
element in the process of self-determination;
7. Requests the administering Power, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the Visiting
Mission, to continue to enlist the assistance of the
specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system in the development and
strengthening of the economy of the Territory, and
requests those agencies and organizations to respond
appropriately to the development needs of the Cayman
Islands;
8. Further requests the administering Power, in
consultation with the Government of the Cayman Islands, to pay particular attention to the training of
qualified local personnel with a view to their increased
participation in the over-all development of the Territory;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
full examination of this question at its next session
in the light of the findings of the Visiting Mission,
including the possible dispatch of a further mission to
the Cayman Islands at an appropriate time and in consultation with the administering Power, and to report
thereon to the General Assembly at its thirty-third
session.
83rd plenary meeting
28 November 1977
32/31.

Question of the United States Virgin
Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the United States
Virgin Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting
of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and all other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to the Territory,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of the Special Committee on the Situation with rcoard
to the Implementation of the Declaration on the G;'anting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,:i2 including in particular the report of the United
Nations Visiting Mission dispatched to the Territory in
April 1977 at the invitation of the administering Power,
the Government of the United States of America,s:i
Having heard the statement of the administering
Power, 31

=~

Ibid., vol. I, chaps. III and V, and vol. IV, chap. XXVII.
· Jbul., vol. IV. chap. XXVII, annex.
4
3 Ibid.,
Thirty-second Session. Fourth Committee 17th
meeting, paras. 47-50.
'
