III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

ward to its report thereon in accordance with the relevant General Assembly resolutions;
12. Requests the specialized agencies to provide
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
with progress reports on their work, including particular
problems in the fields within their competence relating
to the peaceful uses of outer space;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in the light of
paragraph 73 of the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, to consider strengthening
the Outer Space Affairs Division of the Secretariat;
14. Notes the invitation extended by the Government of Austria to hold the twentieth session of the
Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space at
Vienna in 1977 and accepts that invitation with appreciation;
15. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space to continue its work, as set out in the
present and previous resolutions of the General Assembly, and to report to the Assembly at its thirty-second session.
57th plenary meeting
8 November 1976
31/9.

Conclusion of a world treaty on the non•
use of force in international relations7

The General Assembly,
Recalling the principle proclaimed in the Charter of
the United Nations that States shall refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force,
Noting with satisfaction that the principle of the nonuse of force or the threat of force has been incorporated
into a number of bilateral and multilateral international
instruments, treaties, agreements and declarations, including resolutions adopted by the United Nations,
Noting the need for universal and effective application
of this principle in international relations and for assistance by the United Nations in this endeavour,
Having considered the item entitled "Conclusion of
a world treaty on the non-use of force in international
relations",
Taking note of the draft World Treaty on the NonUse of Force in International Relations 8 submitted by
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
1. Invites Member States to examine further the
above-mentioned draft World Treaty on the Non-Use
of Force in International Relations as well as other
proposals and statements made during the consideration
of the item entitled "Conclusion of a world treaty on
the non-use of force in international relations";
2. Requests Member States to communicate to the
Secretary-General their views and suggestions on this
subject not later than 1 June 1977;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
communications received by him pursuant to paragraph 2 above;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Conclusion
7 See also sect.

I above, foot-note 11, and sect. X.B.7 below,

decision 311410.
B Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 124, document A/31/243, annex.

31

of a world treaty on the non-use of force in international
relations".
57th plenary meeting
8 November 1976
31/64.

Incendiary and other specific conventional weapons which may he the subject
of prohibitions or restrictions of use for
humanitarian reasons

The General Assembly,
Convinced that the suffering of civilian populations
and combatants could be significantly reduced if general agreement can be attained on the prohibition or
restriction for humanitarian reasons of the use of specific
conventional weapons, including any which may be
deemed to be excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects,
Mindful that positive results as regards the non-use
or restriction of use for humanitarian reasons of specific
conventional weapons would serve, in addition, as encouragement in the broader field of disarmament and
might facilitate subsequent agreement on the elimination of such weapons which were completely banned
for use,
Recalling that the issue of prohibitions or restrictions
for humanitarian reasons of the use of specific conventional weapons has been the subject of serious and
substantive discussion for a number of years, notably
at the sessions of the Conference of Government Experts on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
held, under the auspices of the International Committee
of the Red Cross, at Lucerne from 24 September to
18 October 19749 and at Lugano from 28 January
to 26 February 1976, 10 and at three sessions of the
Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable
in Armed Conflicts and in the General Assembly since
1971,
Noting that the discussions and proposals regarding
the prohibition or restriction for humanitarian reasons of
the use of certain weapons have focused on napalm and
other incendiary weapons, on indiscriminate methods
of using land mines, on perfidious weapons and weapons
which rely for their effect upon fragments invisible on
X-ray, on certain types of small calibre projectile which
may be especially injurious and on certain blast and
fragmentation weapons,
Noting that the issue will come before the fourth
session of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian
Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts, to be held at
Geneva from 17 March to 10 June 1977,
Convinced that the work of the fourth session of the
Diplomatic Conference should be inspired by a sense
of urgency and the wish to attain concrete results which
was stressed in the appeal by the Fifth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976,11
9 For the report of the first session, see Conference of Government Experts on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
(International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva, 1975).
1 For the report of the second session, see Conference of
Government Experts on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons (International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva,
1976).
11 See A/31/197, annex IV, sect. A, resolution 12.

°

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

32

concerning particularly the prohibition of the use of
napalm and other incendiary weapons,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the work of the Diplomatic Conference on the
Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in Armed Conflicts as regards the work of the Conference relevant to the present
resolution ;12
2. Invites the Diplomatic Conference to accelerate
its consideration of the use of specific conventional
weapons, including any which may be deemed to be
excessively injurious or to have indiscriminate effects,
and to do its utmost to agree for humanitarian reasons
on possible rules prohibiting or restricting the use of
such weapons;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, who has been
invited to attend the Diplomatic Conference as an observer, to report to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session on aspects of the work of the Diplomatic
Conference relevant to the present resolution;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Incendiary
and other specific conventional weapons which may
be the subject of prohibitions or restrictions of use for
humanitarian reasons".
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/65.

Chemical and bacteriological
(biological) weapons

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolutions 2454 A (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2603 B (XXIV) of 16 December 1969,
2662 (XXV) of 7 December 1970, 2827 A (XXVI)
of 16 December 1971, 2933 (XXVII) of 29 November 1972, 3077 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3256
(XXIX) of 9 December 1974 and 3465 (XXX) of
11 December 1975,
Convinced that the process of international detente
is conducive to the implementation of further disarmament measures and of general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Reaffirming the necessity of strict observance by all
States of the principles and objectives of the Protocol
for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925,13
Convinced that the Convention on the Prohibition of
the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on
Their Destruction14 constitutes an important step towards early agreement on the effective prohibition of
the development, production and stockpiling of all
chemical weapons and on their elimination from arsenals
of all States,
Recalling in that connexion the undertaking contained
in article IX of the Convention to continue negotiations
in good faith with a view to reaching early agreement
on effective measures for the prohibition of the <level12 A/9726, A/10222, A/31/146.
13 League of Nations, Treaty Series,

No. 2138, p. 65.
14 Resolution 2826 (XXVI), annex.

vol. XCIV (1929),

opment, production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons and for their destruction,
Stressing the importance of early agreement on the
complete prohibition of the development, production
and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their
destruction, which would contribute to general and complete disarmament under effective international control,
Noting the risk of continued development, production
and stockpiling of chemical weapons in the absence of
such agreement,
Having considered the report of the Conference of
the Committee on Disarmament,15
Noting that drafts of a convention on the prohibition
of the development, production and stockpiling of all
chemical weapons and on their destruction,16 as well
as other working documents, proposals and suggestions,
have been submitted to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament and constitute valuable contributions to reaching appropriate agreement,
Noting also the comments addressed to this problem
and relevant documents submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session,
Noting further that intensified efforts in the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament have led to
increased understanding in identifying practical approaches towards the prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons, and
their destruction, including definition of the agents to be
banned,
Recognizing the importance of developing methods
for providing adequate assurance of compliance with
effective measures for the prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical
weapons, including methods of verifying the destruction
of stockpiles of such weapons,
Having in mind that agreement on the complete
prohibition of the development, production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and on their destruction
should not impede the utilization of science and technology for the economic development of States,
Desiring to contribute to a successful conclusion of
the negotiations on effective and strict measures for
the complete prohibition of the development, production
and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and for their
destruction,
1. Reaffirms the objective of reaching early agreement on the effective prohibition of the development,
production and stockpiling of all chemical weapons and
on their elimination from arsenals of all States;
~·. Urges again all States to make every effort to
fac1htate early agreement on the effective prohibition of
the development, production and stockpiling of all
chemical weapons and on their destruction;

3. Requests the Conference of the Committee on
Disarmament to continue negotiations as a matter of
high priority, taking into account the existing proposals,
15
•
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Sesswn, Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27).
16
See Official Records of the Disarmament Commission
Supplement for 1972, document DC/235 annex ·B document
CCD/361; Official Records of the Gener~[ Assembiy Twentyninth Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/9627), annex'n, document CCD/ 420; ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 27
( A/ 10027), annex JI, document CCD/ 452; and ibid., Thirtyfirst Session, Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27), annex III, document CCD/512.
