S/PV.8799

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8799th meeting

Thursday, 17 June 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Auväärt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Gallagher
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Maman Sani
Ms. Syed
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Ben Lagha
Ms. Jacobs
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Office in
Haiti (S/2021/559)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-15673 (E)
*2115673*

S/PV.8799

The question concerning Haiti

Haitian society. Finally, in spite of several Haitianled mediation efforts, the deep-rooted political crisis
that has gripped the country for the better part of the
past four years shows no sign of abating. A political
agreement remains elusive, as the rhetoric used by
some political leaders grows increasingly acrimonious.

The meeting was called to order at 3 05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question concerning Haiti
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti
(S/2021/559)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Haiti to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Claude Joseph, Acting Prime Minister of Haiti.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Helen La
Lime, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti and Head of the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti; and Ms. Chantal Hudicourt Ewald,
practicing lawyer of the Port-au-Prince Bar Association
and former member of the 1986-1987 Haitian
Constitutional Assembly.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2021/559, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Office in Haiti.
I now give the floor to Ms. La Lime.
Ms. La Lime: I am honoured to once again have
the opportunity to address the Security Council in
person and to provide an update on the situation in
Haiti, where conditions have deteriorated in the leadup to the electoral events slated for the fall.
In recent weeks, the country has experienced
a resurgence in coronavirus disease cases, which
has prompted the authorities to declare a new state
of health emergency and consequently led the
Provisional Electoral Council to postpone the proposed
constitutional referendum scheduled to take place at the
end of this month. A resurgence in inter-gang violence
has caused the displacement of hundreds of families
in several poor neighbourhoods of Port-au-Prince and
has deepened the sentiment of insecurity that pervades
2/18

17/06/2021

Even though national authorities have sought to
widen consultations on the new draft constitution,
the process continues to elicit criticism from various
stakeholders due to its perceived lack of inclusivity and
transparency. Technical preparations for the referendum
have also been plagued by critical operational delays.
Moreover, the ever-growing polarization of Haitian
politics, as evidenced by some actors recently
exhorting the population to resort to violence to disrupt
the referendum process, is extremely concerning. All
stakeholders must refrain from such inflammatory
discourse. All forms of violence or incitement to violence
are unacceptable and must be strongly condemned.
As Haiti prepares to enter a new electoral cycle,
an inclusive and participatory process will be essential
to consolidating the path towards good governance
and political stability in the country. In this regard, the
debate over the constitutional referendum should not
detract from the timely organization and holding of the
overdue parliamentary and local polls, as well as that of
the presidential election. A political consensus remains
the best possible means to holding a peaceful process
that would allow the Haitian people to fully exercise
their right to vote. It is of paramount importance that
all political and civil society leaders enter into a goodfaith dialogue to constructively devise a way to ensure
that elections take place within this calendar year, so
that an orderly democratic transfer of power to the duly
elected representatives of the Haitian people occurs in
February 2022.
These last months have been marked by several
worrying incidents and serious human rights abuses
perpetrated by gangs against civilian populations.
Between 1 February and 31 May, these criminal groups
were responsible for 78 homicides and countless
assaults and rapes. In addition, repeated episodes of
gang violence have resulted in the displacement of over
16,000 people from the Port-au-Prince metropolitan
area neighbourhoods of Bas-Delmas, Bel-Air,
Martissant, Tabarre Issa and Toussaint Brave since
the beginning of the year. It is the duty of the Haitian
authorities to end the violence, protect the population,
ensure unfettered humanitarian access to those in
21-15673

17/06/2021

The question concerning Haiti

need, provide emergency assistance to those who have
been displaced and hold the perpetrators of such acts
accountable for their crimes.
While the strength of the Haitian National Police
is still not commensurate with the size of the country’s
population, the chronic state of insecurity starkly
underscores the limits of a law enforcement-centred
approach to the gang issue. A more comprehensive
strategy to address its underlying causes is urgently
needed. I am pleased to note that the interministerial
task force on community violence reduction, established
by the Government in early April, completed — with
United Nations support — its review of the national
strategy, a document that is aimed at informing an
integrated response to gang violence and is now
ready for approval. Similarly, the executive has made
noticeable headway in revising and bolstering weapons
and ammunitions management legislation that, when
adopted, will help regulate the import, purchase and
use of firearms in the country.
Incremental progress has also occurred in the
judicial realm, with the instalment on 5 May of the
Board of the Legal Aid Council, as well as the opening
in early June of legal aid offices in the jurisdictions
of Les Cayes and Petit-Goâve. Those encouraging,
albeit long overdue, steps will contribute to enhancing
access to justice for the least privileged and signal the
start of a systemic push to reduce prolonged pretrial
detention and overcrowding in Haitian prisons. The
new penal code and code of criminal procedure will
also be instrumental in that effort. To facilitate their
dissemination among judicial actors, and their entry
into force in June 2022, strong political commitment,
notably through the immediate establishment of a
national committee for penal reform, will be critical.
By contrast, efforts to fight impunity remain
woefully inadequate, as evidenced by the lack of
progress in the Dorval case. A chronic lack of resources
dedicated to judicial inquiries and lengthy delays in
renewing the mandates of investigative judges also
stymie progress in investigating and prosecuting such
emblematic cases as the 2018 La Saline massacre and
the 2019 Bel-Air killings. It would behove authorities to
provide judicial actors with the means they require to
accomplish their mission.
In spite of the complexity of the situation, the
United Nations team in Haiti continues to work hand in
hand to help authorities address immediate challenges,

S/PV. 8799

as well as the structural causes of instability that
impede progress, while seeking to enhance the impact
of our collective interventions. To that end, a number of
joint initiatives are under way to implement the national
social protection and promotion policy, reinforce food
security and community resilience, catalyse the fight
against impunity and corruption, and operationalize
the humanitarian-development-peace nexus. I would
appeal in that regard to Member States to contribute
to the 2021-2022 humanitarian response plan, which
still requires some $198 million to enable humanitarian
actors to respond to the needs of 1.5 million people,
1.3 million of whom are severely food insecure.
To ensure that the opportunity of a democratic
renewal of Haitian institutions is seized; that the
right of every Haitian to live in a peaceful and stable
environment is upheld; and that each and every citizen of
the country has access to justice, social services and the
opportunity of a livelihood, it is imperative that local,
parliamentary, as well as presidential elections take
place, as scheduled, in the fall of this year. To that end,
all Haitian stakeholders must urgently set aside their
differences, eschew their narrow interests and work
together to tackle the protracted political, structural
and social issues that hinder the country’s progress.
The President: I thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General La Lime for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hudicourt Ewald.
Ms. Hudicourt Ewald (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the President of the Security Council
for inviting me to provide Council members with an
overview of the current situation in Haiti in my capacity
as a professional, as a member of Haitian civil society
and a former member of the Haitian National Assembly
from 1986-1987.
With regard to the political context, the steps required
for the convening of elections enabling the replacement
of the members of the legislative branch and those of
the executive boards of the local communities were not
undertaken within the legal deadlines. Since January
2020, Haiti has been operating without a chamber of
deputies and with a senate that is currently reduced to
one-third of its members. The local communities are
administered by officials appointed by the executive
branch. That situation has polarized society, including
the judiciary, which makes any attempt at dialogue
extremely difficult, if not impossible.

21-156733/18

S/PV.8799

The question concerning Haiti

The already tense relationship between the
executive branch and the judiciary has been exacerbated
by the dismissal and appointment of members of the
judiciary by the executive branch, which has prolonged
the strikes by members of the judiciary. Those strikes
have made it impossible for citizens to exercise their
constitutional right of access to justice and to appear
before a regular judge within a reasonable time frame,
which has accelerated the overcrowding of prisons.
The judiciary is weakened and entirely
dysfunctional. In addition, the executive branch has
been exercising legislative power for 17 months, issuing
decrees and presidential orders of a legislative nature.
It is in that polarized backdrop that the executive
decided, by presidential decree, to undertake
constitutional reform and to organize elections.
A Provisional Electoral Council has been appointed
with the mission of organizing a referendum for a
new constitution, followed by elections at all levels.
A five-member Independent Consultative Committee
has also been appointed to draft the text of the new
constitution. The Committee circulated its text for
opinion and comments through some associations at the
beginning of March.
I was asked by four of the major business associations
to provide a comparative analysis of the text of the 1987
Constitution and the proposed draft. We also attended
a debate organized by the Bar Association of Port-auPrince, in collaboration with the Faculty of Law of
Quisqueya University. At the invitation of the Haitian
diaspora organization Haitian Studies, we participated
in a debate, together with Mr. Georges Michel, a former
member of the Constitutional Committee in 1986-1987;
Ms. Danielle Magloire, a university professor and
women’s rights activist; a law professor from the city
of Cap-Haïtien and a sociologist university professor in
the United States of America.
The general opinion was that constitutional changes
are necessary. However, although the Independent
Consultative Committee claims to have consulted all
the work that has been done on the subject over the past
several years, the current process is not legitimate and
the full participation of all civil society is required.
In our opinion, the Government, in the absence
of a parliament, could have drawn on the procedure
used in 1986, described as follows, which allowed for
a broad participation of the population. That involved,
4/18

17/06/2021

first, setting up a committee to draft a constitutional
text; secondly, organizing elections and consultations
for the formation of the constituent assembly, which
was made up of 61 members, 41 of whom were elected
and 20 of whom were appointed by the country’s social
and professional associations; thirdly, broadcasting
the work of the constituent assembly live on national
radio and television, allowing the public to see that
its suggestions had been taken into account and to
understand the reasons underlying the proposed
constitutional provisions; fourthly, a vote by the
constituent assembly on the final version of the text of
the constitution, article by article; and, lastly, holding
a referendum so that the population could vote on the
text adopted by the Constituent Assembly. A similar
process to that I have just outlined could have been
followed, with the exception of the referendum stage.
With regard to the security environment, the current
sociopolitical context is making it very difficult — if not
impossible — to motivate the population to participate
in any form of electoral process. The primary concern
of the people, most of whom are poor, is to meet their
needs and those of their families. Their financial and
security situations are precarious. Gangs rule. The
threat of kidnapping, theft, rape and crime is facing us
all. No one is immune.
Those residing in underprivileged and densely
populated neighbourhoods are the main victims. Those
communities are mostly found along the west coast
of Port-au-Prince and the nearby hills. The southern,
northern and eastern exit routes of Port-au-Prince
are under the control of armed gangs. The Artibonite
valley — an important agricultural area of the
country — has been under threat by armed gangs for
more than two years. A special edition of the Moniteur,
published on 18 March, declared a state of emergency in
the areas of Village-de-Dieu, Grande Ravine, Delmas,
Savien and Petite Rivière de l’Artibonite.
Insecurity and violence are disrupting travel to and
from the various neighbourhoods within Port-au-Prince
and between Port-au-Prince and other cities. Getting to
work presents a daily risk for employees. Businesses
are sometimes forced to close their doors owing to gang
activity. The courthouse in Port-au-Prince — the capital
of Haiti — is located in a dangerous area bordering
neighbourhoods under the control of heavily armed
gangs. Despite repeated requests from the Port-auPrince Bar Association and judiciary personnel, the
21-15673

17/06/2021

The question concerning Haiti

Government has refused to relocate the courthouse and
been unable to effectively ensure its security.
In recent months, the gang war in the commune
of Cité Soleil and Martissant has resulted in numerous
deaths and injuries. Two students in their last year of
the same Cité Soleil high school were killed in the space
of a week. People have had to flee their homes. The
bodies are not counted. Often, when a body is found, it
is buried on the spot on the order of the authorities who
have been called to write up a report — if they show up
or are able to show up.
The National Commission for Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration was created on
27 February 2019, with the primary mission of
coordinating and implementing State policy on
disarmament, disbanding illegally armed groups and
reintegrating disarmed individuals. To date, there has
been no information indicating that any gang has been
disarmed or its members reintegrated into society. On
the contrary, the main gangs in Port-au-Prince have
joined forces. Armed struggles between members
and non-members of that confederation are causing
numerous casualties among the civilian population,
which have not been officially recorded.
The gangs are well supplied with heavy weapons
and ammunition in a country that is, in principle, under
a weapons embargo. The police seem totally powerless.
Images of the clashes and the victory cries of the gangs
are trending on social media. The resurgence in late
April of the coronavirus disease in the form of a much
more virulent variant has compounded the general
insecurity landscape. Access to hospitals and medical
oxygen supplies is limited. To date, no vaccines are
officially available in Haiti.
With regard to the financial situation, the exchange
rate of the Haitian currency against the United States
dollar is artificially maintained at a low level by the
Haitian State, to the detriment of the Haitian people,
who live on remittances received from abroad. A Haitian
who receives $100 a month has lost the equivalent of
three days’ worth of food for his family. The formal
business sector has not been spared. Businesses have
difficulty accessing the currency needed to pay their
international suppliers. They face long delays as
investment agreements are not respected.
Let us now talk about the situation of women.
Approximately 52 per cent of the Haitian population
is made up of women. They are most often the heads

S/PV. 8799

of their families. Haitian fathers, for the most part,
abandon their children to their mothers and do not
contribute anything. For Haitian women, no sacrifice
is too great to ensure the subsistence and education of
their children.
Women are the pillars of the Haitian economy. In
the countryside, they tend to their gardens. In appalling
conditions, they sell what they grow to the public in the
cities, where they invade the sidewalks and streets and
squeeze into public markets. The markets are littered
with garbage and rarely have restrooms. The women
are the best clients of microcredit organizations. For
example, they represent 94 per cent of the clients of
microcredit organization Sèvis Finansye Fonkoze, S.A.
throughout the country and 75 per cent of the clients of
FINCA S.A. Despite the difficult economic situation
that Haiti has experienced over the past few years,
particularly the past 12 months, the loan repayment rate
for Sèvis Finansye Fonkoze, S.A. is around 97 per cent.
Haitian women are found in large numbers in public
and private management positions. However, owing to
the culture, they rarely reach the highest levels and
avoid getting too involved in politics. They continue
to suffer from their marginalized status in Haitian
society. Despite the key roles they play in the social
and economic dynamics of the country, their work
remains undervalued.
Moreover, the political marginalization of women
and their exclusion from all positions of responsibility
in public administration continue to perpetuate their
lack of participation in the country’s governance
system. For example, the 35 per cent quota for women
provided for in the 2011 constitutional amendment has
not been upheld by successive Governments. Concerned
with meeting their basic needs, women often perceive
involvement in any political issue as a threat to their
families’ well-being.
In conclusion, there is no trust in the State or
political class. The people do not believe in the will or
the ability of those in power to combat insecurity. The
current concern of Haitians is to ensure the survival and
protection of their families. People are afraid. Despite
the difficult context, solidarity exists in Haiti. In their
awareness of the State’s chronic weakness, members of
civil society and everyone else within their power is
supporting care centres and displaced populations. The
country is in dire straits.

21-156735/18

S/PV.8799

The question concerning Haiti

17/06/2021

The President: I thank Ms. Hudicourt Ewald for
her briefing.

can succeed President Moïse when his term ends on
7 February 2022.

I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.

We welcome the indefinite postponement of the
referendum to amend the Constitution, given our
concerns that the Government of Haiti’s preparations to
hold a referendum have not been sufficiently inclusive,
participatory or transparent. We have emphasized to the
Government of Haiti that the focus must be on holding
free and fair legislative and presidential elections
in 2021.

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
La Lime for her comprehensive briefing on the situation
in Haiti. The United States is highly appreciative of the
work that she and her team have done and continue
to do. I thank Ms. Hudicourt Ewald for her insights
and sharing her expertise on the challenges that Haiti
is facing. We welcome the presence of acting Prime
Minister Joseph in the Chamber today.
In the four months since the Security Council
last met to discuss the work of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (see S/2021/174), we believe
that the Government of Haiti has not sufficiently
focused on addressing the country’s most urgent
priority — organizing parliamentary elections that
would end the current period of rule by decree by
President Moïse. We note with appreciation the efforts
of the Government to undertake voter registration, but
more must be done.
The United States has repeatedly urged both the
Government of Haiti and political stakeholders to
create the conditions for free and fair parliamentary and
presidential elections this fall. Most recently, the United
States was part of an Organization of American States
(OAS) delegation that visited Haiti from 8 to 10 June to
discuss the ongoing stalemate with the Government and
meet with political and civil society stakeholders. We
look forward to the report of the OAS and will continue
to engage closely with the United Nations, the OAS and
the international community.
As we have said repeatedly, the people of Haiti
deserve the opportunity to elect their leaders and restore
Haiti’s democratic institutions. The only way out of
presidential rule by decree is the conduct of free and
fair legislative elections, so that Haiti’s legislature can
resume its constitutional role and an elected president
6/18

To assist in that effort, the United States Government
is providing over $3 million to the Consortium for
Elections and Political Process Strengthening, which
includes the National Democratic Institute, the
International Republican Institute and the International
Foundation for Electoral Systems. Their activities
include focusing on improving electoral administration,
strengthening the competitiveness of political parties,
educating voters on electoral processes, promoting
electoral transparency and ensuring inclusive
voter participation.
On the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the
United States remains fully committed to ending the
global pandemic as soon as possible. The United States
will share at least three-quarters of its donated doses
through the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility,
prioritizing Latin America and the Caribbean, SouthEast Asia and Africa. Approximately 6 million doses
from the first tranche will go to South and Central
America, including Haiti. In addition, the United
States has invested more than $16 million to meet the
immediate COVID-19-related health needs of Haitians
while focusing on reducing widespread transmission.
Despite the Haitian Government’s commendable
decision in September 2020 to increase the budget of
the Haitian National Police, we remain concerned by
the lack of resources devoted to law enforcement, given
the increase in gang violence, a 36 per cent increase
in kidnappings in the first four months of 2021 and a
17 per cent increase in homicides.
The United States is providing $21 million in
equipment, training and technical advice to build the
capacity of the Haitian National Police as an effective
and accountable law enforcement agency. We call on
other donors to increase their support as well. We are
also encouraging Haiti to take a holistic approach to
countering gangs and are providing $5 million to
21-15673

17/06/2021

The question concerning Haiti

strengthen the Haitian National Police’s capacity to
work with communities to resist gangs.
The United States is also working to strengthen the
Haitian National Police’s capacity to provide election
security and to protect protesters’ human rights, which
have been under grave threat in the past several months.
The United States and Haiti are working together to vet
officers in Haitian National Police crowd-control units,
as well as retraining, restructuring and equipping them
so that they can quickly respond and protect Haitians
from civil unrest and election-related violence.
We remain deeply concerned by the ongoing
scourge of corruption, which continues to fuel discord
and instability. We are still awaiting effective action by
the Haitian Government to ensure accountability for
human rights abuses, particularly in the emblematic
cases the Council has repeatedly highlighted, including
those of Grande Ravine, La Saline and Bel-Air, as well
as the murder of Monferrier Dorval in August 2020.
The United States will continue to use all appropriate
tools to promote accountability for all corrupt and
malign actors in Haiti.
Haiti faces a variety of serious and complex
challenges, none of which can be fully addressed
without political stability in the country. That stability
can be achieved only through free and fair elections
that deliver a democratic and fully representative
Government. The time for action by President Moïse
and all key stakeholders is now. The people of Haiti
cannot afford any further delays and the United States
will continue to stand with them.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I appreciate the briefings delivered by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Haiti, Ms. Helen La Lime, and Ms. Chantal Hudicourt
Ewald. Their reflections are most useful to the Council.
I also welcome the presence of the Acting Prime
Minister of Haiti at this meeting.
Stability and prosperity in Haiti constitute a
major and unresolved issue for Latin America and the
Caribbean. As we have heard, the political, security and
human rights situation in the country has not improved
since our last meeting in February (S/2021/174). We
therefore stress the urgent need to hold parliamentary,
presidential and municipal elections in Haiti before the
end of the year.

S/PV. 8799

We call on all political actors to ensure the holding
of free, inclusive, transparent and credible elections
in 2021 that reflect the democratic will of the Haitian
people. Given the fragility of the electoral processes
ahead, we join the Secretary-General in his appeal
to the Haitian authorities, political parties and civil
society to put the future of the country before their
personal interests. Violence and incitement to violence
are unacceptable. It is only through dialogue and
democratic renewal that Haiti will be able to embark on
the path towards sustainable development.
We acknowledge the efforts of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and other groups to
bring about a much-needed dialogue between political
parties, authorities, civil society and members of the
diaspora. We regret that those endeavours have not been
successful and we call on all actors to renew efforts
to engage in dialogue, without preconditions, in order
to reach a minimum consensus that will promote the
prosperity and well-being of the Haitian people.
More than 1.5 million Haitians are in need of
humanitarian assistance. The national authorities and
the international community must work more closely
together to address the current situation. We take note
of the state of emergency declared in Haiti due to the
coronavirus disease pandemic, while expressing our
concern about the minimal progress made in terms of
the vaccination process. Nevertheless, we welcome the
support that Haiti will soon be receiving in that regard,
as we have just heard from the representative of the
United States. We reiterate our call for vaccines, as a
global public good, to be made available to the poorest
countries and distributed to all social groups.
Challenges pertaining to human rights and the rule
of law remain a source of concern in Haiti. Greater
efforts are needed to combat corruption and impunity,
particularly in cases of gender-based violence.
Furthermore, we express our concern regarding the
deterioration of the security situation, in particular
the activities of criminal gangs and the increase
in kidnappings.
We acknowledge the efforts of the United Nations
country team aimed at creating jobs for young people,
women and other vulnerable groups. We urge continued
efficient and coherent collaboration and interaction
between BINUH and the United Nations country team
to enhance the resilience of the people in order to ensure
peacebuilding and sustainable peace in the country.

21-156737/18

S/PV.8799

The question concerning Haiti

We particularly welcome the weapons and
ammunition management programme launched by
BINUH and various United Nations entities, including
the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace,
Disarmament and Development in Latin America and
the Caribbean.
The role of the various United Nations organs and
agencies to promote development in Haiti is critical,
but it is necessary to generate synergies between the
Security Council, the Economic and Social Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission.
In March, the Security Council made a clear
statement on the need for political actors in Haiti to
resolve their differences. The international community
and the United Nations system, including the Council,
must stand firm and united to support Haiti in achieving
this goal.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): I
have the distinct honour to deliver this statement on
behalf of Kenya, the Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We thank Ms. Helen La Lime, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Haiti, and Ms. Chantal
Hudicourt Ewald for their briefings. We also welcome
the presence of the Acting Prime Minister of Haiti, His
Excellency Mr. Claude Joseph, in today’s deliberations.
The ever-deteriorating state of affairs in Haiti,
as evident by the very grim report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2021/559), is extremely troubling. The
political stalemate persists and the recent upsurge in
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) cases risks further
exacerbating the already dire socioeconomic and
humanitarian situation, while the temerity and power
of gangs compound the security situation.
The prevailing conditions therefore require
urgent attention and specific and sustained support
from the international community. Political inertia
cannot continue if Haiti is to achieve its aspirations of
peace, stability and prosperity. Consistent with their
responsibilities, the United Nations, the Caribbean
Community and the Organization of American States
(OAS) have been urging Haitian leaders and relevant
stakeholders to decisively tackle its multifaceted crises.
In that context, the A3+1 commends the efforts of
the Permanent Council of the OAS in undertaking a
good offices mission to Haiti last week, in which Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines participated. We hope that
8/18

17/06/2021

the mission was successful in establishing a framework
for dialogue among the various Haitian stakeholders,
with the aim of reaching a palatable solution. We look
forward to the mission’s forthcoming report.
In order to peacefully overcome the current crises
through a Haitian-led and -owned inclusive national
political dialogue, all Haitian stakeholders need to
soften their deeply entrenched positions so that trust
can be built and dialogue facilitated. Further, the A3+1
takes this opportunity to remind the Haitian leaders
of their international law obligations and the regional
commitments to which they have pledged, particularly
those enshrined in the Inter-American Democratic
Charter and the Charter of Civil Society for the
Caribbean Community.
The A3+1 is deeply disturbed about the security
and human rights situation. The lack of progress in
the efforts of the Haitian National Police to provide
the necessary security and protection in the areas
under assault, such as Martissant, La Saline, Bel-Air,
Ravine and Cité Soleil, is extremely worrying. The
high incidence of kidnappings continues apace, with
ongoing robbery, cruel detention and human rights
violations, including sexual and gender-based violence.
Additionally, reports continue to emerge with respect
to rogue police officers. The recent request by President
Moïse for additional support from the United Nations
attests to the gravity of insecurity in Haiti.
Accordingly, we call for strict adherence to the
presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/7) adopted in
March, which emphasized the need for an immediate
and coordinated response by Haitian authorities to
demonstrate their commitment to addressing the
deteriorating security situation in Haiti, including gangrelated criminal activities, increases in kidnappings,
homicides and rape.
The A3+1 also echoes its support for the National
Commission on Disarmament, Demobilization and
Reintegration in its efforts to reduce community
violence, and urges the Government to undertake
measures to adopt the draft national strategy on
community violence reduction. The strategy should
bolster the State’s security apparatus to combat criminal
activities and dismantle gangs. Similarly, adopting
the national action plan on human rights endorsed
in December 2019 by the Haitian Interministerial
Committee on Human Rights will be instrumental in
bringing justice to the victims.
21-15673

17/06/2021

The question concerning Haiti

The dire conditions prevalent throughout the Haitian
prison system and the judicial deficiencies cannot
be divorced from the security challenges. The A3+1
therefore urges the authorities to address bottlenecks
within the penitentiary and judiciary systems.
We welcome the establishment of the Board of
the Legal Aid Council and its role in expediting legal
cases. We also echo the Secretary-General’s call on the
Ministry of Justice and Public Security to establish a
committee on the implementation of the penal reform
codes without delay in order to ensure their enactment,
with a view to tackling the detention rate and serious
overcrowding in prisons.
Resolving the political stalemate appears to be
a priority for the scheduling of inclusive, free, fair,
transparent and credible elections. However, the
interconnected nature of Haiti’s multifaceted challenges
demands durable parallel solutions. Good governance
has become a policy condition for loans, technical
assistance and debt relief. It is therefore incumbent for
Haitian political leaders to resolve the current impasse
in order to enjoy this benefit.
Likewise, we encourage the international
community to continue supporting Haiti’s 2021
national humanitarian response plan, which requires
$235.6 million to respond to the needs of 1.5 million
people, including 1.3 million who are severely food
insecure. At the same time, we urge the scaling up
of the COVID-19 vaccines supply in order for our
sister nation to respond appropriately to the pandemic
and ensure its sustainable recovery. We welcome the
announcement made moments ago by the United States
to assist in that regard.
Finally, we tell our Haitian brothers and sisters
that history has shown us that no matter how difficult
their challenges are, they rise. We therefore call on
them once more to collectively find sustenance from
the tried and tested values of their forebears and to
unite, reconcile and advance on the path to peace,
development and stability.
The A3+1 celebrates their rich and diverse culture,
as displayed during their heritage month in May,
recognizing that Haiti symbolizes the first black nation
to gain independence by overcoming colonialism and
slavery. To that end, it would be remiss of us not to
repeat our call for reparations from former colonial
Powers to assist in repairing the malignant legacy
of slavery. We believe that, within this decade focused

S/PV. 8799

on the upliftment of persons of African descent, proper
attention must be given to this just cause.
Ms. Syed (Norway): I would like to thank Special
Representative La Lime for the report (S/2021/559)
and for the concrete recommendations therein, which
we support. I would also like to thank Ms. HudicourtEwald for her briefing and Prime Minister Joseph for
his participation.
Ten days from now Haitians were scheduled to
vote in a constitutional referendum. We note the recent
decision to postpone this referendum, and we encourage
all parties to engage in a substantive dialogue and
prepare for the critical elections later this year. We
hope these parliamentary and presidential elections
can be implemented in an orderly and peaceful manner
as scheduled. For this, a genuine commitment to
democratic principles is a prerequisite and will entail
ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation
of all eligible voters, including women.
Norway is increasingly concerned about the lack
of public safety. The shocking events of community
violence, especially gang-related violence, must be
addressed. For the period between 1 February and
31 May alone, the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti (BINUH) attributed 295 alleged human rights
abuses to gang members and unidentified armed men,
including 78 killings, as well as cases of kidnappings,
arson, armed robberies and displacement. We condemn
these crimes and urge the authorities to ensure that the
perpetrators are held to account.
As a significant donor to the Central Emergency
Response Fund, Norway welcomes yesterday’s
announcement by Mark Lowcock that $1 million
be allocated as part of an urgent response to gang
violence and displacement in Haiti. We are particularly
troubled by the potential impact of violence on women
and children, who make up around 70 per cent of
the recently displaced. We are worried about their
protection needs, especially with regard to sexual and
gender-based violence. The increase in harassment of
and reprisals against human rights defenders and the
consequent shrinking of civic space is also troubling.
This cannot be tolerated.
Norway is also deeply concerned that the number
of persons in pre-trial detention has further increased.
We call for the necessary judicial reform to remedy
this situation and end unacceptable overcrowding. In
the light of all the foregoing challenges, we welcome

21-156739/18

S/PV.8799

The question concerning Haiti

be the thorough reporting of BINUH and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) on human rights violations and
abuses, and we call on Haitian authorities to facilitate
the establishment of an OHCHR office in Haiti as soon
as possible.
Norway notes the recent increase in coronavirus
disease infections in Haiti. We encourage the
implementation of an efficient response to the pandemic
and welcome the decision to accept vaccines through
the COVAX facility. We will continue to follow the
situation closely.
In addition to the grave issues underscored already,
Norway would also like to emphasize the need to
consider the impact of climate change as one of several
systemic challenges that Haiti is facing. Haiti is
especially vulnerable to natural disasters exacerbated
by climate change and environmental degradation.
Furthermore, the region is currently entering a new
hurricane season predicted to reach levels that are
above normal. Lack of resilience affects livelihoods
and leads to internal displacement, which in turn fuels
crime and unrest, all contributing to a deteriorating
humanitarian situation.
In the light of that, we especially welcome and
encourage the ongoing United Nations work on
climate-change mitigation through community-based
efforts. Given the links between climate change
and security, we encourage BINUH to include more
information about the impact of climate change and
gaps in resilience in Haiti in its next briefing to us. We
believe such information falls neatly under benchmark
6 of BINUH’s mandate, namely, building resilience.

17/06/2021

situation in Haiti has seen no major changes since our
last meeting, in February 2021 (see S/2021/174). The
stalemate has continued, with the opposition parties
remaining steadfast in their positions on the formation
of a transitional Government. Meanwhile, a new
prime minister, the sixth under the current president,
has been appointed and given the task of forming a
new Government.
The Independent Consultative Committee has also
reviewed the draft text of the new Constitution. The
Provisional Electoral Council has begun preparations
for elections, and a revised election calendar has been
announced. The constitutional referendum has been
postponed sine die, and uncertainty over its happening
remains. All these developments raise pertinent
questions about the holding of elections. We believe
the Government and the opposition must engage
constructively on the way forward to ensure that the
election process is completed in 2021 as scheduled. Haiti
has seen enough brinkmanship, and it is now time for all
stakeholders to work towards democratic renewal. The
efforts of BINUH and the Special Representative need
the Security Council’s support. We also welcome the
visit by the delegation of the Organization of American
States to Port-au-Prince last week and its engagement
with all stakeholders. Holding free and fair elections is
important for Haiti.

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Head of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), Ms. Helen La
Lime, for her detailed briefing on the implementation
of the mission’s mandate and the related developments
in Haiti. I would also thank Ms. Hudicourt-Ewald for
her insight into the current situation in the country. I
welcome the presence of the Acting Prime Minister of
Haiti in today’s meeting.

The security situation has unfortunately
further deteriorated. The failed police operation in
Village-de-Dieu, the prison breakout and the recent
deadly clashes between the rival gangs in Port-auPrince reflect the serious security challenges. We
have taken note of the ongoing efforts to address these
challenges, including police recruitment, review of the
draft law on firearms and ammunition and the draft
national strategy for community-violence reduction.
These efforts should be expedited further. We also
hope that the quick implementation of projects funded
by the Peacebuilding Commission will help to facilitate
greater involvement of communities, thereby positively
affecting the security situation. The authorities also
need to take immediate action to end impunity and
bring to justice those responsible for killing of the
President of Port-au-Prince Bar Association and other
emblematic cases mentioned repeatedly in the reports of
the Secretary-General. The justice and prison systems
also need immediate attention.

I will focus my statement mainly on key issues
concerning the mission’s mandate. The political

The sociopolitical situation and the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) disease pandemic have added

Before closing, I would like to again reiterate that
Norway fully supports BINUH and its ongoing work.

10/18

21-15673

17/06/2021

The question concerning Haiti

to the difficult economic situation, which has, in
turn, increased the vulnerability of the population,
which the report has highlighted under benchmark 5.
The humanitarian situation has also worsened, with
4.4 million people in need of assistance of one form
or another. There is therefore a clear need to enhance
humanitarian assistance. In this regard, we hope
that the funding shortages faced by humanitarian
agencies, including the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, will improve in the
coming months.
As rightly mentioned by the Secretary-General,
Haiti has numerous strengths that can propel its
socioeconomic recovery, provided there is improvement
in the political and security situation. We have no doubt
that the people of Haiti have the strength and resilience
to overcome the current challenges. We hope that
the upcoming elections will pave the way for Haiti’s
revival and usher in progress and prosperity. To this
end, we encourage continued close collaboration and
coordination between BINUH and the United Nations
country team in Haiti and the Government of Haiti.
India has had a long association with Haiti and its
people. India was a major troop-contributing country
to the United Nations peacekeeping operation in Haiti
and contributed three formed police units to the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. India has also
been extending assistance to Haiti in times of need,
including during the 2010 earthquake and the COVID–19
pandemic. India remains committed to supporting the
people of Haiti in these challenging times.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): Since
the Security Council deliberations in February, Haiti has
not yet emerged from the crisis and the country is still in
chaos. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/559) and
the briefings by Special Representative La Lime and
the non-governmental organization representative just
now described to us a Haiti with political divisiveness,
economic difficulties, social unrest, rampant gangs, an
unchecked pandemic and deprivation of livelihoods.
Allow me to cite just two examples.
First, according to the data, nearly 40 per cent of
the Haitian population, or approximately 4.6 million
people, cannot get basic food each day and urgently
need humanitarian assistance.
Secondly, on 14 June UNICEF pointed out that,
in the past two weeks alone, about 8,500 women
and children in Port-au-Prince had been displaced

S/PV. 8799

by gangster violence. The hardship and misfortune
experienced by the Haitian people are both difficult to
believe and unacceptable. The Haitian Government and
Haitian leaders bear the primary responsibility for that
unfortunate and even desperate situation.
The Security Council and the Secretary-General
repeatedly have called on the Haitian Government
to abandon self-interest and meet the aspirations of
the people by undertaking their due obligations and
strengthening national governance. Unfortunately, that
has not become a reality. The proposed constitutional
referendum has repeatedly been postponed. The
parliamentary, presidential and local elections, which
are expected to be held in September, are also plagued
with uncertainty.
China once again urges the Haitian authorities and
the leaders of all parties to put an end to meaningless
political strife, crack down on corruption and the abuse
of power and move the relevant political agenda forward
in order to create favourable conditions for and work
towards the swift restoration of the country’s stability
and social order and the achievement of economic
development. They cannot afford to repeatedly let the
Haitian people down or fail the expectation and help of
the international community.
Over the past 30 years, the United Nations has
invested huge resources in a tremendous effort to help
Haiti. However, to date such efforts and resources have
not achieved the expected results. The Haitian people
are still suffering tremendously and the future of Haiti
is still very bleak.
The United Nations existing blood-transfusion and
oxygen-supply assistance model is going nowhere and
appears to be unsustainable. China commends Special
Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime
and her colleagues for their work and for their input.
However, I wish to reiterate that there is no external
solution to the question of Haiti. The country must be
able to solve its own problems and achieve development
on its own. Now is the time to seriously seek new
ideas and new ways to help the Haitian people. The
United Nations, donors, countries of the region and the
Organization of American States should jointly explore
ways to help Haiti emerge from the crisis and get back
on track. The Security Council should learn from its
past experience and lessons and carefully consider the
future presence of the United Nations in Haiti in the
light of the situation in the country. In that regard, the

21-1567311/18

S/PV.8799

The question concerning Haiti

Secretariat should propose feasible recommendations
in conjunction with the expiration of the new mandate
in October of this year.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers
for their briefings.
As we have said in the Security Council many
times before, the people of Haiti deserve an end to
the dysfunction that has so long plagued their State
institutions and governance. I want to start by joining
other speakers in calling for free, fair, credible and
transparent elections in order to enable a transfer of
power in February 2022. That is critical to putting Haiti
on a path to stability and prosperity.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned by
the lack of accountability for human rights violations.
While we recognize the challenges, it is frustrating, to
say the least, that, after years of international support,
that impunity endures. Only political will from Haiti’s
leaders can break that cycle.
The fact that decades of international support to
Haitian institutions have failed to generate durable
peace dividends rightly begs questions about the tools
and approaches deployed over the years. The United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti represents the
Council’s conviction that international engagement
with Haiti needed to rest on a new model of cooperation,
with Haitians firmly in the lead. Experience has taught
us that sustainable peace needs to be built from the
ground up. Political processes need to be accompanied
by grass-roots engagement to promote social cohesion
and defuse tensions. The elections are critical, but the
violence and corruption that have long plagued Haiti
can be overcome in the long term only by empowering
local peacebuilders.
The United Kingdom remains convinced that the
integrated United Nations presence in Haiti positions
the Organization better to support Haiti’s needs on
the basis of a more holistic approach. The success of
community violence reduction programmes shows what
can be achieved. We therefore encourage the United
Nations country team in particular to align its strategies
firmly in support of peacebuilding approaches.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I would like to warmly
welcome His Excellency Mr. Claude Joseph, Prime
Minister of Haiti, to our meeting today. I also thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Helen La Lime, for her insightful briefing and all
12/18

17/06/2021

United Nations personnel in Haiti for their hard work
on the ground at this very challenging time. I would
also like to thank Ms. Chantal Hudicourt Ewald for her
information on the latest developments in Haiti.
We are concerned about the multifaceted difficulties
and instability in Haiti. The current political impasse
and the unscheduled electoral framework agenda
have remained the greatest challenges hindering
constitutional reform. The continued violence and
kidnappings, especially gang-related criminality, over
parts of the country have further exacerbated the
situation. The recent humanitarian response plan for
Haiti reports that this year some 4.4 million people
will require emergency humanitarian assistance. That
number accounts for more than 40 per cent of Haiti’s
total population. Against that background, I would like
to stress the following points.
First, regarding political progress, the urgent need
for Haiti now is to hold free, fair, transparent and
credible legislative elections, which have been overdue
since October 2019. We therefore urge all the relevant
parties to make further efforts in reaching a political
agreement on modalities for and timing of the elections
that are acceptable to all Haitian stakeholders, including
the political representation of women and young people.
We call on the United Nations and the international
community to urgently prioritize resources in support
of the elections.
At the same, we further stress the primary
responsibility of the Government of Haiti to address
the underlying drivers of instability. The Government,
political parties and other stakeholders in Haiti should
engage in a comprehensive national dialogue to address
the root causes of the current political impasse. It is
high time for a compromise and political consensus to
be made on constitutional and broader reforms.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation, Haiti
continues to face a number of long-standing threats and
challenges. Gang-related violence, kidnappings and
attacks targeting local communities have had adverse
impacts on the livelihoods of Haitians. We condemn
those acts and urge the Haitian Government and local
authorities to uphold their responsibilities, take decisive
measures to improve the country’s legal framework and
undertake all security measures needed to stop violence
and protect civilians, especially women and children.
We call upon international and regional partners
to maintain their support for the Haitian security
21-15673

17/06/2021

The question concerning Haiti

forces through training, provision of equipment and
capacity-building.
Thirdly, with regard to socioeconomic development,
a number of long-standing threats and challenges,
including linkages between sociopolitical, governance
and economic challenges, have fuelled instability and
undermined Haiti’s socioeconomic development.
In that regard, we look forward to the adoption of
bold and necessary measures by the Haitian authorities
to address poverty and socioeconomic instability. We
also call on the international community and countries
in the region to continue supporting socioeconomic
development in Haiti, especially through viable projects
boosting job creation, women’s and youth empowerment
and capacity-building. We cannot emphasize enough the
need to address the deep-rooted economic issues facing
Haiti. Only with such assistance can the Government
and the people of Haiti overcome long-term challenges
and strive for sustained stability and security.
Before concluding, we commend the tireless efforts
of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and the
United Nations country team in Haiti. We stress the
important role of neighbouring countries and regional
organizations and encourage them to continue their
active engagement in Haiti.
We would like to reaffirm our support for the
Haitian people in the pursuit of peace, security and
sustainable development in the country.
Ms. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Helen La Lime and Ms. Chantal
Hudicourt Ewald for their comprehensive briefings and
I welcome Mr. Claude Joseph, Acting Prime Minister
of Haiti, to the meeting.
We are very concerned about the situation in Haiti.
In the absence of elections, the Parliament has not
been in session since January 2020 and the President
continues to govern by decree. Since the resignation
of the Prime Minister in April, the Haitian authorities
have not been able to form a government. No agreement
has been reached to allow the country to overcome the
crisis, which the country desperately needs. I recall that
it is first and foremost the responsibility of the Haitian
executive to put an end to that deadlock.
The priority is therefore to organize legislative and
presidential elections, which are scheduled to be held in
the fourth quarter of this year. To ensure their credibility,

S/PV. 8799

three conditions are necessary. First, the authorities
must guarantee the security of voters. I would like to
welcome the establishment of a joint electoral security
unit within the Haitian National Police; that is a step in
the right direction, even if much remains to be done,
especially in the Port-au-Prince metropolitan area.
Secondly, the authorities must establish reliable
voters’ lists and accelerate the distribution of
identification cards. A total of 4.4 million Haitians have
already been registered and those efforts must continue.
Thirdly, we call on all parties to work in good faith
to reach a consensus that will allow for a transparent
election to be held in a peaceful climate.
The security situation in Haiti is deteriorating.
Gang violence, kidnappings, human rights abuses and
attacks against law enforcement are on the rise. The
recent events in the southern suburbs of Port-au-Prince
attest to the climate of terror that reigns in the country.
As we know, the solution lies in allocating more
resources to the Haitian National Police, which must be
beyond reproach. The recruitment conducted in recent
months is positive and must continue.
With regard to the fight against impunity and
corruption, we have not seen any progress. The
investigation into the assassination of Monferrier Dorval
has stalled. Haitians are waiting for justice following
the massacres in Grand Ravine, La Saline and Bel-Air
and the perpetrators of those atrocities are still at large.
Corruption is corroding the country’s institutions and
undermining people’s trust. The Haitian justice system
must live up to the requirements of the rule of law to
which the population aspires.
The new and even deadlier wave of the coronavirus
disease has compounded the existing fragility of the
country, with nearly 4 million Haitians already living
in extreme poverty and suffering from food insecurity.
Allow me to express France’s solidarity with Haiti’s
fight against the current health crisis.
I would like to pay tribute to the work of the Special
Representative and the entire team of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti in an extremely difficult
context. France, both at the national level and through
the European Union and the International Organization
of la Francophonie, stands more closely than ever with
the people and country of Haiti.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Ms. Helen La Lime, Special

21-1567313/18

S/PV.8799

The question concerning Haiti

Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH),
for her briefing on the situation in the country and the
work of BINUH.
The situation on the island is a source of growing
concern. The security situation continues to deteriorate;
the socioeconomic situation is deteriorating; there is no
unity on the issue of the launch of the constitutional
process; and State institutions and the entire system
of central and regional governance are weak. The
humanitarian situation is also deteriorating, partly
owing to the spread of the coronavirus pandemic, for
which the country’s medical system was unprepared
for obvious reasons. There are more and more cases
of human rights violations, attempts to put pressure on
the judiciary and restrictions on civil liberties. Against
that background, widespread public disapproval
has been compounded by the increased activity of
criminal groups.
We are convinced that this steep downturn is the
result of the paralysis of the political system, against
the background of the suspension of the work of the
Parliament more than one year ago. It is clear that
governing the country by decree is not easing tensions
but on the contrary is largely provoking them, as
evidenced by the public rejection of a number of
decisions that under normal circumstances would have
been taken in consultation with the Parliament.

17/06/2021

country. We hope that, while acting strictly within the
limits of its mandate, BINUH will continue to contribute
in an impartial manner to the search for a national
consensus, with the broadest possible involvement of
the key political players.
I would also like to stress that we should not
disregard the issue of resolving political differences
while we focus on the efforts to ensure security of
civilian population, as that could undermine the
effectiveness of our efforts. Under such difficult
circumstances, it is crucial for the Security Council to
send a unified message in support of national dialogue.
Russia stands ready to provide Haiti with all
necessary support so that the work of the Security
Council can result in genuine normalization of the
situation in Haiti and the strengthening of its sovereignty
and self-sufficiency.
Mr. Gallagher (Ireland): Let me also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Helen La Lime
for her briefing today and express my appreciation to
Ms. Chantal Hudicourt Ewald for her valuable briefing.
I also acknowledge the presence of Acting Prime
Minister Claude Joseph at this meeting today.

We note attempts by President Moïse to establish an
inclusive political dialogue to develop unified national
approaches to the most important requirements for
normalizing the situation, including the completion of
constitutional reforms and the holding of presidential
and parliamentary elections. We regret to note that to
date those steps have not yielded any results.

I want to focus on three points. The first relates to
the crossroads in Haiti’s future. During our previous
meeting, we spoke of the opportunity that 2021 offers
to restore and revitalize democracy in Haiti. However,
with fewer than 100 days remaining before the proposed
first round of legislative elections, preparations must
be urgently stepped up so that the people of Haiti can
exercise their democratic will at the ballot box. It has
never been more important that the Haitian people
choose their own legislators and, in time, their next
elected President.

We were surprised and concerned to learn,
following the issuance of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2021/559), about the postponement of the vote on the
constitutional referendum scheduled for 26 June. The
process of drafting changes to the Constitution is itself
a subject of public criticism, since it is being conducted
in the absence of the Parliament. Such a radical and
simultaneous change to the State system should be
backed by broad public support, but currently there is,
to be frank, no evidence of such support.

We joined the recent calls of the United Nations,
the Organization of American States and the European
Parliament to ensure that credible, inclusive and
transparent elections are held in a safe and timely
manner. Elections, of course, are not an end in and of
themselves, but they are a vital step on the path towards
restored and reinvigorated democratic institutions in
Haiti. We reiterate our belief in the power of dialogue to
generate understanding and create the space for agreed
compromises and a path forward.

Port-au-Prince needs responsible international
support and the current situation imposes a particular
responsibility on the United Nations presence in the

Much remains to be discussed, including on
constitutional reform. Those with such experience know
the impact that a representative citizens’ assembly,

14/18

21-15673

17/06/2021

The question concerning Haiti

with the full and equal participation of women, can
have on the deliberation of constitutional questions and
generating shared investments in the future.
My second point relates to the multiple structural
and systemic challenges that Haiti faces. We are
gravely concerned about reports of continuing violence,
insecurity and economic depression, compounded
by the challenge of responding to the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
Gang-related violence, prison overcrowding,
lengthy pretrial detentions, impunity for human rights
violations and sexual and gender-based violence are
issues of serious concern. We also note an alarming
rise in the rate of kidnappings and homicides. The
Government must address pervasive issues in law
enforcement and the justice system and take urgent
steps to advance the national strategy for community
violence reduction. We welcome the establishment of
Board of the Legal Aid Council with the support of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti.
Ireland also remains concerned about the shrinking
civil society space, particularly as it affects Haitian
women and youth. The combined pressures that I
outlined are preventing women from asserting their
rights and claiming their place in politics and society.
More than half of all households in Haiti are womenled. What affects Haitian women affects the future
trajectory of Haiti.
Thirdly, I wish to address the very grave
humanitarian situation in Haiti. The scale of the challenge
is truly daunting. We are particularly alarmed by the
widespread severe food insecurity, including — most
regrettably — persistent child malnutrition. As we
know, the effects of malnutrition have intergenerational
consequences, further undermining Haiti’s ability to
build its future. The crisis requires a strong collective
response from the international community.
However, the safety and security of humanitarian
workers, who have suffered direct attacks in the course
of their vital work, must be guaranteed. We call on the
Haitian Government to ensure the safety of all those who
provide vital assistance. Given the security situation,
the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service is critical
to the functioning of the United Nations country team
and its partners. We are concerned about reports that its
future activity is under threat owing to underfunding.

S/PV. 8799

As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/559)
rightly states, despite the many interwoven challenges it
faces, Haiti has numerous strengths, not least of which is
its resilient people. The international community must
match their resilience with continued commitment;
support efforts to build faith in the electoral system;
and work with the new elected Government to address
the underlying issues holding Haiti back from building
a future based on those strengths.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Estonia.
I would like to thank Special Representative of
the Secretary General Helen La Lime and Ms. Chantal
Hudicourt Ewald for their briefings. I would also like
to express Estonia´s strong support for Ms. La Lime
and her team for their valuable work. This is a critical
year for Haiti. As a result of the long-lasting political,
economic and humanitarian crisis, the country has
become acutely vulnerable. The first serious outbreak
of the coronavirus disease has had an additional impact.
Therefore, it is important that the allocations of vaccine
doses reach more people in Haiti.
We are deeply concerned about the ongoing
political impasse, the lack of accountability and the
worsening security and social situation, which threaten
the stability of Haiti. It is crucial to find a way out of
that dire situation and restore the path leading towards
political stability and security in Haiti. More progress
is needed in setting a consensual reform agenda to
ensure free, fair, transparent and credible legislative,
local and presidential elections in the fourth quarter
of 2021. It is crucial to create the necessary conditions
to hold elections, as that is the only way to restore
democratic institutions and a functioning Government
in Haiti. The Haitian people have the right to elect their
country’s leader and representatives.
We welcome the decision of the Organization of
American States to assist the Haitian authorities in
facilitating dialogue among national stakeholders.
In addition, the widely debated and controversial
constitutional referendum cannot be held in the current
conditions. Both the referendum and the electoral
processes need to be inclusive and transparent.
The security situation remains challenging. We
note with concern the continuing gang violence and
the increased number of kidnappings and killings. It
is of the utmost importance to ensure public safety
and provide security for Haitians. We encourage the

21-1567315/18

S/PV.8799

The question concerning Haiti

Haitian authorities to take further steps with regard to
the national strategy on community violence reduction.
The human rights situation has also deteriorated.
Stronger measures against insecurity and impunity need
to be taken. We reiterate the importance of enhancing
accountability and call on the Government of Haiti to
reform the justice system. Judicial institutions need to
be strengthened to ensure that all cases are properly
investigated and perpetrators are held accountable
for their crimes. We support the establishment of a
country office of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in Haiti.
Lastly, the Haitians deserve a stable State based on
democracy, the rule of law and sustainable development.
We remain hopeful that the continued efforts of all
parties will bring about a better future for Haiti.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the Acting Prime Minister
of Haiti.
Mr. Joseph (Haiti) (spoke in French): First of all, I
thank the Security Council for the interest it has always
taken in the constructive development of the economic,
political, social and security situation in Haiti.
Today’s meeting is of the utmost importance at
a time when the Republic of Haiti, my country, is at
a crossroads. For more than two years, the country
has experienced an extremely difficult sociopolitical
situation, characterized by recurrent attempts to
destabilize it and the public order by a certain faction
of the opposition whose actions seek only to create
disorder and instability.
We thank and commend the Secretary-General for
his latest report on the situation in Haiti (S/2021/559),
the key points and recommendations of which we
accept. We regret, however, that the report does not
sufficiently take into account the significant progress
made in the country over the past three or four years
in promoting and respecting human rights, fighting
corruption, improving governance and strengthening
the rule of law. I thank all those Council members
who have shown their unwavering solidarity with the
Haitian people, who have so often fallen victim to the
incomprehension of certain politicians and oligarchs
driven by petty interests.
16/18

17/06/2021

Allow me to take this opportunity to reaffirm the
commitment and determination of the President of the
Republic of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel Moïse,
to work towards mitigating the sociopolitical climate
through dialogue and consultations with all of the
nation’s key stakeholders, including political parties
and civil society organizations.
While we wait for the opposition to finally embrace
dialogue and cooperation as the only way out of the
protracted political impasse, the executive branch
is assuming its responsibilities towards the nation. It
has set its sights on organizing elections at all levels
by the end of the year with a view to renewing the
political landscape in Haiti, restoring the operation of
all democratic institutions and ensuring the transfer
of power to a legitimately elected president on
7 February 2022.
The Government of the Republic of Haiti is well
aware of the extreme complexity of the situation and
the concerns it may raise. That is precisely why we
are taking all necessary measures to curb the problem
of gang violence and kidnapping and restore security
throughout the country.
The Haitian National Police, as the guarantor of
security and the maintenance of law and order, is fully
mobilized to that end, despite its limitations and lack of
resources. To achieve our goals, we need the support and
solidarity of our friends in the international community
more than ever, particularly when it comes to technical
assistance and strengthening the operational capacities
of the Haitian National Police.
The political situation in Haiti over the past two
years has been extremely worrisome. Recurrent
political instability fuelled by the 1987 Constitution,
which is completely out of sync with the country’s
historical and sociocultural realities, together with
the resulting flagrant imbalance between the branches
of Government, are the main reasons for that, as
well as other structural problems that hinder the
national economy and the sustainable development of
the country.
In an act of patriotism and in order to tackle the root
causes of Haiti’s problems and provide lasting solutions
to them, the Head of State — who is highly attentive
to the aspirations of the population, which has often
spoken out in favour of a new social contract — intends
to offer the nation a new constitution to put an end
to the vicious cycle of political instability, thereby
21-15673

17/06/2021

The question concerning Haiti

rendering the country governable. Therefore, following
broad consultations with the various strata of society,
he issued a decree on 28 October 2020 establishing
the Independent Consultative Committee, which is
responsible for drafting the new constitution.
A section of the political class and certain other
actors, who in many ways benefit from the flaws
and weaknesses in the current Constitution, have
contested this initiative from the outset and done
everything possible to derail the project. However, the
Independent Consultative Committee has performed
its responsibilities well, drawing on the reports of the
various rounds of consultations carried out between
2007 and 2020 concerning the 1987 Constitution. That
documentary approach was complemented by hearings
with the participation of more than 30 national and
international experts, including experts from the United
Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and the Organization
of American States.
That important preparatory work resulted in a first
draft of the new constitution, which was submitted
for comment and analysis by the whole of society on
2 February. Within that framework, meetings were
organized throughout the country’s 10 administrative
divisions. More than 800 civil society organizations
were involved in the process, the vast majority of which
joined forces to brief the Independent Consultative
Committee on their views.
On the basis of those criticisms and
recommendations, a second draft was circulated on
18 May. The aim was to gather additional suggestions
from civil society before producing a consensual text
to be submitted to the population for approval through
a constitutional referendum, which was scheduled for
27 June.
Unfortunately, the resurgence of cases of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in the country at the
beginning of May led the Provisional Electoral Council
to postpone the referendum vote indefinitely, in line with
the recommendations of the Ministry of Public Health
and Population and the scientific unit responsible for
the management of the COVID-19 crisis in Haiti. A new
date for holding the referendum will be communicated
shortly by the Provisional Electoral Council.
In the meantime, we are working hard to advance
the electoral process, which is irreversible. It is a
guarantee of the consolidation of democracy, the rule of
law and political stability in the country. The President

S/PV. 8799

of the Republic of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Jovenel
Moïse, and the Government as a whole are deeply and
resolutely committed to that end. Under no pretext
can there be any interruptions to the electoral process,
which would be a serious blow to Haiti and the Haitian
people, especially in terms of democracy, the rule of
law and political stability.
My physical presence at this briefing on Haiti is
mainly to reiterate the determination of the President of
the Republic of Haiti to assume his responsibilities and
keep his promises to the Haitian people in their entirety,
all while respecting Haiti’s international commitments.
As far as the holding of the upcoming elections is
concerned, I can assure Council members that there is
nothing to worry about, apart from certain logistical
problems and the crucial issue of security, which will
promptly be addressed in all their aspects. From an
organizational perspective, the Provisional Electoral
Council has already set in motion most of the machinery
required to hold the elections.
At the financial level, the Provisional Electoral
Council has prepared and submitted a budget for the
organization of a referendum and the elections. Based
on that budget, on 21 January the Haitian Government
has signed an agreement with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) on the reactivation
of the Basket Fund, which has been replenished with
resources from the public treasury on several occasions.
All that remains is for our international partners to fulfil
their pledges of financial support, which amount to
more than $17 million. With regard to logistical issues,
the Provisional Electoral Council is working closely
with UNDP and the United Nations Office for Project
Services. A total of 12 sites throughout the country for
the storage of voting materials have been identified and
a deployment plan has been elaborated.
President Jovenel Moïse has declared 2021 to be an
“election year”. True to his commitment and promises,
he has done everything possible to facilitate the
organization of elections in the course of this year. The
electoral machinery is up and running; the Provisional
Electoral Council has the resources it needs; and the
electoral process is following its normal course.
The Head of State is determined to make the process
as inclusive, transparent and participatory as possible.
He continues to invite all branches of the political
opposition to the table for dialogue and consultations
with a view to reaching a historic compromise that will

21-1567317/18

S/PV.8799

The question concerning Haiti

result in a government of national unity that includes
all political tendencies. The renewal of my mandate at
the head of an ad interim Government is a powerful
testimony to the openness of the President of the
Republic of Haiti.
I wish to conclude my remarks by reaffirming, loud
and clear that, contrary to what some of my friends
in the opposition may think, the path of transition is
one that Haiti should avoid. We have had plenty of
experience in that regard throughout Haiti’s history,
especially recently. From 1986 to 2016, the country
experienced no fewer than 15 transitional Governments,
including 10 from 1986 to 1993 alone, with the only
results being total institutional paralysis and the further
weakening of the State.
Transitional regimes promote all kinds of
dishonesty, corruption and misappropriation, while the
country sinks into instability, poverty and economic
inequality and struggles to find its way to development.
Only honest, democratic, free, inclusive and credible
elections can guarantee the political stability necessary
for the socioeconomic stability and progress of
the nation.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. La Lime
to respond to the comments and questions raised.
Ms. La Lime: I think it has all been said during
the course of this meeting. The attention paid to the
concerning humanitarian and security situation and the
violence that threatens peaceful and fair elections, as
well as the call on the part of all participants here today
for democratic processes to resume and for dialogue to
happen so that consensus can be built and elections can
take place in 2021, has been well heard.
The United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti and
the United Nations country team will continue to work

18/18

17/06/2021

to address the humanitarian situation, improve the
security situation and mount the electoral apparatus
that will ensure free and fair elections.
The President: I thank Ms. La Lime for the
clarifications she has provided.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hudicourt Ewald to
respond to the comments and questions raised.
Ms. Hudicourt Ewald: I think that most of the
issues have been covered. However, I am very concerned
that one aspect of the issues covered was not mentioned,
which in my view is an emergency — the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) health crisis. I mentioned in
my presentation that vaccines were not available. In
addition, oxygen, which is the first product used to treat
COVID-19, is also very scarce in the country. We have
received some machines, but some of them have not
yet been installed. As recently as this morning, gangs
broke into the site with the only operating industrial
tank-filling centre in the country. This is an emergency.
Today, some people in the hospital may be at risk as
a result.
I would like to thank UNICEF for its support during
the COVID-19-related problems we had last year. It was
able to help the country address that issue. However,
today the population is in danger. So, in addition to
the gang threat, this point should be underlined. Apart
from that, I think everything has been said and we do
need to find a solution to security and political matters
in order to move forward in Haiti.
The President: I thank Ms. Hudicourt Ewald for
the clarifications she has provided.
I now invite Council members to convene in closed
consultations to continue our discussion.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

21-15673
