R.olllllom adopted -

du, nporta of du, Foarth Committee

conditions in the Territory upon which the Committee
has pnsented a report,•
Decides to draw the attention of the petitioners to
the report and observations of the Committee on South
West Africa regarding conditions in the Territory,
submitted to the General Assembly at its fourteenth
session, and to the action taken by the Assembly on
this report.
838th plenary meeting,
17 November 1959.

1357 (XIV). The Hoachanas Native Reserve
The General Assembly,
Having authorized the Committee on South West
Africa, by resolution 749 A (VIII) of 28 November
1953, to examine petitions as far as possible in accordance with the Mandates procedure of the League of
Nations,
Having received the report~ from the Committee dealing, inter alia, with its examination of petitions concerning developments in the Hoachanas Native Reserve,
Considering that the original inhabitants of the Territory have an inherent right to continued and unmolested
residence on their own land,
Noting that inhabitants of the Hoachanas Native
Reserve, survivors of the Red Nation, or Rooinasie
N amas, have an inherent right of ownership and
possession of their ancestral land at Hoachanas, where
they claim an area of 50,000 hectares as recognized
by agreement with the German Government, and that
former Governor Theodor Leutwein, recording the
history of his governorship of German South West
Africa from 1894 to 1905, stated: "The next reserve
was in Hoachanas, headquarters of the Red Nation.
There, in 1902, a total of 50,000 hectares was declared
the inalienable property of the tribe", 6
Noting further that the Government of the Union of
South Africa reported to the League of Nations in 1923
that it had confirmed the rights of "Natives" on land
occupied by them under treaties or agreements with
the former German administration,
Noting that the residents of the Hoachanas Native
Reserve were ordered by the Government of the Union
of South Africa to vacate Hoachanas by 31 December
1956, that the majority refused to leave their traditional
land and move, as directed by the Government, to land
found by a government commission to be inferior to
that of Hoachanas, and that the Administrator of South
West Africa consequently obtained a court order in
July 1958 for the eviction of one of the Nama residents,
the Reverend Markus Kooper, Minister of the African
Methodist Episcopal Church,
Recalling that the Committee on South West Africa,
in its report to the General Assembly at the thirteenth
session, 7 urged the Union of South Africa to take all
steps necessary to ensure that the people of Hoachanas
retained their traditional homeland and to investigate
their claim to surrounding land,
Recalling further that the General Assembly, by resolution 1245 (XIII) of 30 October 1958, approved the
• Ibid., part II.
r, Ibid., Supplement No. 12 (A/4191).

e Theodor Leutwein, Elf Jahre Gouve,.neur in DeutschSudwestaf,-ika, Berlin, 1907, p. 272.
7 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth
Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/3906 and Add.1), para. 119.

Z7

report of the Committee on South West Africa and
thereby endorsed the Committee's decision regarding
Hoachanas,

N tJting with concern that the Government of the
Union of South Africa disregarded this decision, and
caused the Reverend Markus Kooper and his family to
be forcibly removed from Hoachanas on 29 January
1959 to a site approximately 150 miles away, thereby
depriving his congregation of their minister, that several
residents of the reserve were allegedly injured during
the removal, and that the other inhabitants of the
reserve were informed by Government officials of their
impending removal by force,
CtJnSidering with regret that it is the policy of the
Mandatory Power to remove the "Native" inhabitants
from their lands which they have held n.s their own
in order to make room for "European" settlers, in
violation of fundamental human rights and the sacred
trust assumed by the Government of the Union of
South Africa over the Mandated Territory,
Considering the removal of the inhabitants of
Hoachanas for a purpose not in conformity with the
Mandate or the Charter of the United Nations to be
contrary to the obligation undertaken by the Mandatory
Power to promote to the utmost the material and moral
well-being and the social progress of the "Native"
inhabitants of the Territory,
1. Urges the Government of the Union of South
Africa to desist from carrying out the removal of other
residents of the Hoachanas Native Reserve and to
arrange for the return of the Reverend Markus Kooper
and his family to that reserve;
2. Requests the Government of the Union of South
Africa to investigate the claims of the Rooinasie Namas
to the original area of Hoachanas, of which only 14,254
hectares are now occupied by them, and to take such
further steps as may be necessary, in consultation with
the territorial Administration and the people concerned,
to ensure the recognition and protection of the full rights
of the people of Hoachanas and the promotion of their
general welfare;
3. Requests the Government of the Union of South
Africa to inform the United Nations on the measures
taken to implement the present resolution.
838th plenary meeting,
17 NtJVember 1959.

1358 (XIV). Withdrawal of a passport from
Mr. Hans Johannes Beulces
The General Assembly,
Having accepted the advisory opinion of 11 July 1950
of the International Court of Justice on the question
of South West Africa,2
Having authorized the Committee on South West
Africa, by resolution 749 A (VIII) of 28 November
1953, to examine petitions in accordance with the
Mandates procedure of the League of Nations,
Having received a report8 from the Committee dealing with petitions from Mr. Hans Johannes Beukes,
a South West African student, and from Mr. Neville
Rubin, President of the National Union of South
African Students,
8/bid., Fourteenth Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/4191),
part I, section III; part II, section III, para. 80, and section VI,
paras. 226 and 227; ~ also annexes XXIX to XXXII.
