General Assembly-Fourteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOYfED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Page

1399 (XIV). Report of the International Law Commission covering the work
of its eleventh session (21 November 1959) (item 55).
14-00 (XIV). Codification of the principles and rules of international law relating
to the right of asylum (21 November 1959) (item 55).
1401 (XIV). Preliminary studies on the iegal problems relating to the utilization
and use of international rivers (21 November 1959) (item 55)
1450 (XIV). International conference of plenipotentiaries on diplomatic intercourse and immunities (7 December 1959) (item 56)
1451 (XIV). Question of the publication of a United Nations juridical yearbook
(7 December 1959) (item 57). . . . . . . .
1452 (XIV). Reservations to multilateral conventions: t'1e Convention on the
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization (7 December 1959)
(item 65)
.... ......
1453 (XIV). Study of the juridical regime of historic waters, including historic
bays (7 December 1959) (item 58). .

55
55
55

SS
56
56

57

1399 (XIV). Report of the International Law
Commission covering the work of ilM
eleventh session

1401 (XIV). Preliminary 11tudies on the legal
problems relating to the utilization and tise
of international rivers

The General Assembly,
Hooing considered the report of the International Law
Commission covering the work of its eleventh session, 1
1. Takes note of the report of the International Law
Commission ;
2. Expresses its appreciation of the work done by the
Commission.
842nd plenary meeting,
2 J November 1959.

The General Assembly,
C onsuiering that it is desirable to initiate preliminary
studies on the legal problems relating to the utilization
and use of international rivers with a view to determining whether the subject is appropriate for codification,
Requests the Secretary-General to prepare and circulate to :~.{ember States a report containing:
(a) Information provided by Member States regarding their laws and legislation in force in the matter and,
when necessary, a summary of such information;
( b) A summary of existing bilateral and multilateral
tr,·atit·s;

1400 (XIV). Codification of the principles and
rules of international law relating to the
right of asylum

( r) A summarv of decisions of international tribm;als, including arbitral awards;

The General Assembly,
Considering that it is desirable to standardize the
application of the principles and rules relating to the
right of asylum,
Recalling that the International Law Commission at
its first session included the right of asylum in the provisional list of topics of interr.ational law selected for
codification,2
Requests the International Law Commission, as soon
as it considers it advisable, to undertake the codification
of the principles and rules of international law relating
to the right of asylum.
842nd plenary meeting,
21 November 1959.

( d) A survey of studies made or being made by nongovernmental organizations concerned with international
law.
842nd plenary meeting,
21 Nm.1ember 195?.

1450 (XIV). International conference of plenipotentiaries on diplomatic intercourse and
immunities

The General Assembly.
Recalling that, by its resolution 1288 (XIII) of
5 December 1958, it decided to include in the provisional agenda of its fourteenth session the question
entitled "Diplomatic intercourse and immunities" with a
view to the early conclusion of a ronvention on diplomatic intercourse and immunities,

1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourteenth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/4169).
2 Ibid., Fourth Session, Supplement No. JO (A/925), para. 14.

55

56

General Aaembl;r--Foarteenth Seulon

Believing that the codification of the rules of international law in this field would assist in promoting the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations,
l. Decides that an international conference of plenipotentiaries shall be convoked to consider the question
of diplomatic intercourse and immunities and to embody
the results of its work in an international convention,
together with such ancillary instruments as may be
necessary;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to convoke the
conference at Vienna not later than the spring of 1961;
3. Invites all States Members of the United Nations,
States members of the specialized agencies and States
parties to the Statute of the International Court of
Justice to participate in the conference and to include
among their representatives experts competent in the
field to be considered ;
4. Invites the specialized agencies and the interested
inter-governmental organizations to send observers to
the conference ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
conference all relevant documentation, and recommendations relating to its methods of work and procedures
and to other questions of an administrative nature ;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange 2.lso
for the necessary staff and facilities which would be
required for the conference ;
7. Refers to the conference chapter III of the report
of the International Law Corrut_1ission covering the work
of its tenth session,3 as the basis for its consideration
of the question of diplomatic intercourse and immunities ;
8. Expresses the hope that the conference will be
full,: attended.
847th plenary meeting,
7 December 1959.
1451 (XIV). Q~estion of the publication of a
United Nations juridical yearbook

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1291 (XIII) of 5 December
1958 regarding the question of the publication of a
United Nations juridical yearbook,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the matter, 4
Considering that it would be highly desirable that
documentary materials of a legal character relating to
the United Nations should be made available in a yearly
volume for the use of Governments as well as organizations and all persons interested in the development of
international law,
l. Decides that a United Nations juridical yearbook
which would include documentary materials of a legal
character relating to the United Nations should be
published;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, as a first step,
to submit a report to the General Assembly at its
fifteenth session containing a detailed outline of such
a yearbook;
8 Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 9 (A/3859 and
Corr.I).
'Ibid., FO'Urteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 57, docu-

ment A/4151.

3. Decides to consider this report at its fifteenth
session.
847th plenary meeting,
7 December 1959.
1452 (XIV). Reservations to multilateral conven•
tions: the Convention on the Inter-Govern•
mental Maritime Consultative Organization

A
The General Assembly,
Havirig considered the item entitled "Reservations to
multilateral conventions : the Convention on the InterGovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization", as
well as India's instrument of acceptance of the Convention on the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization and the report of the SecretaryGeneral, G
Noting that the Secretary-General of the United
Nations acts as the depositary authority in respect of
that Convention,
·Noting the statement made on behalf of India at the
614th meeting of the Sixth Committee on 19 October
1959, explaining that the Indian declaration was a
declaration of policy and that it does not constitute a
reservation,
1. Expresses its appreciation of the information and
materials made available to the General Assembly;
2. Expresses the hope that, in the light of the abovementioned statement of ·India, an appropriate solution
may be reached in the Inter-Governmental Maritime
Consultative Organization at an early date to regularize
the position of India ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization
the present resolution together with the relevant records
and documentation.
847th plenary meeting,
7 December 1959.

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 598 (VI) of 12 January 1952,
1. Decides to amend paragraph 3 ( b) of that resolution by requesting the Secretary-General to apply the
aforesaid paragraph to his depositary practice, until
such time as the General Assembly may give further
instructions, in respect of all conventions concluded
under the auspices of the United Nations which do not
contain provisions to the contrary;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to obtain information from all depositary States and international
organizations with respect to depositary practice in
relation to reservations, and to prepare a summary of
such practices, including his own, for use by the International Law Commission in preparing its reports on the
law of treaties and by the General Assembly in considering these reports.
847th plenary meeting,
7 December 1959.
n Ibid., agenda item 65, document A/4235.
