S/2018/750

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
31 July 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 30 July 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
In a letter dated 23 July 2018 addressed to me, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Emigrants of Lebanon requested that the Security Council extend the mandate of
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for a further period of one
year, without amendment. In that regard, and further to my report to the Council of
13 July 2018 on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2018/703), I hereby
request that the Council consider the renewal of the mandate of UNIFIL, which is due
to expire on 31 August 2018.
I commend the continued commitment of both the Lebanese Armed Forces and
the Israel Defense Forces in maintaining the cessation of hostilitie s, as well as their
close cooperation and coordination with UNIFIL. The continued period of relative
calm and stability in southern Lebanon and along the Blue Line provides a window
of opportunity for progress towards a permanent ceasefire and a long -term solution
to the conflict, as called for in resolution 1701 (2006).
At the same time, both parties have yet to fulfil their respective obligations
under the resolution. Israel must withdraw its forces fr om Lebanese territory and
cease violations of Lebanese airspace. The Government of Lebanon must exercise
effective authority over all Lebanese territory, prevent hostile actions from its
territory, ensure the safety and security of the civilian population, in addition to that
of United Nations personnel, and ensure the disarmament of all armed groups so that
there will be no weapons or authority in Lebanon other than that of the Lebanese
State. The presence of unauthorized weapons outside of State control, coupled with
bellicose rhetoric from both sides, heightens the risk of miscalculation and escalation
into conflict.
UNIFIL, in line with its strategic priorities as confirmed in the 2017 strategic
review (S/2017/202), and in close coordination with the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for Lebanon, continues to work with the parties in fulfilling those
obligations and, in particular, to support the efforts of the Government of Lebanon to
extend the authority of the State in southern Lebanon, including by increasing the
capacity and presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces.
I continue to be encouraged by the steps that the Government of Lebanon has
taken to reinforce the Lebanese Armed Forces and extend State authority south of the
Litani River further to the adoption of Security Council resolution 2373 (2017), in
which the Council called for “an effective and durable deployment of the Lebanese
Armed Forces in southern Lebanon and the territorial waters of Lebanon at an
accelerated pace”. These steps included the deployment in September 2017 of the

18-12582 (E)

030818

*1812582*

S/2018/750

Fifth Intervention Regiment, the inauguration in May 2018 of the Lebanese Armed
Forces regional civil-military cooperation centre in the south, and steady progress in
operationalizing the Lebanese Armed Forces model regiment, in addition to efforts to
acquire an additional vessel for the Lebanese navy. The increased capacity and
presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in southern Lebanon has enabled further
cooperation and coordinated activities between the Lebanese Armed Forces and
UNIFIL, as called for in resolution 2373 (2017), including permanent and temporary
checkpoints and counter-rocket-launching operations. It is significant that the
Lebanese Armed Forces initiated coordinated foot patrols along the Blue Line, with
213 such patrols conducted in June 2018.
A strong, sustainable presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in southern
Lebanon is a vital element in enhancing State presence in southern Lebanon and in
moving from the fragile cessation of hostilities to a permanent ceasefire. Such a
presence is also an important demonstration of the commitment of Lebanon to
resolution 1701 (2006). The United Nations is committed to enhancing its support for
those efforts, including with respect to ensuring that there sh ould be no unauthorized
armed personnel, assets or weapons in the area between the Blue Line and the Litani
River, bearing in mind the primary responsibility of the Lebanese Armed Forces in
that regard. UNIFIL will continue to adapt its posture to ensure t hat it acts with all
means available within its mandate and capabilities regarding the illegal presence of
armed personnel, weapons or infrastructure.
I reiterate my call for further international support for the Lebanese Armed
Forces, including within the framework of the International Support Group for
Lebanon, building on the commitments made by the Government of Lebanon
regarding the implementation of resolutions 1701 (2006) and 2373 (2017) during the
“Rome II conference” held in March 2018.
In the absence of progress towards a permanent ceasefire, the ability of UNIFIL
to deter, prevent and de-escalate the conflict remains of vital importance. The
emphasis that UNIFIL places on prevention continues to be part and parcel of its
operational and non-operational activities. By mitigating risks in a timely manner,
UNIFIL continues to prevent small incidents from escalating into large -scale violence
and to safeguard the cessation of hostilities. In that regard, the constructive liaison
and coordination facilitated by UNIFIL with the parties, including through the
tripartite mechanism, is critical in de-escalating tensions and building trust.
This has been especially important during periods of heightened tension in
recent months on both sides of the Blue Line in response to certain developments, as
elaborated in my reports on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2018/210 and S/2018/703). For example, a particularly tense situation over
construction works carried out by the Israel Defense Forces in sever al areas south of
the Blue Line was de-escalated in April 2018 through liaison efforts with the parties
led by the UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander.
The liaison and coordination arrangements, including the tripartite mechanism,
continue to play a crucial role in maintaining stability. The tripartite forum has
remained flexible, enabling the parties to discuss a wide range of issues, including
practical arrangements on the ground to further stabilize the situation along the Blue
Line. In this regard, UNIFIL has been facilitating discussions with the parties with a
view to addressing contentious points along the Blue Line.
UNIFIL has taken a number of proactive steps to enhance the pace, visibility
and effectiveness of its operations in accordance with resolution 2373 (2017). It has
expanded foot patrols along the Blue Line and in villages where heavy vehicular
movements are problematic, increased night patrols along the Blue Line, utilized air
assets more effectively, including by increasing the number of operational flights,
2/4

18-12582

S/2018/750

such as reconnaissance of sensitive areas, and undertaken night flights to monitor
wadis. Between August 2017 and May 2018, it increased its monthly operational
activities from 13,362 to 14,871, with a 68 per cent increase in foot patrols and a
28 per cent increase in the average flight hours of reconnaissance air patrols. UNIFIL
continues to look at ways to adjust its operations in an effort to ensure that it remains
a credible, flexible and mobile force.
The freedom of movement of UNIFIL was generally respected, with exceptions
detailed in my previous reports on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006)
(S/2017/964, S/2018/210 and S/2018/703). Each time its freedom of movement was
restricted, UNIFIL took immediate action with the respective national and local
authorities and the Lebanese Armed Forces to restore access, either by vehicle or on
foot. Following several restrictions of movement in May 2018 ( S/2018/703), UNIFIL
and the Lebanese Armed Forces took steps to ensure that sites maintained by “Green
Without Borders”, situated in close proximity to the Blue Line, were accessed and
monitored without hindrance. It is imperative that the freedom of movement of
UNIFIL be fully respected and unimpeded within its area of operations.
The increased pace of operations and the more intrusive patrolling conducted in
accordance with the implementation of resolution 2373 (2017) has not affected the
relationship with the local population, which has remained largely positive. UNIFIL
continued to identify and implement quick-impact projects to address the pressing
needs of local communities, support the extension of State authority in the south and
contribute to local acceptance of the presence of the Force in line with its strategic
priorities.
UNIFIL also continued its engagement with the Lebanese Armed Forces to
explore ways to conduct activities that would benefit local communities south of the
Litani River. In this regard, the newly inaugurated Lebanese Armed Forces regional
civil-military cooperation centre will be important as it is expected to strengthen
cooperation between the Lebanese Armed Forces and communities across southern
Lebanon, including in the field of emergency preparedness and civilian protection.
In January 2018, the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force completed its reconfiguration
in line with the recommendations of the 2017 strategic review ( S/2017/202). The
Maritime Task Force, which currently comprises six vessels and has an authoriz ed
maximum number of personnel of 780, continues to support the Lebanese navy in
carrying out maritime interdiction operations and joint training. By enabling a stable
and safe maritime environment, the Maritime Task Force not only contributes to
enhancing maritime trade, but also deters the use of Lebanese territorial waters for
illicit purposes.
As at July 2018, the total number of military personnel stands at 10,426. The
UNIFIL civilian component includes 235 international and 585 national staff. I am
grateful to the 42 troop-contributing countries that comprise UNIFIL for their ongoing
commitment. The deterrent effect of the presence and operations of UNIFIL, on land
and at sea, continues to play a crucial role in maintaining stability in southern
Lebanon and along the Blue Line. The UNIFIL presence is also key to creating an
environment conducive to a political process in which a permanent ceasefire could be
discussed. UNIFIL, in close coordination with the United Nations Special
Coordinator for Lebanon, is ready to lend its full support to the parties in that process.
Regarding the financial aspects of UNIFIL, by its resolution 72/299 and
decision 72/558, adopted on 5 July 2018, the General Assembly appropriated the
amount of $474.4 million for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July
2018 to 30 June 2019. As at 16 July 2018, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special
Account for UNIFIL amounted to $56.2 million. Total outstanding assess ed
contributions for all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to
18-12582

3/4

S/2018/750

$2,072.2 million. Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to
30 April 2018, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned equipment has
been made for the period up to 31 March 2018, in accordance with the quarterly
schedule. Should the Security Council decide to extend the mandate of the Force
beyond 31 August 2018, the cost of maintaining UNIFIL would be limited to the
amounts approved by the Assembly.
I would like to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Michael Beary, and to all the military and
civilian personnel of UNIFIL, for the work they are carrying out in southern Lebanon
and for their commitment to the service of peace.
I pay tribute to peacekeepers who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the service
of peace and to all men and women who have served in UNIFIL since its inception
40 years ago.
I would also like to express my appreciation for the unified and steadfast support
of the Security Council to UNIFIL and its mandated activities. With the above
information in mind, I recommend that the Council extend the mandate of UNIFIL
for a further period of 12 months, until 31 August 2019.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

4/4

18-12582
