Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

tions of Member States for the financial years 1959,
1960 and 1%1 in currencies other than United States
dollars;
4. Subject to rule 161 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly, States which are not Members of
the United Nations but which participate in certain
of its activities shall be called upon to contribute towards the 1959, 1960 and 1961 expenses of such activities on the basis of the following rates :

B
The General Assembly
Approves the adjustment of retirement, disability and
widow b~nefits from 1 January 1958 as recommended
by the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board in its
resolution 4 (IX). 22
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.

Non-member States

Per ce1Jt

C

Germany, Federal Republic of ........... .
Korea, Republic of .................... .
Liechtenstein ......................... .
Monaco ..........•...................
San Marino .......................... .
Switzerland .......................... .
Viet-Nam ........................... .

5.33
0.21
0.04
0.04
0.04
0.97
0.20

The General Assembly
1. Adop.~s the texts annexed to the present resolution
as amendments to the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund ;
2. Decides that the amended text of article XVIII,
paragraph 1, and the new article XLII shall be effective
from the date of the present resolution, and that the
amended text of article XXII, paragraph 1, shall be
effective from the date on which the Genera' Assembly
has taken action on the recommendations of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board resulting from the
proposed comprehensive review of the Fund, 23 or on
1 January 1962, whichever is earlier.
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.

the following countries being called upon to contribute :
(a) To the International Court of Justice: Liechtenstcin, San Marino and Switzerland;
( b) To the international control of narcotic drugs :
Federal Republic of Germany, Republic of Korea, Liechtenstein, Monaco, San Marino, Switzerland and VietNam;
( c) To the International Bureau for Declarations of
Death of Missing Persons: Federal Republic of Germany;
(d) To the Economic Commission for Asia and the
Far East: Republic of Korea and Viet-Nam;
( e) To the Economic Commission for Europe :_ Federal Republic of Germany.
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.

B
The General Assembly,
Taking into account the views expressed that the consideration of the recommendations of the Committee on
Contributions might be facilitated if Member States
could have access to the statistical and other information at the Committee's disposal,
1. Requests the Committee on Contributions to consider an arrangement which would enable representatives of Member States, on request, to acquaint themselves with the statistical and other information at the
Committee's disposal;
2. Requests the Committee on Contributions to submit its recommendations on this matter to the General
Assembly at its fourteenth session.
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.

ANNEX
Article XVIII, paragraph 1 (amended text)
In addition to the contributions deducted from the remuneration of the participant as provided in article XVI, any participant may, subject to the approval of the Joint Staff Pension
Board and under such conditions as the Board may prescribe,
deposit in the Pension Fund, in a lump sum or sums and/or by
an increased rate of contribution, an amount computed to be
sufficient to purchase an additional retirement benefit which,
together with his prospective regular retirement benefit as
provided herein, will provide for him a total retirement benefit
not to exceed 60 per cent of his final average remuneration
at the age of retirement. Interest at such rates as may be set
from time to time by the Board shall be allowed on such contributions.
Article XXII, paragraph 1 (amended text)
The Joint Staff Pension Board shall consist of eighteen
members:
(a) Six members appointed by the United Nations Staff
Pension Committee, two from the members elected by the
General Assembly, two from the members appointed by the
Secretary-General and two from the members elected by the
participants ;
(b) Twelve members appointed by the staff pension committees of the other member organizations in accordance with
a table fixed by the administrative rules of the Fund which
shall provide for equal representation of the three groups
referred to in article XX.
Article XLII (new text)

1309 (XIII). Annual report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board and amendments
to the Regulations of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund
A
The General Assembly
Takes note of the annual report of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Board.21
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.
"'Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 8 (A/3938).

FORFEITURE OF THE RIGHT TO A BENEFIT

1. The right to a lump-sum benefit shall be forfeit if, for
two years after the date on which payment would have been
due, the person entitled has lodged no claim and has failed to
submit payment instructions or has refused to accept payment.
2. The right to a pension or life annuity shall be forfeit if,
for five consecutive years, the person entitled has lodged no
claim and has failed to submit payment instructions or has
refused to accept arrears.
3. The right to unpaid instalments of a pension or life annuity shall be forfeit if, for two years after payment would

• Ibid., p. 6.
• See resolution 1310 (XIII),

46

C;eneral A1111embly-Thirteenth Session

4. The provisions of paragraphs !, 2 and 3 of this article
shall not affect any right to a benefit which has not been exercised for reasons beyond the beneficiary's control.

3. Requests the Secretary-General, in conjunction
with the executive heads of the other member organizations and in co-operation with the Jcint Staff Pension
Board, to submit proposals for action by the General
Assembly at its fifteenth session ;

5. Forfeitures as described above shall be reported to the
Board. Where the right to a benefit has been forfeited pursuant to paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this article and information
subsequently received shows that such forfeiture would have
been contrary to the provisions of paragraph 4 if the facts
of the case had been known in time, the Board shall restore
the-right to a benefit.

4. Decides that, for the purposes of contributions to
and benefits payable from the Joint Staff Pension Fund,
the pensionable remuneration of the professional category and higher salary levels shall be increased, with
effect from 1 January 1959, by 5 per cent of the pensionable remuneration otherwise in force at that time ;

6. The Board may rei9state the right to a benefit when it
has been satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist which
warrant such action.

5. Authorizes the Joint Staff Pension Board to supplement, with effect from 1 January 1959 and pending
the outcome of the comprehensive review requested
above, the pensions and life annuities paid under articles
IV, V, VII and X.1 (d) of the Regulations of the Joint
Staff Pension Fund, the amount of the supplement to
be 5 per cent of the regular benefit;

have been due, the person entitled has lodged no claim and has
failed to submit instructions or has refused to accept payment.

1310 (Xlll). Pensionable remuneration of the
@taff

The General Assembly,
Having considered the annual report of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board21 and the report of
the Secretary-General on the pensionable remuneration
of the staff,2f
1. Decides that a comprehensive review of the system of benefits and their present and future adequacy,
of the methods by which pensionable remuneration
could be revised and of the financial and technical bases
of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund shall
be undertaken in the light of the observations and suggestions made on this subject in the Fifth Committee;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board and
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to appoint such experts as may be required to accomplish
this comprehensive review ;
"'Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 53, documents A/C.5/i(JJ and
Add.I.

6. Authorizes the Secretary-General to advance the
necessary funds to the Joint Staff Pension Fund for supplementary payments made under paragraph 5 above,
such advances to be repaid by the Fund after the next
meeting of the Joint Staff Pension Board;

7. Invites the attention of the member organizations
participating in the Joint Staff Pension Fund to the
decisions set out above.
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.
1311 (XIII). Report of the Economic and Social
Council ( chapter X)

The General Assembly
Takes note of chapter X of the report of the Economic
and Social Council.25
783rd plenary meeting,
10 December 1958.
'"Ibid., Thirteenth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/3848).

1334 (Xfil). Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1958

The Genera/, Assembly

1. Resolves that for the financial year 1958 the amount of $US55,062,850 appropriated by its resolution 1230
(XII) of 14 December 1957 be increased by $6,059,050 as follows:
Amount
appropriated
by resolution
1230 (XII)
Section

1.
2.
3.

Supplementary
appropriation

Revised
amount
of
appropriation

(US dollars)

A. UNITED NATIONS
Part I. Sessions of the Genera/, Assembly, the councils,
commissions and committees: special meetings and
conferences
Travel of representatives, members of commissions, and
committees ..................................... .
Special meetings and conferences .................... .
Board of Auditors ........................•...•.••.•

638,800
2,250,000
53,000

207,900

846,700

166,000

2,416,000

I

2,Y41,800

373,900

TOTAL, PART

53,000
3,315,700

===
