S/2022/484

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 June 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 13 June 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
The Security Council, in its resolution 2586 (2021), requested that I present a
review of the United Nations Mission to support the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA)
at least one month before the expiration of its mandate on 15 July 2022. The Mission,
established pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 2452 (2019), supports the
implementation of the Agreement on the City of Hudaydah and the ports of Hudaydah ,
Salif and Ra’s Isa, as set out in the Stockholm Agreement ( S/2018/1134, annex).
Since my previous review, submitted on 4 June 2021 (S/2021/528), UNMHA
stepped up its political engagement strategy in order to encourage the parties to the
Agreement to return to the Redeployment Coordination Committee and its joint
mechanisms following the suspension on 12 March 2020 by the Government of
Yemen of its participation in the Committee, which it has yet to resume. The Mission
continued its efforts to support implementation of the ceasefire, including by
expanding its monitoring reach and advancing mine action on the ground. Following
the unilateral withdrawal of the joint forces of the Government of Yemen from
Hudaydah on 12 November 2021 and the significant shift of the front line to the
southern districts of Hudaydah Governorate, achieving those objectives remains
essential to maintaining the stability of Hudaydah and, most vitally, maintaining the
functioning of the ports of Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa.
Since the withdrawal, UNMHA has responded with agility and realigned its
approach, priorities and footprint in response to the altered operational environment,
with a view to: (a) incrementally intensifying its monitoring of the ports and the
governorate-wide ceasefire; (b) restoring communication and liaison channels
between the parties; (c) re-establishing avenues for de-escalation; and (d) prioritizing
entry points for confidence-building and mine action, while working with the parties
to calibrate implementation of the Agreement in the altered context.
As a result of this major shift in the military landscape, which has been
amplified by broader developments, including the two-month-long nationwide truce
that commenced on 2 April 2022 and was then extended on 2 June for an additional
two months, along with the change in the Government of Yemen leadership on 7 April
2022, the Mission has recorded a marked decline in the number of ceasefire violations
and offensive operations across the governorate, with overall stability in Hudaydah
city. Those developments have led to an increase in civilian movement and a marked
shift away from a mainly military focus by local authorities on the ground.
As a result, space has opened for the Mission to work with the parties to support
confidence-building measures on both sides of the front line and take a lead role in

22-09202 (E)

200622

*2209202*

S/2022/484

coordinating mine action with stakeholders, including by providing technical
expertise to address significant explosive remnants of war contamination in
Hudaydah. Another benefit has been increased freedom of movement, which has
enabled the Mission to develop an expanded patrol plan and gain increased access to
areas in Hudaydah city that the local authorities had previously prevented it from
entering.
Military and political dynamics
From 3 June to 11 November 2021, there were active hostilities in 6 of the city’s
26 districts, including the eastern and southern outskirts of Hudaydah city. The city,
however, experienced some stability during that period in comparison with previous
months, with a decline in the level and frequency of hostilities. The conflict was
centred in the southern districts of Hudaydah Governorate, where fighting was
persistent, in particular at vulnerable points on the west coast highway.
During that period, political dynamics were dominated by the leader of the
National Resistance and recently appointed Deputy President of the President ial
Leadership Council, Brigadier General Tareq Saleh. Military forces on the west coast
were restructured, integrating components of the Government of Yemen joint forces,
as well as hundreds of Tihami fighters, under the command of Tareq Saleh. It was
reported that there were internal disputes in the joint forces during the integration,
sparking incidents of civil unrest and armed clashes in the southern districts of the
Governorate. In parallel, the Political Bureau of the National Resistance took steps t o
establish itself as a new entity in the country’s political arena.
This period also saw efforts by the Houthis (who also call themselves Ansar
Allah) to advance their military operations on other fronts outside of Hudaydah, in
particular in Ma’rib and Shabwah. Those efforts gave rise to a heightened “antiStockholm Agreement” sentiment among some in the Government of Yemen, who
issued unilateral statements in which they asserted that the Hudaydah Agreement
protected a status quo in the west that enabled the Houthis to deploy additional
personnel and resources on other fronts.
In the early hours of 12 November 2021, the Government of Yemen joint forces
unilaterally withdrew from their positions across large parts of Hudaydah
Governorate. The withdrawal was conducted without coordination with or the prior
knowledge of the United Nations. The joint forces redeployed to new positions in the
south of the governorate and reportedly reinforced fronts in Tai‘zz and the south of
Yemen. Houthi forces immediately took control of most of the vacated areas, from
Hudaydah city to Tuhayta’ district in the south of the governorate. The redeployment
led to a major shift of the front line, to the southern districts of the governorate, an
indication that military priorities had changed.
The unilateral withdrawal sparked reactions from certain components of the
joint forces, some of which expressed opposition to the move, while the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Government of Yemen indicated that the Government had not
been aware of the operation. On 15 November, the Coalition to Support Legitimacy
in Yemen, which is led by Saudi Arabia, issued a statement describing the withdrawal
as part of a military strategy to support other fronts. Meanwhile, the Houthis
reasserted control over the local administration in the vacated areas of Hudaydah
Governorate that they now occupy.
In the aftermath of the withdrawal, areas in the vicinity of the new front line and
southern districts saw high levels of fighting, including a significant increase in aerial
activity as the parties sought to consolidate their new front lines. Hostilities declined
noticeably in the period after the withdrawal; although new hotspots emerged, the
conflict was focused in the southern districts of Hays and Tuhayta’. Since the
2/8

22-09202

S/2022/484

withdrawal, Hudaydah city and the ports have seen a significant reduction in conflict.
However, notable incidents occurred in the first quarter of 2022. For example, on
several occasions, regional actors alleged that the Houthis had utilized the ports to
launch waterborne improvised explosive devices into the Red Sea. It was reported
that 24 air strikes targeting areas within and around Hudaydah city and its ports were
carried out on 20 January and 26 March in response.
Throughout the reporting period, ceasefire violations continued to have a
significant impact on the local population and residential areas, in particular during
the period following the withdrawal and spikes of escalation in Hudaydah city. An
estimated 106 civilians, of whom at least 3 were women and 32 were children, were
killed and another 244 were injured, among whom were 24 women and 47 children.
The dramatically shifted dynamics following the withdrawal also gave rise to
an urgent need to make progress in mine action in Hudaydah. Incidents involving
landmines and explosive remnants of war, including cluster munitions and improvised
explosive devices, soared because of the population’s increased access to areas that
were formerly under military control. Since the withdrawal of the joint forces on
12 November 2021 and up to and including 30 May 2022, the Mission recorded 69
incidents across the Governorate that were caused by those hazards, resulting in an
estimated 67 civilians killed, including 1 woman and 15 children, and another 74
injured, including 5 women and 22 children. Mine incidents are one of the most
significant risks to the protection of civilians.
UNMHA has closely monitored the impact of the nationwide truce mediated by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen. Since that truce went into
effect on 2 April 2022, there has been a noticeable shift in the situation, with a
cessation of large-scale attacks and offensive operations. By 8 June 2022, a total of
18 vessels carrying fuel had entered Hudaydah port, both during the lead -up to the
truce and after it went into effect, bringing noticeable relief to the population in
Hudaydah city and the surrounding areas, with fuel being readily accessible on the
public market. The Mission continues to closely coordinate with the Office of the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen with respect to the national
situation.
Redeployment Coordination Committee and its de-escalation mechanisms
To secure a sustained resumption of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee, the most significant implementation and coordination mechanism of the
Hudaydah Agreement, the Mission continued to focus on: (a) bringing the parties back
to dialogue through a proposed joint, face-to-face meeting as the most immediate
objective; and (b) addressing issues raised by the Government of Yemen with respect
to implementation of the Agreement, including to ensure that the Mission has the
ability to equally access the territory controlled by both sides in H udaydah.
Between July and October 2021, efforts to narrow the gap between the parties
and advance those objectives continued through several engagements both at the
military and political levels. Specifically, engagement efforts with both sides focused
on making progress towards agreement on three core issues: (a) the relocation of
UNMHA headquarters to the Hudaydah airport, which is equally accessible to both
sides; (b) the request to address the concerns of the Government of Yemen regarding
the killing of its liaison officer on the Hudaydah front line following the shooting
incident of 13 March 2020; and (c) the location for a joint meeting (sites in the region
and in Europe have been proposed).
With regard to the planned relocation of UNMHA headquarters, a subject that I
addressed in my previous review (S/2021/528), the Mission presented the parties with
an operational plan and a revised phased concept of operations for redeployment.
22-09202

3/8

S/2022/484

While both sides agreed in principle to what is set out in those documents, there were
certain areas of disagreement, in particular with regard to the sequencing of events.
To advance the discussion, UNMHA attempted to convene a joint meeting, but its
efforts were unsuccessful.
Progress in that regard halted following the withdrawal of the Government of
Yemen joint forces, and efforts shifted to immediate engagement with both parties
and other interlocutors in order to gain a thorough understanding of their new
positions following the withdrawal and of any implications for the Hudaydah
Agreement. While differing positions were presented, in particular by components of
the joint forces, the Mission, through its engagement with the Co -Chair of the
Redeployment Coordination Committee, was able to confirm that the Government
remained committed to the Stockholm Agreement. Similarly, engagements with the
Houthis revealed: (a) a firm commitment to the Hudaydah Agreement and its
implementation and to the Redeployment Coordination Comm ittee; (b) the
expectations that UNMHA and the United Nations country team should be heavily
involved in supporting humanitarian efforts, in particular mine action; and (c) a
commitment to increased cooperation and enhancing the Mission’s freedom of
movement.
The new Head of UNMHA, who took up his post on 23 January 2022, has built
on these efforts and focused on broadening consultation with the parties, influential
local and regional actors and the international community, with a view to engaging on
measures to further the implementation of the Agreement. Those consultations have
centred on proposals to re-establish liaison channels, with the support of UNMHA
teams co-located with each party on the ground that are focused on broadening local level participation, with a view to ensuring that community-related priorities and
concerns are taken into account. The channels will be used for de-escalation and
collaboration on mine action and to support confidence-building measures.
In parallel, the Head of Mission has sought to make progress towards an
agreement with regard to a proposal for the immediate establishment of an UNMHA
presence in Government-controlled territory south of the new front line, in order to
ensure that the Mission is equally accessible and can provide impartial assistance to
both parties for the full implementation of the Hudaydah Agreement, and to realign
the Mission’s footprint. Following the change in the leadership of the Government of
Yemen and the establishment of the Presidential Leadership Council on 7 April 2022,
the Head of Mission met and engaged with Council members, including the Deputy
President, Brigadier General Tareq Saleh. As a result of those engagements, the
Mission developed a concrete plan for strengthening its relationship with the
Government of Yemen, including through the establishment of a permanent UNMHA
presence in Mukha’, which is the joint forces’ centre of operations on the west coast.
Monitoring the ceasefire and maintaining civilian nature of the ports
The Mission continued to monitor the ceasefire throughout the reporting period.
In that regard, it has made sustained efforts to expand its reach, gain access to conflict affected areas and, in close coordination with Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Yemen, engage the parties at all levels to de-escalate fighting
where increased conflict occurred. Although the Mission’s freedom of movement has
remained subject to major constraints, stemming largely from the continued
suspension of the Redeployment Coordination Committee and the restrictions on
movement imposed by the Houthis, UNMHA has made some inroads on that score,
gaining increased access to the ports and enhancing its ability to reach locations
within Hudaydah city and the southern districts. That development has strengthened
the Mission’s monitoring and situational awareness in those areas and, thanks to its
increased presence, has served as a confidence-building measure.
4/8

22-09202

S/2022/484

At the outset of the reporting period, following negotia tions and the conclusion
of an agreement with the Government of Yemen, and after notifying the Houthis, the
Mission conducted road assessments in Government-controlled territory, running
from Hays to Khawkhah in the south of the governorate and along the w est coast
highway to Manzar district, south of Hudaydah city. Those road assessments marked
the first time that UNMHA had gained access to districts south of Hudaydah city since
its inception. The purpose of the assessments was to enhance the situational
awareness, mobility and operational radius of UNMHA and the United Nations
country team in areas that had been hard to reach. The road assessment missions
visited critical hotspots and enabled UNMHA to obtain a first-hand overview of the
former front line, including military positions, and record the changes that have
occurred in comparison to what the parties had reported in 2019.
Since the withdrawal of the joint forces, UNMHA has visited large parts of the
former front line and carried out three assessment missions to districts south of
Hudaydah city, including in the areas of Durayhimi, Jah and Tuhayta’. Those visits
enabled the Mission to assess the clearance of mines and explosive remnants of war
on main roads, the resumption of traffic resulting from the opening of the main route
to Sana’a, road conditions and the humanitarian situation.
To address the changed situation in Hudaydah, UNMHA developed an expanded
patrol plan designed to ensure its daily access to ports at all port installations and to
conflict-affected areas in the southern districts of Hudaydah. Following extended
negotiation, the Houthis have agreed to facilitate implementation of this plan in areas
under their control, with priority given to increased access to the ports. Patrolling t he
ports and supporting the parties to maintain the civilian character of the ports has
been a core priority for the Mission, in particular following escalations earlier in 2022
and allegations that the ports were being used for military purposes. In suppo rt of
landmine and explosive remnants of war surveys, UNMHA has conducted regular
patrols in contaminated locations in Hudaydah city that pose a high risk to the local
population. In addition, it has consistently sought to gain access to sites where
significant ceasefire incidents occurred, with a view to verifying and assessing the
impact on the ground.
The establishment of a permanent UNMHA presence in Mukha’ will further
enable it to gain access to conflict areas from the south.
Coordination with Stockholm Agreement stakeholders
UNMHA has continued to coordinate with United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes and other partners to provide all possible assistance and ensure a unified
understanding in support of the Hudaydah Agreement. As part of that effort, the
Mission has advocated in favour of humanitarian passage to areas of need and
supported the resolution of issues affecting the local population. UNMHA, working
through an established forum for regular exchange of informa tion with the United
Nations country team, was able to regularly provide the country team with situational
awareness briefings on the evolving dynamics on the ground, in particular in the
immediate aftermath of the withdrawal of the joint forces. In furthe rance of the
Hudaydah Agreement, the Mission, in close coordination with the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), supported the development of infrastructure related projects aimed at delivering peace dividends to rural communities on both
sides of the front line. However, implementation of those projects has stalled because
of the shifts in territorial control following the withdrawal of the joint forces.
UNMHA, through its mine action adviser, has assumed a lead mine action
coordination role in Hudaydah Governorate and established a mine action
coordination mechanism comprising the Yemen Executive Mine Action Centre,
22-09202

5/8

S/2022/484

UNDP, the United Nations Children’s Fund and other partners on the ground. This
mechanism is designed to provide targeted technical expertise to the Yemen Executive
Mine Action Centre and stakeholders and to develop and implement a coherent
strategic plan to support Yemen Executive Mine Action Centre activities, including
to promote rapid information-sharing on mine incidents, identify and survey mined
areas, strengthen mine education and awareness, with a focus on women and children,
and support safe delivery of humanitarian assistance. Since April 2022, UNMHA, in
coordination with UNDP and the Yemen Executive Mine Action Centre, has
conducted landmine and explosive remnants of war surveys in five suspected high risk areas and a plan is being developed to advance immediate measures to mark
identified mine fields and intensify explosive risk ordinance education. In parallel,
the Mission continues to conduct mine action advocacy through its high -level
engagements and social media platforms.
To promote local engagement with women, UNMHA completed a
comprehensive mapping of female activists and community-led organizations on both
sides of the front line, with a view to increasing women’s participation in the
implementation of the Agreement and locally led peace initiatives.
UNMHA has supported the United Nations project to address the deteriorating
condition of the floating storage and offloading vessel Safer, which is moored off the
coast of Hudaydah. To that end, the Mission has provided, inter alia, facilitation
support for the activities of the United Nations project team through the Mission’s
liaison system with local actors, as well as logistical and information support for the
project team during its initial visit to Hudaydah in February 2022. Since that time,
UNMHA and the Safer project team have continued to hold discussion, with a view
to the potential provision by the Mission of additional support for future operations.
Operations during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
While the Mission continued to operate under strict COVID-19 protocols, in
line with United Nations country team and World Health Organization guidance, the
impact of COVID-19 on UNMHA operations eased considerably in the reporting
period. Following a significant decrease in operating capacity at the height of the
pandemic in 2020 and in the first half of 2021, the Mission has increased its footprint,
with a particular emphasis on increasing the number of monitors to enable it to expand
the reach of its patrols. In addition, UNMHA continued to mainstream lessons learned
to ensure that best practices to mitigate risks are integrated into its operations.
More than 95 per cent of Mission staff (both international and national) have
been vaccinated against COVID-19 following the roll-out of the vaccine. In addition,
measures have been taken to ensure that the families of national staff and contractors
have access to the vaccine. As a result of those efforts, UNMHA can conduct its
operations with a significantly reduced risk to both staff and the local population.
Observations
Three radical shifts have altered the military and political landscape in the
Mission’s area of operations. The first was the withdrawal of the joint forces from
Hudaydah city and large parts of Hudaydah Governorate on 12 November 2021. The
second was the transfer of power from the former President, Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi
Mansour, and Vice-President of Yemen and the establishment of the Presidential
Leadership Council, which includes among its membership the two most influential
commanders on the west coast. The third was the implementation of the two -monthlong United Nations-brokered truce, which commenced on 2 April 2022 and was then
extended for an additional two months on 2 June, and related efforts to work towards
a sustained ceasefire. Those shifts are providing new opportunities for reducing
6/8

22-09202

S/2022/484

violence and advancing stability and confidence-building on the west coast in support
of the Special Envoy’s efforts to achieve a comprehensive and inclusive political
solution across Yemen. The most critical priorities are set out below.
Supporting the parties’ efforts to maintain the civilian nature of the ports of
Hudaydah, Salif and Ra’s Isa remains a critical priority for the Mission. Si nce June
2021, more than 70 per cent of humanitarian assistance for Yemen has entered through
the ports of Hudaydah, providing food and nutritional support to over 13 million men,
women and children in Yemen. In the same period, the ports of Hudaydah and S alif
have served as entry points for 745,983 tons of life-saving commodities and more
than 4.8 million tons of commercial cargo, including 3.8 million tons of food,
0.8 million tons of fuel and 211 tons of medical equipment and medical supplies.
While it is imperative that the ports remain protected from military action, events in
the first quarter of 2022 have shown that they remain vulnerable. The Mission’s
continued presence in Hudaydah city and its intensified monitoring of the ports
remain essential to preserving the lifeline that those ports provide. Following
agreement with the Houthis, UNMHA has progressively increased its monitoring of
the ports and will continue to engage at all levels to advance that objective and
ultimately deliver on its overarching mandate, by monitoring the ports daily,
unannounced and across all installations.
Adjusting the Mission’s footprint so that it can effectively respond to the
changed situation in Hudaydah and ensure the equal access of both parties remains an
even more critical priority in the current climate, in particular given that Government
forces are now situated more than 100 km south of Hudaydah city.
An UNMHA presence south of the front line is key to the Mission’s ability to
provide effective and impartial support to assist both parties in fully implementing
the Hudaydah Agreement. The agreed upon UNMHA presence in Mukha’ will provide
the Mission with a gateway to the southern districts of Hudaydah. UNMHA has
deployed the required capacity and put in place the logistics needed in that regard.
The Mission’s established and mature liaison system with the Houthi hierarchy
has been leveraged to advance critical objectives, including mine action, and serve as
a conduit, when needed, in support of partners and h umanitarian interventions on the
ground. The new permanent UNMHA presence in the south is vital to solidifying
those efforts across both sides and strengthening the Mission’s relations with the
Government and broader stakeholders on the west coast. Buildin g on those efforts, a
realigned liaison process between the parties, to be facilitated by UNMHA teams in
the north and south of Hudaydah Governorate, will be essential to advancing
objectives in the current climate, including de-escalation, mine action, confidencebuilding and providing support to unhindered and safe humanitarian access. A
realigned liaison process would also be of vital importance should the current truce
continue to evolve and become a more sustained ceasefire.
Following the withdrawal of the joint forces, mine incidents in which civilians,
including children and women, are injured and killed have become an almost weekly
occurrence because of the population’s increased access to areas that were formerly
under military control, where mined areas remain unmarked. On 5 April 2022,
UNMHA established a mine action coordination mechanism, and the Mission has
strived to coordinate the provision of expertise, mine surveys and mine awareness.
Those initiatives have helped reduce the risk of death or injury among the most
vulnerable in Houthi-controlled territory. Collective efforts to build on those
initiatives, including support for efforts in Government -controlled territory, will be
paramount to protecting the local population, in particular thos e who are most
vulnerable, and could serve as a model to advance mine action on other fronts. Mine

22-09202

7/8

S/2022/484

action coordination provides an opportunity for UNMHA to increase protection of the
civilian population and will remain a critical part of mandate delivery i n the future.
The ability of the Mission to deliver on its mandated tasks and its ultimate
support for effective ceasefire implementation will continue to hinge on the freedom
of movement afforded to it by both parties. Since the establishment of UNMHA,
limited freedom of movement has been one of the greatest challenges to the Mission’s
ability to operate effectively. Some progress has been made in that regard recently,
enabling the Mission to have a more systematic presence in the ports and locations
south of the city. However, it remains essential for UNMHA to make continued
progress on that front. Accordingly, the Mission will continue its advocacy efforts at
all levels to move this issue forward and will continue to count on the collective
support of the Security Council to advance this aim.
The conflict in Yemen continues to highlight the significant vulnerability of
women; they carry the heaviest burden in this conflict, especially in households in
communities that have suffered a total breakdown of their social cohesion and safety
networks. Recognizing the disproportionate impact of the conflict on women in
Hudaydah and across Yemen and the significant role that women play as agents of
change and campaigners for local level reconciliation, UNMHA will continue to
explore channels for strengthening local women’s engagement on both sides of the
shifted front line.
In the light of the devastating conflict in Yemen, now in its eighth year, the
United Nations-brokered truce, which was extended for an additional two months
from 2 June 2022, and the steps taken to build a more sustained ceasefire have brought
some hope that the suffering and the plight of the Yemeni people will be brought to
end. While the situation remains highly fragile, it is essential that UNMHA, in
lockstep with the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary -General for Yemen,
remains poised and ready to take advantage of entry points and opportunities for
confidence-building at the local level that might serve to reinforce broader peace
efforts.
Lastly, the Mission’s objectives of realigning its footprint and re -establishing a
liaison process between the parties, with both sides participating, will help them to
leverage these opportunities and will encourage participation by local actors,
including women and young people. The ultimate goal is to build confidence and
stability, thereby creating an enabling environment for the return of displaced persons
and advancing collaborative mine action, the opening of roads and the safe delive ry
of aid.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

8/8

22-09202
