S/PV.7141

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7141st meeting

Tuesday, 18 March 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Lucas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Luxembourg)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Ms. King
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Laro
Ms. Paik Ji-ah
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Manzi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (S/2014/158)

14-26803 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1426803*

S/PV.7141

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan
and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (S/2014/158)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Hervé
Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Phumzile
Mlambo-Ngcuka, Executive Director of the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment
of Women to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2014/158, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ladsous.
Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I thank you,
Madam President, for this opportunity to brief the
Security Council once again on the situation in South
Sudan and to present the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/158).
Little more than three years since the holding of
the referendum that led to the independence of South
Sudan, the country, it must be said, is in a tragic
situation marked by extreme violence. The number of
civilians who have been brutally killed or mistreated
is in the thousands, with at least 800,000 refugees and
displaced persons, 75,000 of whom are in camps of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
Despite the signing of a ceasefire agreement, it must be
reported that both parties continue to fight against one
another, in violation of that agreement. With the arrival
of the rainy season, we fear that the humanitarian

2/8

18/03/2014

situation, which is already extremely difficult, will
further deteriorate. Moreover, the initial investigatory
findings suggest that atrocities and grave violations of
human rights have been committed by both parties in
the course of the fighting. In that regard, I would like to
welcome the news of the establishment of a commission
of inquiry by the African Union.
This crisis is fundamentally a national political
crisis. The conflict has spread to the whole country.
No region has been spared. It is true that the violence
has mainly taken place in the states of Jonglei, Upper
Nile, Unity and Central Equatoria, but the political
polarization caused by the conflict now affects the
lives of all South Sudanese and the functioning of
Government throughout the country.
That is why the mediation process, led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
has focused on three priorities, namely, the cessation of
hostilities, the crisis in the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement (SPLM) and the national political dialogue.
As the Council knows and as I stated, the mediation
process conducted by the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development led to the signing, on 23 January, of
agreements between the Government of South Sudan
and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army
(SPLM/A) in Opposition on the cessation of hostilities
and on the status of detainees. Mediation under the
auspices of IGAD has also led to the release of 7 political
leaders of the SPLM, among the 11 who were arrested,
as members may recall, at the beginning of the political
crisis in December 2013.
During the second round of negotiations, the
parties agreed to resolve the political conflict at the root
of the internal dynamics of the SPLM. It is expected
that a meeting will be held between the eight members
of the SPLM party leadership — four allies of the
Party Chairman, President Salva Kiir, and four of his
opponents — to find a solution to the party’s internal
crisis. Those negotiations are to be conducted jointly
under the aegis of officials from the Ethiopian People’s
Revolutionary Democratic Front and the African
National Congress.
With a view to ensuring that that exercise in national
reconciliation includes all segments of society, this
week the mediation is convening a civil society forum
where the views of civil society can be considered in
determining the modalities that will allow the country
to move forward.

14-26803

18/03/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

(spoke in English)
A key demand of the opposition is the release of
all 11 political detainees. Seven of them were indeed
released on 29 January, but the remaining four remain
in detention, and trial proceedings against them
commenced on 11 March. The resolution of that issue
will be necessary to make meaningful progress in the
talks.
Furthermore, the gap between the parties on the
content, objective and sequencing of the broad-based
dialogue, as envisaged by IGAD, remains wide. While
agreeing to the conduct of a national conference, the
Government continues to insist that it be held within
the country, once a ceasefire has been agreed upon and
is effectively implemented. The forces opposing the
Government, both the SPLM/A in Opposition and the
released political leaders, on the other hand, demand the
immediate start of a broad-based dialogue, in addition
to the formation of an interim Government ahead of the
elections.
The security and humanitarian situation in South
Sudan will continue to deteriorate until the parties
engage fully in the political talks, until they respect the
cessation of hostilities and allow freedom of movement
for the United Nations and its partners. Both parties
continue to prioritize the pursuit of military gains over
talks towards a comprehensive political settlement. The
crisis has already affected the security of the region.
The longer it goes on, the more the chances for further
regional intervention will grow.
In that regard, the immediate establishment of the
monitoring and verification mechanism is essential. A
joint technical committee has been established, with a
functioning headquarters in Juba, and monitoring and
verification teams are being trained for deployment
to six sites in conflict areas. With a view to ensuring
effective and robust monitoring and verification, the
IGAD Heads of State decided on 13 March to deploy
by mid-April a robust protection and deterrent force
to provide security for the monitors. This week, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and UNMISS
are sending planners to Addis Ababa to work with
IGAD and other partners in developing the concept
of operations of the force and the modalities of its
cooperation with UNMISS. IGAD has indicated that it
will require the financial support of Member States to
deploy and sustain the force. We shall keep the Council
informed closely of further developments in that regard.

S/PV.7141

UNMISS was deployed to help South Sudan
transform into a democratic State and to assist its
leadership in delivering long-awaited dividends of
peace and independence to its citizens. Today, the
leadership stands divided, its security institutions are
fragmented and the society is victimized by communal
tensions. Under those conditions, and as discussed with
the Council, the initial raison d’être of UNMISS no
longer applies.
It is for that reason that the Secretary-General’s
report on South Sudan before the Council highlights
the need for a strategic shift in the posture of UNMISS.
Accordingly, we will temporarily put on hold activities
aimed at the extension of the authority of the State and
focus on five main priorities, all within a posture of
impartiality. They are the protection of civilians, the
facilitation of humanitarian assistance, human rights
monitoring and reporting, the prevention of further
intercommunal violence and support to the IGAD
process, as and when requested and within capabilities.
The troops of UNMISS are operating under a
Chapter VII mandate, which allows the use of force to
protect civilians and ensure the safety and security of
United Nations personnel and assets. The protection
priority will be for those sheltering at United Nations
compounds and other locations where they have sought
sanctuary, which the Mission will try to support by
facilitating humanitarian access. Subsequently, as
additional troops arrive and conditions are created for
the safe, voluntary return of the internally displaced
persons, upon a request from humanitarian partners,
the protection operation would spread further so
as to contribute to creating the conditions for safe
and voluntary returns. To implement that protection
mandate, UNMISS will, let me say again, uphold strict
impartiality, interacting with both sides as necessary,
to reach out and facilitate access to civilians at risk.
As far as other activities of UNMISS are concerned,
they will be guided by two cardinal principles. First,
UNMISS will not undertake any activity that could
enhance the capacity of either side to engage in military
or hostile operations, and, secondly, the Mission will
not participate in any activity with the parties that
could jeopardize the mediation process led by IGAD.
That new posture of the Mission will remain
in place until the parties finalize a comprehensive
political agreement. At that time, we shall conduct a
more comprehensive integrated review of the mandate,

14-268033/8

S/PV.7141

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

posture and capabilities of UNMISS and provide
further recommendations to the Security Council.
At this point, I need to raise a very serious
question. There has been a negative campaign against
UNMISS and its leadership in South Sudan, which
seems systematic and organized. There has been an
unacceptable vilification of the United Nations by some
local and national officials, with public demonstrations,
media articles and harassment of United Nations
personnel, including to the point of putting their lives
in danger. Under those conditions we will need to
consider further drawing down our staff and limiting
our activities to the absolute minimum related to
protection, human rights monitoring and support to
humanitarian assistance.
The incident of 7 March in Rumbek, during
which national authorities seized the weapons and
ammunitions of a United Nations contingent, has been
used to excite the negative climate regarding UNMISS.
I dispatched a high-level team last Wednesday to
investigate where mistakes were made in the shipping
of that equipment. We offered to the Government to
conduct a joint investigation, simply to prove our good
faith and provide full transparency. Unfortunately, that
offer was declined.
The situation is grave. World Food Programme
operations have been brought almost to a standstill,
despite the dire need for humanitarian assistance. Crossborder movements of humanitarian supplies — for
instance, food and seeds to plant the next crop — which
urgently need to be prepositioned before the rainy
season sets in, are being delayed. United Nations flights
are being searched, convoys stopped and personnel
harassed by South Sudan security across the country.
Organized demonstrations against the Mission have
increasingly begun to adopt a very aggressive tone.
The Mission’s freedom of movement has been severely
restricted, despite repeated démarches, including from
the Secretary-General to President Kiir.

18/03/2014

police units to UNMISS was certainly timely and
greatly contributed to saving human lives on the
ground. In the light of the obstructions to a political
resolution of the crisis, the Secretary-General is asking
the Security Council to raise the ceiling for UNMISS
military and police personnel for one year, outside
the inter-mission cooperation framework. The ceiling
would therefore increase from 7,000 to 12,500 soldiers
and four mobile police units.
The deployment of additional military personnel
would take place in three phases. The second phase
will be completed between now and the end of June,
with 2,800 soldiers deployed and three mobile police
units on the ground. The third phase provides for the
deployment of the two remaining infantry battalions
and will be realized once the Mission has re-evaluated
the situation and its own absorption capacity.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that the
people of South Sudan have suffered too much and for
far too long. Its sole wish is that the crisis end as quickly
as possible. It is now the duty of the political authorities
to stop the violence, and to do so immediately. They
must give orders to their respective forces to cease
military operations without delay, participate in a
significant and constructive manner in the talks that are
taking place in Addis Ababa and work towards building
a State that exercises its functions through democratic
institutions and transparent processes, accountable
for their acts before the representatives elected by the
people. The international community was a guarantor
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement that allowed
South Sudan to gain its independence. Now more than
ever, it is our duty to remind the South Sudanese parties
of the commitments they undertook therein.
The President (spoke
Mr. Ladsous for his briefing.

in

French):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka.

(spoke in French)

Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka: Two years ago, the
international community celebrated with the people
of South Sudan their independence, new Statehood
and entry into the United Nations. Today, South Sudan
has lost its peace, and the international community is
called upon to help the people of South Sudan restore
their hard-won peace, as violence by conflicting parties
is continuing. The situation has caused a serious
humanitarian crisis that has had a disproportionate
impact on women and girls.

Last December’s decision by the Security Council
to authorize the deployment of additional troops and

Since the current conflict began, in December,
I have met with women from civil society and

We very much hope that the situation changes soon,
as its continuation is not sustainable, nor indeed is it
acceptable. I would urge the Security Council and its
members to intervene on behalf of UNMISS, condemn
the campaign and request President Kiir to condemn it
himself immediately and issue instructions to national
and local authorities and SPLM cadres to stop it.

4/8

14-26803

18/03/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

representatives from South Sudan inside the country,
in Addis Ababa during the African Union Summit and
in New York this week in the course of the ongoing
session of the Commission on the Status of Women.
One month ago, I had an opportunity to visit Juba.
On my arrival, I was greeted by nearly 100 women
bearing the slogan “South Sudan Women for Peace”
and calling for peace and the support of UN-Women
and the United Nations. Those women came from all
parts of the country and from all sides of the conflict.
They are partners of UN-Women, as well as the
Security Council’s partners for peace and security in
South Sudan.
During my trip, I met with President Salva Kiir,
key Cabinet Ministers, including the Ministers for
Cabinet Affairs, Justice, Education and Finance. I also
met with donors, representatives of United Nations
agencies, the Speaker of Parliament, members of the
National Legislative Assembly, women leaders and
displaced women living in the United Nations Mission
in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) civilian
protection sites.

S/PV.7141

The current conflict has exacerbated the already
dire conditions of poverty and violence. In addition,
South Sudanese women experience the highest levels
of maternal mortality in the world. More than 8 in
10 women are illiterate. A recent United Nations study
found that as many as 40 per cent have been affected by
physical or sexual violence. What they are facing is a
matter of extreme urgency — of life and death.
The response from the international community has
been vastly insufficient thus far, with only 24 per cent
of the appeal funded. Our colleagues from the United
Nations and other humanitarian organizations have
worked extremely hard, with very limited resources.
I urge the Council to use its voice to ensure a
more immediate and decisive response in support of
the people of South Sudan and the agencies that are
bringing relief to the country. For our part, together
with our partners, such as UNMISS, we are doing our
best to make sure that the humanitarian response fully
takes into account the special needs of women and girls
and facilitates their full participation.

I was appalled at the conditions of those living in
the protection sites. The onset of the rainy season has
worsened an already critical situation. The density of
people in living spaces was 13 times the recommended
humanitarian minimum. Such conditions pose
significant health, protection and security risks to girls
and women. In those sites, there is only one latrine for
more than 200 people, and open sewers run through the
camp itself.

During my visit, I made a commitment to initiate
UN-Women’s humanitarian efforts in the Juba-based
UNMISS civilian protection sites, which support the
commendable efforts of our sister agencies. Our focus
is on providing safe spaces and psychosocial support,
as well as income generation and skills training. We are
also engaging in start-up literacy courses for adults and
exploring ways to support education so that children
and youth who are trapped in a camp do not miss out on
their education during the current crisis.

Women and girls have been exposed to heightened
levels of violence and crime, including sexual and
gender-based violence. Attacks are occurring both
inside the camp and outside the camp. When women
leave the camps to search for food for their families,
they are also exposed to violence. The population in
the camps I saw were overwhelmingly women and
children. The women I spoke with were often distressed
and traumatized.

The women I met in the protection sites shared
the impact of the current humanitarian crisis, their
concerns for the future and their demands for inclusion
in the peace negotiations. Their resilience is striking,
and so is their overwhelming desire for peace. They
have mobilized across divisions and built inclusive
coalitions. They are demanding a voice in the decisions
being made to resolve the crisis and rebuild their
country.

Data from one of the sites indicates that 58 per cent
of households are headed by women, and 34 per cent of
households are missing one or more family members.
Some women did not know where their children were;
some had husbands who were missing or who had been
killed. Many had experienced violence themselves. All
expressed a feeling of not knowing their own or their
family’s future and were struggling to survive.

I also engaged with the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) on the representation of women
in the peace talks. Today I commend Ambassador
Mesfin, the chief mediator for the IGAD peace talks,
for his efforts to encourage the inclusion of women.
I applaud the efforts of both sides to ensure women’s
participation. Each has had three women mediators.

14-268035/8

S/PV.7141

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

President Kiir has also expressed his commitment
and has asked UN-Women to support women’s
representation in Addis Ababa, in addition to women
who are in the delegations. However, much more remains
to be done. To be sustainable, negotiations must reach
beyond the confines of the two parties to the conflict.
The equal representation of women at the talks, a robust
role for civil society and gender expertise and analysis
are needed. UN-Women has offered a senior gender
adviser to the IGAD mediation team and looks forward
to supporting its efforts through that and other means
of support.
I also welcome the signing of the cessation of
hostilities agreement and its inclusion of rape as a
recognized violation. The commitments on paper will of
course need to be translated into action. The monitoring
and verification mechanism must be established and
deployed to enforce the ceasefire.
UN-Women is ready to offer any support necessary
to the IGAD efforts to increase the numbers of women
in monitoring and verification efforts, to link to civil
society efforts and to provide dedicated expertise on
the monitoring of sexual violence. I echo the voices of
women in South Sudan that urge both sides to return
to the peace table as a matter of urgency, to renew
their commitment to a ceasefire and to find a political
solution that allows the displaced to return home and for
South Sudanese to continue to build their new country.
Women told me of their desire to go back to their homes
and communities.
While negotiations are needed to resolve the
immediate political crisis, accountability and
reconciliation are equally needed to ensure that we
build a foundation for sustainable peace. I welcome
the efforts of the African Union in establishing a
commission of inquiry to investigate conflict-related
human rights violations in South Sudan and to make
recommendations on accountability and reconciliation.
I was particularly pleased by the announcement, last
week, of the appointment of five commissioners to
head that body, in particular the appointment of two
women commissioners, one of whom is the African
Union’s own Special Envoy for Women, Peace and
Security, Ms. Bineta Diop. That enables greater efforts
to be focused on ending impunity. UN-Women stands
ready to offer the support of a dedicated sexual and
gender crimes investigative expert to form part of the
Commission’s team. That is in line with the support we

6/8

18/03/2014

have provided to all United Nations commissions of
inquiry since 2009, largely with good impact.
The last time I addressed the Council was
last October (see S/PV.7044), during the Council’s
adoption of resolution 2122 (2013). In that and previous
resolutions, the Council made very significant promises
to women to address their needs and to deliver on
the commitment to women’s participation. Those
commitments are being tested now in places such as
the Central African Republic, Syria and South Sudan.
UN-Women benefits from the attention and support
that the Security Council provides as we take those
resolutions to the people who need them the most. That
includes briefings such as this one today and briefings
that the Council receives from envoys.
Together we can demonstrate to the women of
South Sudan, who continue on in the most desperate
of situations, that their courage and determination can
be matched by our own commitment to their cause,
through stronger support for the implementation of
all Security Council resolutions dedicated to women,
peace and security.
Once more, Madam President, I thank you for this
opportunity and I look forward to our discussion.
The President (spoke in French):
Ms. Mlambo-Ngcuka for her briefing.

I

thank

I now give the floor to the representative of South
Sudan.
Mr. Deng (South Sudan): As this is the first time that
my delegation addresses the Security Council during
your presidency, Madam President, permit me to begin
by congratulating you and your delegation on assuming
that responsibility for the month of March 2014 and by
wishing you every success in your leadership. I would
like to assure you of the full support and cooperation
of my delegation. I would also like to commend your
predecessor for her leadership of the Council for the
month of February, when I had the honour to exchange
views with her on the crisis situation in our country. I
want to assure her and the Council that the concerns
the Council asked her to share with me have been duly
conveyed to the authorities at home, and I have been
assured that they are being given serious consideration.
Permit me also to take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Hervé Ladsous, Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, and take note of his

14-26803

18/03/2014

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

statement on the operational challenges facing the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). I
also thank the Executive Director of UN-Women for
her reflections on her visit to South Sudan and on the
current humanitarian situation. I would like to assure
them both that the Government of South Sudan will
give their observations due consideration and attention,
with a view to improving cooperation as we jointly
engage in expediting recovery for the people of South
Sudan. My gratitude is also due to Ms. Hilde Johnson,
who has borne the brunt of the burdens of the UNMISS
responsibilities during these very trying times.
It is of course very painful to listen to the details
of the situation as just presented. We realize that all of
it is strongly motivated by the desire on the part of our
colleagues in the Secretariat and the Council to help
the people and the Government of South Sudan. As the
representative of South Sudan, my reaction cannot be
one of defensiveness, denial or discomfort in hearing
what has been said. All I would say, however, is that,
realizing that we have a mutual interest in addressing
the crisis and restoring peace, security and stability
for our people, we need to see the situation, when
possible, from both perspectives. It is in that light that
my statement will reflect my desire — our desire — to
bridge the differences and to try to work together in
addressing the crisis.
Despite the difficulty our relations have been
confronted with during the current crisis, the
Government of South Sudan continues to sincerely
appreciate and support the work that the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and other bodies within
the United Nations system continue to carry out in South
Sudan under extremely challenging circumstances.
It is to the trauma, fustrations, pain and anger
caused by the devastating violence that broke out on
15 December 2013 that much of the negative public
outcry against UNMISS should be attributed. It is
undeniable that, had UNMISS not opened its camps
to fleeing internally displaced persons, thousands
more would have lost their lives. It is also obvious that
the country has nothing to gain, and much to lose, in
alienating the United Nations and the international
community at large. I know personally that the
leadership of South Sudan, in particular President
Salva Kiir himself, remains deeply appreciative of the
role the United Nations is playing in the country and
is unwaveringly committed to continued cooperation
with the Organization.

S/PV.7141

Much appreciated also is the role played by
the community of international non-governmental
organizations in working with UNMISS to save lives.
We appreciate the development of the crisis-response
plan for South Sudan, which aims at continuing to
save lives and helping the people of South Sudan begin
the process of restoring peace and normalizing the
situation in the country. As a Government, it is indeed
our responsibility to do our utmost to cooperate closely
with those who are trying to help us alleviate the
suffering of our people.
The Government of South Sudan is doing its best,
under very difficult circumstances, to prove to its
people, and indeed to the international community, that
it wishes to see a speedy end to the current conflict
that is devastating our country. It is well known that
President Salva Kiir is strongly committed to peace,
unity and national reconciliation. The Government
remains committed to the talks of the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) with the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in
Opposition and has agreed to the deployment of the
IGAD regional force and the monitoring verification
mechanism to the affected areas. The SPLM/A in
Opposition, which currently controls Nassir, Malakal
and Akobo, has, regrettably, not accepted the regional
force or the monitoring verification mechanism.
In crisis there are also opportunities. Since the
process of negotiations takes time, South Sudan will
probably adopt a two-phased approach. The first phase
is to end the violence as soon as possible, along with, of
course, providing much needed humanitarian assistance.
The second phase will be a more in-depth discussion
of what went wrong and how the mistakes of the past
can be corrected so as to put the nation back on the
path of sustainable peace, development and prosperity,
which the people of South Sudan so badly need and
deserve. We are deeply grateful to regional leaders and
international partners that have assisted South Sudan
in having an opportunity to discuss differences and to
strategize on the way out of the crisis.
We cannot, of course, take lightly the anti-UNMISS
sentiment that is reflected in the demonstrations across
South Sudan and may indirectly have led to some
infractions of the status-of-forces agreement. I would
like to assure the Security Council that that is not the
policy of the Government of South Sudan. The Cabinet
discussions and decisions reflect the notion that the
United Nations is indeed a principal partner of South

14-268037/8

S/PV.7141

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Sudan and represents the goodwill of the international
community towards our country. Again, I speak not
only for the Government but also for the President
personally in saying that the Government intends to
exert all efforts to calm the situation and to contain
the hostile statements and demonstrations. Indeed, the
Government of South Sudan deeply regrets the loss of
life among humanitarian personnel as a direct result of
the heightened tension in the conflict.
As I have said, I make these remarks not only as a
representative of the Government but also as someone
who has engaged with the authorities on all such issues.
I note and should say that, during my visit to Juba for a
conference of ambassadors, I requested and was granted
permission by the President to visit the detainees, both
the four still in Juba and the seven in Nairobi. I gained
an insight of the extent to which, despite all the sharp
differences, there was a profound desire on all sides, at
least among the detainees to whom I talked, to end the
hostilites as rapidly as possible so as to restore peace,
unity and reconciliation.
Despite my appreciation for all that is said by the
United Nations about the situation in our country, we
appeal to the international community to appreciate not
only the democratic freedom of peaceful demonstrations
but also the frustration and anger inciting the people,
especially when certain actions take place that give
them the impression, however mistaken, that those
representing the United Nations may be sympathetic to,
and supportive of, the other side in the conflict. In saying
that, let me emphasize that the United Nations cannot
of course take sides. However, misunderstandings in a
crisis situation can generate hostile reactions. As I have

18/03/2014

said before, continuous engagement and constructive
dialogue are the way to correct such misunderstandings.
Much of my statement is the result of my engaging
with the authorities, be it with the leadership, the
President, the Vice-President or the relevant ministers.
In fact, earlier today, I spoke with both the President
and the Vice-President. My remarks are exactly those
that they asked me to convey to the Council.
As reflected in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2014/158), the Government of the Republic of
South Sudan is aware that the Security Council is
considering changes to the UNMISS mandate. Given
the reality of the conflict in South Sudan, it is of course
understandable that the Security Council will revise its
priorities and look into focusing the UNMISS mandate
on the protection of civilians, human rights and security
sector reform. We would, however, urge the Council to
continue with some of the other crucial elements aimed
at stabilizing the country, as originally envisaged. As I
have often said, South Sudan was rendered vulnerable
by a war that raged for half a century, and ironically has
now become even more vulnerable owing to the current
crisis. The country is more in need of international
support than ever before.
Finally, let me conclude by reiterating our
appreciation and support for the work of UNMISS, and
the United Nations in general, despite concerns on both
sides, which, I believe, can be addressed and resolved
through constructive dialogue.
The President (spoke in French): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

8/8

14-26803
