s

UNITED

NATIONS

Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
S/17130
25 April 1985
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ARABIC, CHINESE,
ENGLISH, FRENCH,
RUSSIAN, SPANISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL
At the 2576th meeting of the Security council, held on 25 April 1985, in
connection with the consideration of the item entitled "The situation between Iran
and Iraq", the President of the security council made the following statement:
"On behalf of the members of the Security Council, I am authorized to

make the following declaration:
'The members of the Security Council, seized with the continuing
conflict between Iran and Iraq, are appalled that chemical weapons have
been used against Iranian soldiers during the month of March 1985 in the
war between the two countries, as concluded in the report of the medical
specialist appointed by the Secretary-General (S/17127 and Add,l*),
'They recall the statement of 30 March 1984 by the President of the
Security Council on behalf of the members (S/16454). They strongly
condemn renewed use of chemical weapons in the conflict and any possible
future use of such weapons. They again urge the strict observance of the
Geneva Protocol of 1925, according to which the use in war of chemical
weapons is prohibited and has been justly condemned by the world
community.
'The members of the Council condemn all violations of international
humanitarian law and urge both parties to observe the generally
recognized principles and rules of international humanitarian law which
are applicable to armed conflicts and their obligations under
international conventions designed to prevent or alleviate the human
suffering of warfare. At the same time they urge a cessation of
hostilities and remain convinced that a prompt, comprehensive, just and
honourable settlement acceptable to both sides is essential and in the
interest of international peace and security.

*
85-12099

To be issued.
l734j (El

S/17130
EnqliAh
Page 2
'The members ot the Council express their tull appreciation and
support to the Secretary-General tor his report contained in document
S/17097. They are ready to issue at the appropriate moment an invitation
to both parties to take part in a renewed examination of all aspects of
the contlict. They call on the parties to co-operate with the Security
council and with the Secretary-General in their ettorts to restore peace
to the peoples ot Iran and Iraq.'"
