United Nations

S/PV.5858

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5858th meeting
Thursday, 20 March 2008, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Spatafora
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Arias
Mr. Kumalo
Sir John Sawers
Mr. Khalilzad
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia (S/2008/178)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-27826 (E)

*0827826*

S/PV.5858

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Somalia (S/2008/178)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Somalia and Uganda, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Butagira (Uganda) took the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Ahmedou Ould
Abdallah, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Somalia.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Ould Abdallah to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Mulet to take a seat at the Council
table.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2008/178, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Somalia.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
and Mr. Edmond Mulet, Assistant Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ould Abdallah.
Mr. Ould Abdallah: Last week, Somalia’s
Transitional Federal Government announced its
reconciliation
strategy,
which
involves
local
peacemaking within the country and talks with the
external opposition. That was widely welcomed. The
Government’s plan called for me to lead that process,
and I am fully committed to helping the various parties
come together for preliminary talks. I hope to
determine the timing and location of those discussions
soon.
In that connection, I would like to congratulate
the Somalis themselves, my fellow diplomats in charge
of Somalia and the members of the International
Contact Group. When I addressed the Security Council
last December, I called for an end to the costly 17 years
of a business-as-usual policy that has yet to bring
peace to the country. Since I made that speech, there
has been a new approach to addressing the conflict and
some indications of progress both inside and outside
the country.
In full agreement with President Yusuf, Prime
Minister Hussein has chosen a new and leaner Cabinet,
half of whose members come from outside the
parliament. It was welcomed both nationally and
internationally. In another sign of progress, the
Government moved to Mogadishu in January.
I spent three days in Somalia recently and held
joint discussions with the President, the Speaker and
the Prime Minister, who assured me of their
commitment to reconciliation. I addressed the
parliament, which is backing the peace initiative. I also
held meetings with the Alliance for the Re-Liberation
of Somalia. I am continuing to engage in regular
contacts with all sides. I visited Brussels, Cairo and

08-27826

S/PV.5858

Addis Ababa for consultations with Governments and
international organizations. I will soon go to other
countries, including the United Republic of Tanzania,
which is chairing the African Union.
Up until now, international attention has
essentially focused on Somalia’s failings. In order to
do justice to the people’s resilience and courage, I
broadened the agenda by organizing a conference of
Somali and international businesspeople in January, to
discuss how the private sector can help move the
country from a wartime to a peacetime economy.
Building on the success of that conference, I am
convening a larger follow-up summit later next week,
which will be opened by the Somali Prime Minister
and attended by international figures.
We need to recognize and encourage the efforts
made by Somalis themselves in terms of trade,
telecommunications and infrastructure. They are
encouraging developments, but they are not enough.
While more people are now talking about Somalia,
there is little action to stop the violence and
opportunism. I believe that Somalia remains a prisoner
of the past, never having been forgiven for the violent
actions carried out against the international community
in the 1990s. There is, it seems, either a reluctance to
go back there or a deliberate decision to punish all
Somalis, many of whom had not even been born when
the last international intervention occurred.
What is needed now is engagement by the
international community. I am not asking outside
countries to become active for moral or altruistic
reasons. They have a clearly mandated responsibility to
become involved in a country where there are
widespread violations of human rights and
humanitarian law. The concept of the responsibility to
protect was adopted at the 2005 World Summit of
leaders and later endorsed by the Security Council.
Indeed, today too much time is spent collecting
numbers and statistics concerning the suffering of the
Somali people. The real battle to be won is the battle to
be close to and to protect the victims of armed
violence, human rights abuses, drought and famine.
In my last speech I called for simultaneous action
on the political and security fronts. Those two tracks
are undoubtedly closely intertwined. Today we have
some progress on the political front with the
Government reconciliation plan. As the two tracks
should advance together and reinforce each other, there

08-27826

is a need for similar action on the security front. Acting
only on one of them — the political front — is like
limping along on one leg.
The Ugandan and Burundian troops are doing an
excellent job, which is clearly the responsibility of the
whole international community. They deserve our
thanks. Indeed, as indicated in the letter of
20 September 2007 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council, the security options
should not be limited only to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) or United Nations
troops. A strong interim multinational presence could
also be an option. This would involve the friends of
Somalia contributing political support, funds and
troops to stabilize the situation, preferably under a lead
country. I will continue my efforts in that direction.
More can be done to protect ships carrying
humanitarian assistance, as initiated by France last
December. Denmark has now taken over the same task
of escorting ships, and I understand that the
Netherlands has volunteered to continue the work. I
believe that such protection should be expanded into a
United Nations task force, the mission of which would
be to protect United Nations humanitarian supplies,
deter human smuggling, reduce piracy and support the
arms embargo. I have just engaged the services of a
retired general to prepare a paper on piracy off the
Somali coast.
For our work to be truly credible, we need to
deploy many more international staff inside the
country. That concerns the whole United Nations
country team — and, indeed, my office — and would
follow the example of the respected International
Committee of the Red Cross in Mogadishu. Being far
more visible inside the country would allow all of us to
closely engage with Somalis, identify their needs,
assist them and restore the reputation of the United
Nations. No other institution would benefit more from
such a move than the Security Council, which, in my
opinion, should visit Somalia this year.
To facilitate those efforts to improve stability and
encourage increased the numbers of international staff
in Somalia, we will need to accelerate security sector
reform and the training of the police force.
I see all the measures I have just mentioned as a
series of peacebuilding steps that can be undertaken in
the short term and would help stability.

3

S/PV.5858

The international community also needs to
address the question of impunity. Countless lives have
been lost and thousands forced from their homes.
Those responsible for the violence continue to profit
from the misery of others. We have appeased the
warlords, the extremists and the spoilers for too long
by wielding the carrot but not the stick. Those who
have carried out war crimes and crimes against
humanity need to be brought to account through the
International Criminal Court or another international or
local body. There could be a commission of inquiry to
look into the most serious crimes. The independent
expert could also be more involved in addressing the
issue of human rights.
Those solutions cannot all be imposed from
outside. Somalis themselves need to change their
approach. The “winner-takes-all” attitude, which leaves
no room for power-sharing, has destroyed the country
and its reputation. Compromise in negotiation, as
demonstrated in the Agreement of Al Hudaibiyya —
which is very important in Muslim countries —
between the Prophet Mohammed and the people of
Mecca, would benefit everyone. Reconciliation will
profit all, from businessman and farmers to politicians
and warlords.
Obviously the situation in Somalia is very
complex. Our analysis should therefore not be based on
partisan or inaccurate news reports, which are
particularly popular with computer users. To enable us
to make the right decisions, a level-headed analysis
should be based on firsthand information and expertise
on the issues and in the field. An ideological or
dogmatic approach should give way to continued
flexibility and due respect for the basic United Nations
principles of caring for populations and maintaining
peace.
In conclusion, Mr. President, in the past, your
country has helped Somalia, in particular with building
airports, which we still use today for travel to the
country. Under your presidency, it would be symbolic
if the whole Council could agree on concrete steps to
show the same compassion for Somalia and its people
as it has demonstrated elsewhere in Africa.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to Mr. Mulet.
Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): Allow me to thank
you, Mr. President, for having granted me this
opportunity to present to Council members the

4

recommendations of the fact-finding mission to
Somalia, which was led by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. The mission was dispatched
in response to the presidential statement of
19 December 2007 (S/PRST/2007/49), in which you
tasked the Secretariat to consider further support to the
African Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and to update
contingency planning for a possible United Nations
peacekeeping operation to succeed AMISOM.
The mission visited the region from 7 to
25 January 2008 and consulted the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, the African Union and
regional and Somali stakeholders. The mission visited
Merka, Baidoa and Kismayo and spent three days in
Mogadishu, where it met with the Prime Minister and
other Government Ministers and assessed the security
situation on the ground.
It was the first United Nations mission to visit
Kismayo since the resumption of armed conflict at the
start of the second half of 2006. In Mogadishu, the
team visited various districts of the capital to assess the
security situation.
In assessing possibilities for a United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Somalia, the fact-finding
mission conducted a comprehensive analysis of the
security situation, including threats and risks to the
security of United Nations personnel. In that regard, it
is important to note that the situation is not the same
throughout the country. Security conditions in the north
are relatively more stable than those in central and
southern Somalia. In those areas, the conflict remains
extremely complex, characterized by inextricable
alliances between clans, sub-clans and extremist
elements, fighting for control of political and economic
space, and temporary alliances of some groups, aimed
at forcing the withdrawal of the Ethiopian Armed
Forces from the country.
As the Transitional Federal Government (TFG)
has limited capacity to regulate economic activity and
maintain law and order, criminal and other armed
elements are free to control the collection of revenues
from customs, the port and commerce, as well as those
generated by and water and land distribution. In
addition, such groups engage in the trafficking of arms,
drugs and human beings. Political tensions within and
between clans are driven by control over resources. In
many cases such tensions are linked to the activities of

08-27826

S/PV.5858

criminal and insurgent elements but cannot be
separated from them.
(spoke in English)
The continued threat of abduction, kidnapping
and extortion limits the capacity of United Nations and
humanitarian agencies to operate in the country. At the
same time, the United Nations country team estimates
that the size of the population in need of humanitarian
aid is now approaching 2 million people.
The general security trend in Mogadishu appears
proportional to the level of military efforts undertaken
by the Ethiopian armed forces and the Transitional
Federal Government coalition to defeat the antiGovernment elements or conduct forcible disarmament.
Between June and September 2007, there was a sharp
increase in standoff attacks, improvised explosive
device incidents, mine attacks and assassinations, but a
marked decrease in armed clashes. Since September,
concerted efforts by the Ethiopian armed forces and the
actions of the TFG against anti-Government elements
within Mogadishu have increased. Of note is the fact
that, during the last quarter of 2007, attacks by antiGovernment elements became more coordinated and
began to be conducted during daylight hours.
Security incidents occur almost daily, mostly by
insurgents targeting TFG elements, as well as
Ethiopian and AMISOM personnel. On 8 and
9 February 2008, the United Nations common
compound was targeted by hand grenade and
improvised explosive device attacks. Threats against
the United Nations have also appeared on Islamist
websites.
In summary, while the Transitional Federal
Government has made some progress in its efforts to
start an inclusive and viable peace process by reaching
out to opposition groups, the security situation in many
parts of Somalia, particularly in the capital of
Mogadishu,
remains
complex,
volatile
and
unpredictable. Due to the complexity of the conflict,
shifting alliances and extremist activity, the situation in
south and central Somalia can change daily, making
any location that is safe one day potentially dangerous
the next.
I would now like to refer to the contingency plans
for a possible United Nations peacekeeping operation.
Possible future developments are presented in the
annex to the report before the Council under four

08-27826

scenarios, leading up to the possibility of deploying of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation. Based on
those scenarios, the Secretariat has further developed
contingency plans on the support that could be
provided by the international community to the peace
process in Somalia.
Scenario 1 generally represents the current
situation in Somalia. The TFG, with the support of
national and international partners, continues to work
on the development of an inclusive and viable political
process, including by initiating dialogue. Meanwhile,
the security situation remains volatile. Under this
scenario, the current security situation does not allow
for deployment of the United Nations Political Office
for Somalia (UNPOS) and United Nations country
team personnel in Mogadishu and the south and central
parts of the country. However, the Department of
Safety and Security (DSS), in consultation with the
designated official, could develop viable options for
security arrangements that would allow a limited
number of UNPOS staff and United Nations country
team members to relocate from Nairobi to Mogadishu
and other parts of south and central Somalia. The
relocation would enable the United Nations to
effectively facilitate the mediation efforts on the
ground and address critical gaps in humanitarian and
recovery assistance.
The Security Council may also consider the
establishment of a maritime task force, formalizing the
unilateral initiatives presently being undertaken by
individual Member States, either as a United Nations
task force or as an international task force under a
United
Nations
mandate.
This
contingency
arrangement would also provide medical, logistic and
in extremis support for United Nations personnel in
Somalia.
Scenario 2 envisages a measured improvement in
the political process, with at least a critical mass of the
opposition parties supporting political dialogue. Under
this scenario, while the security situation would still be
volatile, dialogue on security arrangements would have
commenced, creating the conditions necessary for
strengthening the United Nations presence in
Mogadishu and other areas of south and central
Somalia.
The objective under the contingency plan in this
scenario would be for the United Nations to further
enhance its political support to the peace process

5

S/PV.5858

through the relocation of UNPOS headquarters — in
addition to the limited number of personnel initially
deployed under scenario 1 — to Mogadishu in order to
facilitate political dialogue on the ground. Subject to
the presence required, security arrangements could take
considerable time to put in place and entail a major
investment in resources and physical protection
measures. This further assessment will be undertaken
by DSS during the month of April, in close
consultation with the Department of Political Affairs,
UNPOS, the Department of Field Support and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
Scenario 3 envisages a measured improvement in
both the political and security situations and the
acceptance and implementation by the major clans and
factions, including a critical mass of armed opposition
groups, of a code of conduct on the use of arms. While
that may be short of a full security agreement — a
ceasefire and/or the cessation of hostilities — it would
establish a minimum code of behaviour among the
armed groups, including a commitment not to attack
United Nations and humanitarian personnel. The
Ethiopian Government and the TFG would have
indicated readiness to consider a phased withdrawal of
Ethiopian troops from Mogadishu.
Under this scenario it is assumed that the political
dialogue between the Government and the opposition
would have commenced. But if the withdrawal of
Ethiopian troops is to be achieved under this
scenario — for example, before political and security
agreements have been finalized — an impartial
stabilization force formed by a coalition of willing
States of about 8,000 highly trained and capable
troops, together with police officers, would be
required.
Under this scenario there would still be clan
tensions, extremist elements and the potential for the
resumption of conflict. The stabilization force would
therefore require timely and accurate intelligence on
extremist and other groups. The force would also need
strong physical protection at its bases to defeat attacks
by mortars and rocket-propelled grenades. Troops
would need to apply tactical techniques to minimize
their vulnerability to roadside bombs and should
possess electronic countermeasures to defeat radiocontrolled explosive devices.
A United Nations force could not be tasked with
this role, as the vast majority of United Nations

6

peacekeeping troops do not possess the those
capabilities or training. As a result, the Security
Council could consider this option only if offers were
forthcoming from capable Member States ready to
form a coalition of the willing under a strong lead
nation, as proposed by Special Representative Ould
Abdallah. The combined coalition stabilization force
and AMISOM could allow the withdrawal of the
Ethiopian armed forces from Mogadishu.
In scenario 4, a viable political process would
have taken hold, involving players from southern and
central Somalia and “Puntland”, with the majority of
the parties agreeing to a political power-sharing
agreement and agreeing to renounce violence, lay
down arms and commit to support the implementation
of a Security Council mandate establishing an
integrated United Nations peacekeeping operation.
Although spoilers would still remain, they would have
been marginalized to the extent possible. Under this
scenario, the Ethiopian forces would have withdrawn
or would be in the process of doing so. A military
agreement would have been signed by the major clans
and factions outlining key security arrangements,
including a ceasefire.
A number of conditions would be required in
order to ensure the best chances of success for an
integrated United Nations peacekeeping mission in
Somalia under this scenario. The strategic assessment
and fact-finding missions further reviewed and refined
those conditions with their counterparts on the ground,
developing proposals for graduated interlinked
political, security and programmatic assistance aimed
at achieving an inclusive and stable political and
peacebuilding process in Somalia. The conditions
include the cessation of hostilities, agreement by all
major groups to allow for external monitoring, and an
inclusive political dialogue.
The United Nations military personnel who
would be required for a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia under this scenario number up to
27,000, with a possible police component of up to
1,500 police officers. Prior to the deployment of any
mission, an integrated mission-planning process should
be completed, including a comprehensive technical
assessment mission to Somalia. The mission would,
among other things, maintain a secure environment for
the functioning of a broadly accepted political
dispensation and assist in the development of security,
judicial and corrections institutions capable of ensuring

08-27826

S/PV.5858

the rule of law and the administrative and institutional
capacity necessary to provide basic and social services
to the population.
Finally, with regard to support for AMISOM, on
20 February this year we received a letter from
Chairperson Konaré of the African Union requesting
that the United Nations put in place a financial,
logistical and technical support package for AMISOM,
totalling some $817,500,000. The Secretariat is
reviewing that request to see how best the United
Nations could respond to it. In the meantime, we
encourage Member States to provide additional support
to the African Union and to troop-contributing
countries of AMISOM. In the meantime, the Secretariat
continues to provide 10 planners to the African Union
in Addis Ababa, who are supporting the planning for
AMISOM.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Mulet for his briefing.
I now call on the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Duale (Somalia): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to organize this
public debate in the Security Council on the situation
in Somalia. We also thank the Secretary-General and
his Special Representative for their dedication to and
tireless efforts for peace and stability in Somalia.
Similarly, we thank the Department of Political Affairs
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations. The
Assistant Secretary-General has provided the Council
with the details of a report that describes a very serious
situation. We thank the missions for their report.
As mentioned, the Security Council was first
seized of the situation in Somalia in early 1992. It
devoted much energy to the Somali crisis at that time
and adopted many resolutions. Those resolutions have
allowed for the deployment of two peacekeeping
operations and a multinational force.
However, after 16 years now, the Somali people
are asking to be given a second chance to resolve the
protracted tragedy in the country once and for all. We
believe that this moment is no to time to give up. The
people of Somalia are tired of civil war and suffering.
The leadership of the Transitional Federal Government
is committed to peace and national reconciliation, as
stated by the Special Representative, and there is now a
window of opportunity to be seized with the utmost
urgency.

08-27826

The United Nations, and the Security Council in
particular, could benefit from valuable lessons learned
from previous United Nations missions deployed in
zones of civil wars and conflicts. In some cases, the
United Nations has been able to send peacebuilding
and peacekeeping missions that have made positive
contributions to ending conflicts and building peace in
affected countries. We hope, therefore, that the
concerted action of the United Nations and the
international community will contribute to peace,
security and stabilization in Somalia after such a long
time.
The report of the Secretary-General and the interagency fact-finding mission to Somalia (S/2008/178)
clearly illustrates that the international community has
a clear and unambiguous responsibility towards the
people of Somalia. That responsibility obliges the
Security Council to look beyond the limitations that the
current security situation imposes and to reflect on a
possible outcome and come up with ideas as to what is
possible — within the constraints already mentioned in
the paper by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations — to help create circumstances in which
the United Nations can become more fully engaged.
We are asking for real engagement by the United
Nations and the Security Council.
The Security Council also has the responsibility
to protect and assist the legitimate Government in
Somalia as it does in other conflicts. Silence and lack
of action are not viable options at this time. The
international community in general, and the Security
Council in particular, must participate in a serious
manner in a peacebuilding process in Somalia. Such a
process would send the right message to the Somali
people, to subregional and regional organizations and
to international donors. It would help strengthen the
ongoing process of national reconciliation and thereby
help support the efforts of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia to achieve peace and
reconciliation in the country.
While the Somali Government is striving to bring
peace and stability to the country with limited
resources and assistance from the international
community, there are still a few elements — so-called
spoilers — that are doing the opposite. We have taken
note of the various ideas in the report, especially with
regard to the proposed contingency plans and scenarios
and the relocation of the United Nations agencies
inside Somalia, which we welcome.

7

S/PV.5858

In our view, the most viable, practical and
meaningful contingency plan and strategy is to adopt a
timely and properly integrated contingency plan
containing the four elements detailed in the report with
the utmost urgency.
We also believe it is time for United Nations
agencies to relocate inside Somalia, as was proposed,
as soon as possible. There are many major cities in the
country that can host and meet the security
requirements of the United Nations agencies currently
based in Nairobi. We wish also to emphasize the time
factor, the need for urgent action and the importance of
speeding up the whole process so that we avoid losing
momentum and opportunities.
In conclusion, we have ample reasons to be
positive and optimistic about the future as long as the
international community speaks in one voice on the
situation in Somalia under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We very much
hope that, this time, something tangible will come out
of the deliberations of the Security Council. We wish to
reiterate the firm commitment of my Government to do
everything possible to move forward an inclusive
dialogue and national reconciliation in the country in
as timely of a manner as possible, with the leadership
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The President (spoke in Russian): I now give the
floor to the representative of Uganda.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): The Ugandan delegation
is grateful to you, Mr. President, for affording us this
opportunity to take part in this important debate
concerning the situation in Somalia. I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on
Somalia, of 14 March 2008 (S/2008/178), which shows
his continued interest in the matter and determination
to find a solution to the problems plaguing Somalia.
The Security Council has been seized with the
situation in Somalia for some time now. Indeed,
resolution 1801 (2008), in its first preambular
paragraph, recalls previous resolutions and presidential
statements on this matter. In other words, the Council
has long determined that the situation in Somalia
constitutes and continues to constitute a threat to
international peace and security in the region. It is for
that reason that the Council authorized the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to take all
necessary measures, as appropriate for the maintenance
of international peace and security, in Somalia. That

8

mandate has been extended from time to time, the most
recent instance being under resolution 1801 (2008),
which extended the mandate for a further period of six
months.
I want to stress here, however, that the
maintenance of international peace and security is the
primary responsibility of the Security Council, under
Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Council may, however, as has been done under Chapter
VIII of the Charter, authorize a regional organization to
undertake that task on its behalf, and that is what it has
done with AMISOM.
Allow me to point out, however, that that
delegation of authority does not amount to abdication.
That is why Uganda and many other countries have
persistently called on the Security Council to assume
its responsibility in Somalia, because AMISOM has a
limited capacity thus far to handle the task. I would
like to thank the Security Council for appreciating the
important work that Ugandan forces have carried out in
Somalia and our sustained commitment to supporting
the efforts of AMISOM. I would like to reaffirm the
commitment of Uganda in that regard. Allow me to
now address two issues.
First, only Uganda and Burundi have deployed
troops in Somalia to date. Other countries that have
pledged troops have not fulfilled their pledges. We
have called on the international community to provide
the necessary logistical and financial support, and we
thank the countries that have helped, such as the
United States, but so far not much has been done. The
Security Council, in resolution 1801 (2008), has urged
Member States to provide financial resources,
personnel, equipment and services for the full
deployment of AMISOM. It is our belief, however, that
the Security Council should take a proactive lead in
that exercise by mobilizing the necessary resources,
including finances and other logistics.
Secondly, we have urged the Security Council to
take over from AMISOM. Sadly, nothing has been
done. We are now familiar with the phrase
“development of contingency plans for the possible
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation to succeed AMISOM”. That was set out in
resolution 1772 (2007); in the presidential statement of
19 December 2007 (S/PRST/2007/49); and now in
paragraph 6 of resolution 1801 (2008). The question is:
when shall we move from the realm of possibility to

08-27826

S/PV.5858

that of actuality? We note that from paragraph 40 of the
report of the Secretary-General that, this time around,
he is proposing, under one of the various scenarios, the
deployment of United Nations peacekeepers, subject to
certain conditions first being fulfilled. In fact, we think
that all the scenarios should be considered and not be
mutually exclusive. It is pertinent to quote
paragraph 40:
“Under scenario 4, a United Nations
peacekeeping operation for Somalia would be
deployed, provided that broad-based political and
security agreements are in place. Prior to the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation, political agreements reached and
security commitments made should include
general provisions on power-sharing, the layingdown of arms, respect for human rights,
facilitation of humanitarian assistance and the
development of governing institutions. A total
force of from 15 to 21 infantry battalions would
be required. The total number of United Nations
military could number up to 27,000, with a
possible police component of up to 1,500 police
officers.”
But it is apparent from that that no peacekeepers
will be deployed unless there is peace to keep in
Somalia in the first place. The conditions outlined are
important and everything should be done to achieve
them, but they should not be preconditions, in our
view. I have had occasion to tell the Security Council
and the General Assembly that in fact there may be
instances — and Somalia is one — when the Security
Council should engage in peacemaking as well. Indeed,
we are not persuaded by the reasoning as contained in
the report. If there was no peace to keep, why then did
the Security Council authorize AMISOM, which was in
fact acting on its behalf.

08-27826

It is not my wish to draw parallels here, but I
would like to cite the example of Darfur. No one can
say for sure that there is peace to keep in Darfur, and
yet the United Nations has authorized the deployment
of United Nations peacekeepers in Darfur. We should
avoid giving an impression of double standards.
To conclude, therefore, Uganda urges the
Security Council to do the following: to move quickly
to mobilize the international community, with the
United Nations taking the lead, to provide the
necessary logistical and financial support to AMISOM
to fully deploy in Somalia. In that regard, Uganda calls
on the Secretary-General to respond favourably to the
proposal by the Chairperson of the African Union, in
his letter of 20 February 2008, for a financial, logistical
and technical support package.
It is our conviction that the full deployment of
AMISOM will serve as a stabilization force pending
the arrival of United Nations peacekeepers; indeed, it
should be the nucleus for the planned United Nations
force.
Secondly, there is a need to finalize plans and
move quickly towards the deployment of the United
Nations peacekeeping force to take over from
AMISOM without preconditions.
Uganda is in Somalia for a good cause and we
shall stay the course, for we believe the international
community should not abandon Somalia.
The President (spoke in Russian): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the course of the
Council’s prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to informal consultations to continue our
discussion of the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

9
