General Assembly-Thirty-eighth Session

154

5. Appeals to Governments to provide the necessary
information to the Secretary-GeneraL as requestcd in paragraph 4 above.
104th plenary meeting
20 Decemher I 983

38/198.

International year for the mobilization of
financia( and technological resources to
increase food and agricultura( production in
Africa

The General Assemhly,
Recalling its rcsolution 37/246 of 21 December 1982 on
an international year for the mobilization of financia! and
technological resources for food and agriculture in Africa,
Noting with great alarm that, sincc the adoption of its
resolutions 35/69 of 5 Dccember 1980, 36/ 186 of 17
December 1981 and 37/246 of21 December 1982, the situation of food and agriculture in Africa has worsened, as
evidenccd by a drastic decline in self-reliance in food,
Recognizing the critica! financia! gap which seriously
hinders the growth of the agricultura! sector in African
countries,
Recognizing a/so that thc technological gap in Africa has
a direct relationship with declining agricultura! productivity, which is aggravated by natural factors such as drought
and dcsertification.
Recognizing further that ali countries of Africa should
implement, in accordancc with thcir national development
programmes and priorities, measures to increase substantially their national food and agriculture programmes
through, ínter afia, national, subregional and regional
measures, including economic and technical co-operation
among devcloping countries,
Recognizing the role of food-sector strategies, which
emerged from the World Food Council as a means for
interested developing countries to adopt an integrated
approach for increasing food production, improving consumption and attracting thc necessary additional intemational resources.
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the implications of declaring an intemational year for
the mobilization of financia) and technological resources
for food and agriculture in Africa, 165
l. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Notes that the year 1991 might be designated international year for the mobilization of financia! and technological resources to increase food and agricultura) production in Africa, bearing in mind the relevant criteria set
forth in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the relevant organs, organizations and bodies of thc
United Nations system, to elaborate action-oriented proposals in respect ofthe intemational year for the mobilization of financia) and technological resources to increase
food and agricultura! production in Africa and to report on
the implementation of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its fortieth session, through the Economic
and Social Council.
J04th plenary meeting
20 Decemher J983
165 A/38/277-E/ 1983/96.
166 AIS--11/14, annex l.

38/199.

Special measures for the social and economic development of Africa in the 1980s

The General Assemhly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-VI) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New Intcmational Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and intemational economic co-operation,
Recal/ing its resolution 35/56 of 5 December 1980, thc
annex to which contains the Intemational Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Reca/ling a/so its resolutions 35/64 of 5 December 1980
and 36/ l 80 of 17 Deccmber 1981, concerning the adoption of a wide range of special measures for the social and
economic development of Africa in the 1980s,
Recallingfurther section II of its resolution 36/ l 82 of 17
December 1981 and section II of its resolution 37 /212 of
20 December 1982, on thc Industrial Development Decade for Africa, and its resolutions 3 7/ 140 of 17 December
1982 on the Transport and Communications Decade in
Africa and 37/245 of21 December 1982 on the situation
of food and agriculture in Africa,
Reca/ling its resolution 3 7/ 139 of 17 December 1982, in
which it. inter afia, urged donor countries to provide substantial and sustained leve Is of resources for promoting the
accelerated development of African countries and the
effective implementation of the Lagos Plan of Action for
the lmplementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa, 166 and to contribute generously to the United Nations Trust Fund for African Development.
Deeply concerned at the negative effects of the current
world economic crisis on the economies of African countries and at the scourges that ravage the African continent,
which suffers mainly from structural problems, inter afia
the lowest leve) of literacy and training and rudimentary
structures in the field of health and housing, as well as the
extremely precarious living conditions of the largest number of refugees in the world,
Expressing its deep concern at the extreme gravity of the
food situation in Africa, which is aggravated by chronic
droughts, the continued decrease in food self-reliance and
the continued increase in volume of the imports of food
products in Africa, particularly in the Sudano-Sahelian
and southern regions, and noting that, among other factors, the rate of increase of food production in Africa continues to lag behind population growth,
Recognizing that Africa is the least industrialized region
in the world, that this specific situation necessitates the full
implementation ofthe objectives set out in the programme
for the Industrial Development Decade for Africa and
that. in order to reverse the existing situation, sustained
efforts by the international community are required to
achievc the effective implementation of the objectives of
the Decade,
Recognizing a/so that Africa is confronted with exceptionally serious economic and social problems, highlighted, inter aha, by the fact that it contains three quarters
ofthe least developed countries and half ofthe land-locked
countries of the world,
Convinced of the need for increased and sustained externa! resources on a predictable and continuous basis in

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

order to achieve in a co-ordinatcd manner the aims and
ojectives of the Lagos Plan of Action and the Final Act of
Lagos, 167
Recalling that there is a need for a thorough evaluation
of the implementation of special measures for the social
and economic development of Africa during the mid-term
review and appraisal of the Intemational Development
Strategy for the Third United Nations Development Decade,
Having considered the third report of the SecrctaryGeneral on special measures for thc social and economic
development of Africa in the 1980s, 168 which reviews special measures taken by the intcrnational community to
that end,
1. Takes note of the third report of thc SecretaryGeneral on special mcasures for the social and economic
development of Africa in the 1980s;
2. Expresses its regret that. dcspitc efforts undertaken
by the intemational community over the past thrcc years,
the resources thus far provided are not commensurate with
African development requirements;
3. Notes the disappointing results of the Fourth Biennial Pledging Conference for the United Nations Trust
Fund for African Development, held at Addis Ababa on 2
May 1983, particularly for projects aimed at assisting the
least developed countries of Africa: lh'I
4. Expresses its gratitude to ali countries which participated and made pledgcs during that conference;
5. Strongly urges ali donor countries to implement
their commitments, as contained in paragraphs 61 to 69 of
the Substantial New Programme of Action for the 1980s
for the Least Developed Countries, as adopted, 1711 so as to
achieve, in that regard, a substantial increase in resources
for the development of the least developed countries,
twenty-six of which are in Africa;
6. Wefcomes the steps taken by a number of donor
countries to increase their contributions to the United
Nations Development Programme, expresses its concern
at the decline in real terms in the United Nations Development Programme assistance given to the developing countries through the Unitcd Nations system, reflecting a general decrease in multilateral concessional assistance in real
terms, which adversely affects the country and regional
programmes for Africa ofthe Programme during the third
programming cycle, 1982-1986, and urges ali countries,
particularly those that have not done so, to increase their
annual contributions to the Programme:
7. A/so urges donor countries to provide substantial
and sustained levels of resources for promoting the accelerated development of African countries and the effective
implementation ofthe Lagos Plan of Action for the lmplementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic
Development of Africa and the Final Act of Lagos, and to
contribute generously to the United Nations Trust Fund
for African Development;
8. Recognizes the importan! contribution consultative
groups and round-table meetings can make to African
development by enhancing aid co-ordination and mobilizing additional resources and urges African and donor
countries to continue to co-operate to that end:
9. Invites ali international financia! institutions, particularly the World Bank, the lntemational Development
Association and the International Fund for Agricultura!
Development, to continue actively to consider increasing
substantially their development assistancc to Africa and to
16 7 /bid., annex 11.
168 A/38/275-E/1983/88.
169 /bid., para. 7.

155

treat the matter of making a special effort in support of
African economic and social development with the
urgency it requires;
1O. Ren<'ws its cal/ to the organs, organizations and
bodies ofthe United Nations system to examine measures
to increase the resources for the execution of the programmes for the Industrial Development Decade for Africa and
the Transport and Communications Decade in Africa and
to apply the special measures in a comprehensive and coordinated manner:
11. Stresses its deep concern at the gravity ofthe food
situation in Africa and the continuing decline in the food
self-reliance ratio, urgently calls upon the African countries to accord due priority to food and agricultura! production in their national and subregional plans and also
urges donor countries and international agencies to
increase their support for the implementation ofthe measures contained in the Lagos Plan of Action in the area of
food and agriculture:
12. Supports the urgent appeal launched by the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in
favour of the twenty-two African countries threatened by
food shortages and urges the international community to
respond generously to that appeal by providing the additional food aid and rehabilitation inputs required;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to convene, in cooperation with the Executive Secretary of the Economic
Commission for Africa. the Fifth Biennial Pledging Conference for the United Nations Trust Fund for African
Development and to take the necessary measures to ensure
its success and, in this regard. appeals to donor countries,
relevant United Nations organs, intemational and regional
financia! institutions and other interested public and prívate bodies to participate fully and contributr generously
to thc Fund;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continuc to allocate the necessary resources to the Economic Commission
for Africa, taking into account its role as the main economic and social development centre within the United
Nations system for the African region, in accordance with
General Assembly resolutions 32/ l 97 of 20 December
1977 and 33/202 of 29 January 1979;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General to submit to
the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session, through
the Economic and Social Council at its second regular session of 1984, a comprehensive report, prepared on a uniform basis and including figures, on the activities throughout the United Nations system in relation to Africa and on
the progress made in the implementation of the present
resolution.
104th plenary meeting
20 December 1983

38/200.

Immediate measures in favour of the developing countries

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and 3202 (S-Vl) of
1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New lntemational Economic Order. 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974. containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and intemational economic co-operation,
17 0 Report ()(/he Unued Natwns Conference on the Leas/ Deve/oped C()untries, Pans. 1-14 September 198/ (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.8~.1.8). par! one. sect. A.
