A /76/PV.71

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

71st plenary meeting

Tuesday, 10 May 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Manalo
(Philippines), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: I invite the attention of the
General Assembly to the resignation from the Human
Rights Council, as communicated by the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United
Nations in a letter to the President of the General
Assembly dated 7 April 2022, effective the same date.
As one vacancy has occurred in the Council, a new
member must be elected to fill the unexpired term of
the Russian Federation.
Before we proceed further, members will recall
that the General Assembly concluded its consideration
of sub-item (d) of agenda item 116 at its 19th plenary
meeting, on 14 October 2021. In order for the Assembly
to proceed today with the election of one member of
the Council to fill the vacancy, it will be necessary to
reopen the consideration of the sub-item.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to reopen consideration of sub-item (d) of
agenda item 116?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 116 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(d) Election of members of the Human Rights
Council
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
hold a by-election to elect a member of the Human
Rights Council.
Pursuant to resolution 60/251, of 15 March 2006,
and taking into account the fact that the vacancy
occurred from among the Eastern European States, the
new member should be elected from that region. The
new member shall be elected directly and individually,
by secret ballot, by the majority of the members of
the General Assembly. Accordingly, 97 votes would
constitute a majority in the General Assembly, which
has a membership of 193 States. The new member
thus elected shall be considered to be serving its first
term of office beginning on the date of election and
expiring on 31 December 2023, and, if re-elected for a
subsequent term of office beginning on 1 January 2024,
would then begin serving its second consecutive term
in the context of paragraph 7 of resolution 60/251, in
which the General Assembly decided that “members
of the Council … shall not be eligible for immediate
re-election after two consecutive terms”.
I should like to inform members that currently the
following States from among the Eastern European
States are represented on the Human Rights Council:
Armenia, Lithuania, Montenegro, Poland and Ukraine.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-34433 (E)

*2234433*

A/76/PV.71

The names of those five States should therefore not
appear on the ballot.
The election will be held in accordance with the
relevant rules of procedure of the General Assembly on
elections. For this election, rules 92 and 93 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly shall be applied,
and balloting shall continue until one candidate receives
the votes cast by the majority of the members of the
General Assembly. Accordingly, the election shall be
held by secret ballot.
Consistent with past practice, if, due to a tie vote,
it becomes necessary to determine one candidate that
will proceed to the next round of restricted balloting,
there will be a special restricted ballot limited to those
candidates that have obtained an equal number of votes.
May I take it that the General Assembly agrees
with the proposed way forward?
It was so decided.

10/05/2022

Representatives are requested to check the boxes
next to the name of the candidate printed on the ballot
paper or write the name of another eligible State on the
blank line. If the box next to the name printed on the
ballot paper is checked, the name of that State does not
need to be repeated on the blank line.
There should be no more than one checked box or
handwritten name for the vacant seat to be filled, as
indicated on the ballot paper.
A ballot will be declared invalid if it contains votes
for more than one eligible Member State from the Group
of Eastern European States. If a ballot paper contains
only a vote for a Member State that does not belong to
the Group of Eastern European States or for a Member
State from that region that is a current member of the
Council, the ballot paper will be declared invalid, since
the present election is a by-election for the one vacant
seat from the Eastern European Group.

The Acting President: For the one vacant seat for
Eastern European States, the Secretariat has received a
communication from one candidate, the Czech Republic.

Finally, if a ballot paper contains any notation other
than a vote in favour of an eligible Member State, those
notations will be disregarded.

I have also been informed by the Secretariat that
voluntary pledges and commitments, made by Member
States in accordance with paragraph 8 of resolution
60/251, were issued as official documents of the
seventy-sixth session.

At the invitation of the Acting President,
representatives of Bulgaria, Chile, Ghana, Jamaica,
Malaysia and New Zealand acted as tellers.

Before we begin the voting process, I would like to
remind members that pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of the voting.

The Acting President: In the interests of time,
the General Assembly will now proceed to consider
the other items announced in the Journal of the United
Nations while the ballots are being counted.

We shall now begin the voting process. Members
are requested to remain seated until all ballot papers
have been collected. The ballot papers will now be
distributed. I request representatives to use only those
ballot papers. In addition, ballot papers will only be
given to the representative seated directly behind the
country’s nameplate. The voting has thus begun.
In accordance with resolution 71/323 of 8 September
2017, the name of the State that has been communicated
to the Secretariat at least 48 hours prior to the election
today has been printed on the ballot paper for the one
regional group concerned. Also, an additional blank
line corresponding to the number of vacant seats to be
filled for the regional group has been provided on the
ballot paper for inscribing another State, as necessary.
2/4

A vote was taken by secret ballot.

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (d) of agenda
item 116.
Agenda item 20 (continued)
Sustainable development
Draft decision (A/76/L.53)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/76/L.53, entitled
“International meeting entitled ‘Stockholm+50:
a healthy planet for the prosperity of all — our
responsibility, our opportunity’”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft decision A/76/L.53?
22-34433

10/05/2022

Draft
decision
(decision 76/562).

A/76/PV.71

A/76/L.53

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 20.
Agenda item 56
Comprehensive review of the whole question of
peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
Report of the Special Political and
Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
(A/76/418/Add.1)
The Acting President: The positions of delegations
regarding the recommendation of the Fourth Committee
have been made clear in the Committee and are reflected
in the relevant official records. Therefore, if there is
no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I
shall take it that the General Assembly decides not to
discuss the report of the Committee that is before the
Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. I would like to remind
Member States that in paragraph 7 of decision 34/401,
the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
I would further like to remind delegations that, also
in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendation contained in the report of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee), I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take a decision in the same
manner as was done in the Committee, unless notified
otherwise in advance.
The General Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Special Political and

Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee) in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution. The Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The
draft
resolution
(resolution 76/263).

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 56?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 117 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(h) Appointment of members of the Board of
the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on
Sustainable Consumption and Production
Patterns
The Acting President: Members will recall that at
its 61st and 62nd plenary meetings, on 15 and 18 March
2022, respectively, the General Assembly appointed
Costa Rica, Croatia, Kuwait, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Senegal, Sweden and the United States of America
as members of the Board of the 10-Year Framework
of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and
Production Patterns for a term beginning on the date of
appointment and ending on 14 March 2024.
Members will also recall that one vacancy each from
the Eastern European States and the Latin American
and Caribbean States remains to be filled for a term of
office beginning on the date of appointment and ending
on 14 March 2024. In this regard, the Secretariat has
received the nomination of Brazil.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
appoint Brazil as a member of the Board of the 10-Year
Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption
and Production Patterns for a term beginning on 10 May
2022 and ending on 14 March 2024?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Members are reminded that
one vacancy from the Eastern European States remains
to be filled for a term of office beginning on the date of
appointment and ending on 14 March 2024.

22-344333/4

A/76/PV.71

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (h) of agenda
item 117.
The Acting President: I now wish to suspend the
meeting while the ballots for the election of a member
of the Human Rights Council are still being counted.
The meeting was suspended at 10.25 a.m. and
resumed at 10.35 a.m.
Agenda item 116 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(d) Election of members of the Human Rights
Council
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Group C — Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
180

4/4

10/05/2022

Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members voting:
Required absolute majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Czech Republic

0
180
23
157
97
157

Having obtained the required majority and the
largest number of votes of the members of the
General Assembly, the Czech Republic was elected
as a member of the Human Rights Council for a
term of office beginning 10 May 2022 and ending
on 31 December 2023.
The Acting President: I congratulate the Czech
Republic on having been elected a member of the
Human Rights Council.
The Assembly has thus concluded its consideration
of sub-item (d) of agenda item 116.
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

22-34433
