A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/141
16 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 110
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/599 and Corr.1)]
54/141. Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and full
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and the Platform for Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 52/100 of 12 December 1997, 52/231 of 4 June 1998 and 53/120 of 9 December
1998, in which it decided to convene a high-level plenary review as a special session of the General
Assembly, which will take place from 5 to 9 June 2000, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”,
Recalling also its resolutions 52/93 and 52/97 of 12 December 1997, 53/116, 53/117 and 53/118 of
9 December 1998, and bearing in mind its resolution 54/4 of 6 October 1999,
Stressing the importance of the special session and the need for strong, sustained political will and
commitment at the national, regional and international levels towards achieving equality between women
and men, and, in this regard, reaffirming that the full implementation of the Platform for Action of the Fourth
World Conference on Women1 requires further action by all,
Reaffirming its decision that the special session will be undertaken on the basis of and with full respect
for the Platform for Action and that there will be no renegotiation of the existing agreements contained
therein,

1

Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex II.
/...

A/RES/54/141
Page 2

Deeply convinced that the Beijing Declaration2 and the Platform for Action of the Fourth World
Conference on Women are important contributions to the advancement of women worldwide in the
achievement of gender equality and must be translated into effective action by all States, the United Nations
system and other organizations concerned, as well as by non-governmental organizations,
Recognizing that the responsibility for the implementation of the Platform for Action rests primarily at
the national level and that strengthened efforts are necessary in this respect, and reiterating that enhanced
international cooperation is essential for the effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and the
Platform for Action,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the follow-up to the Fourth
World Conference on Women and full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and the Platform for
Action;3
2. Commends the work of the Commission on the Status of Women acting as the preparatory
committee for the special session of the General Assembly entitled “Women 2000: gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century”;
3. Takes note of the ministerial communiqué adopted by the Economic and Social Council at the
high-level segment of its substantive session of 1999 on the theme “The role of employment and work in
poverty eradication: the empowerment and advancement of women”,4 as well as Council resolution 1999/55
of 30 July 1999 on integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to major United Nations
conferences and summits;
4. Welcomes the initiatives and actions taken by Governments, the United Nations system and other
international organizations as well as by non-governmental organizations and other actors of civil society
towards the accelerated implementation of the Beijing Declaration2 and the Platform for Action,1 and calls
upon them to implement effectively all the critical areas of concern of the Platform for Action by promoting
the empowerment of women at all levels and their full participation in all spheres of society through, inter
alia, an active and visible policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective at all levels;
5. Also welcomes the replies from Governments to the questionnaire on the implementation of the
Platform for Action,5 and once again invites Governments that have not yet done so to submit national
evaluations of the implementation of the Platform for Action, in accordance with Economic and Social
Council resolution 1999/50 of 29 July 1999;
6. Recognizes the importance attached to the regional and subregional monitoring of the global and
regional platforms for action by regional commissions and other subregional or regional structures, within

2

Ibid., annex I.

3

A/54/264.

4

A/54/3, chap. III, para. 23. For the final text, see Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/54/3/Rev.1).
5
See A/54/264, para. 49.
/...

A/RES/54/141
Page 3

their mandates, in consultation with Governments, and calls for the promotion of cooperation in that respect
among Governments and, where appropriate, national machineries of the same region;
7. Reaffirms that, in order to implement the Platform for Action, adequate mobilization of resources
at the national and international levels, as well as new and additional resources for the developing countries,
in particular those in Africa and the least developed countries, from all available funding mechanisms,
including multilateral, bilateral and private sources, will also be required;
8. Recognizes that implementation of the Platform for Action in the countries with economies in
transition requires continued national efforts and international cooperation and assistance, as indicated in
the Platform for Action;
9. Reaffirms that, in order to implement the Platform for Action, a reformulation of policies and
reallocation of resources may be needed, but that some policy changes may not necessarily have financial
implications;
10. Calls upon Member States to allocate adequate resources for the provision of data disaggregated
by sex and age for undertaking gender impact analysis and measuring progress in order to develop successful
national implementation strategies for the Platform for Action;
11. Encourages all entities of the United Nations system, including the programmes, funds and
specialized agencies, and the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women, to continue
their active involvement in the preparations for the special session and to participate at the highest level in
the special session, including through presentations on best practices, obstacles encountered and a vision for
the future to accelerate implementation of the Platform for Action and address new and emerging trends;
12. Welcomes the initiatives and activities of all regional commissions and other intergovernmental
organizations in support of the preparations for the special session;
13. Reiterates that participation in the special session should be at a high political level;
14. Invites Member States to include representatives of national machineries for the advancement of
women in their delegations to the preparatory committee and the special session;
15. Reiterates the decision that non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, as well as the non-governmental organizations that were accredited to the
Fourth World Conference on Women, may participate in the special session without creating a precedent for
future sessions of the General Assembly;6
16. Encourages Member States to include relevant actors of civil society, especially non-governmental
organizations and representatives of women’s organizations, in their national preparatory processes as well
as in their delegations to the preparatory committee and the special session;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its fifty-fifth session a report
on the special session;
6

See resolution 52/100, para. 46.
/...

A/RES/54/141
Page 4

18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session an item entitled
“Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women and of the special session of
the General Assembly entitled ‘Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century’”.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
