A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/195
9 March 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 100 (b)

RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/610/Add.2)]

49/195. Strengthening of the Centre for Human Rights of the Secretariat

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/135 of 15 December 1989, 45/180 of 21 December 1990, 46/111 and 46/118
of 17 December 1991, 47/127 of 18 December 1992 and 48/129 and 48/141 of 20 December 1993, and bearing
in mind all relevant resolutions of the Economic and Social Council and the Commission on Human Rights,
Considering that the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human rights and fundamental
freedoms is one of the basic purposes of the United Nations enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and a
priority activity of the Organization,
Bearing in mind that the Secretary-General, in his reports on the work
of the Organization for 1992 and 1994, stated that the Charter of the United Nations placed the promotion of
human rights as a priority objective, along with promoting development and preserving international peace and
security, 1/ and that the continuous increase in requests is increasing the workload of the Centre for Human
Rights of the Secretariat and placing ever greater demands on its resources, 2/
Taking into account that in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, the World Conference on
Human Rights, held at Vienna from 14 to 25 June 1993, concerned by the growing disparity between the

1/
100.
2/
95-77173

Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/47/1), para.

A/49/1, para. 387.
/...

A/RES/49/195
Page 2

activities of the Centre and the human, financial and other resources available to carry them out, and bearing in
mind the resources needed for other important United Nations programmes, requested the Secretary-General and
the General Assembly to take immediate steps to increase substantially the resources for the human rights
programme from within the existing and future regular budgets of the United Nations, and to take urgent steps to
seek increased extrabudgetary resources, 3/
Taking into account also the establishment of the post of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, as well as the mandate for the post, including its coordinating role and its overall supervision of
the Centre, as well as the request by the General Assembly in its resolution 48/141 for appropriate staff and
resources to enable the High Commissioner to fulfil his mandate,
Taking into account further the fact that the responsibilities of the High Commissioner include,
inter alia, engaging in a dialogue with all Governments in the implementation of his mandate with a view to the
promotion and protection of all human rights, and rationalizing, adapting, strengthening and streamlining the
United Nations machinery in the field of human rights with a view to improving its efficiency and effectiveness,
Noting that in the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, the World Conference on Human
Rights stressed the importance of strengthening the Centre, 4/
Noting also that the difficult financial situation of the Centre has created considerable obstacles to the
implementation of the various procedures and mechanisms and has negatively influenced the servicing by the
Secretariat of the human rights bodies concerned,
Noting with appreciation the measures already taken by the Assistant Secretary-General for Human
Rights, Head of the Centre for Human Rights, aimed at improving the administration and management of the
Centre,
Acknowledging that, while further improvement in the functioning and efficiency of the Centre, together
with a strong emphasis on good management practices, is needed in order to enable the Centre to cope with its
constantly increasing workload, good management practices need to be complemented by additional resources
commensurate with additional mandates,
Recalling that in its report to the Special Commission of the Economic and Social Council, 5/ the
Commission on Human Rights reaffirmed that the paramount consideration in the employment of staff at every
level was the need for the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity, and that it was convinced
that that was compatible with the principle of equitable geographical distribution, and bearing in mind Article
101, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 6/

3/

See A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III, sect. II, para. 9.

4/

Ibid., para. 13.

5/

E/CN.4/1988/85 and Corr.1, para. 30.

6/

A/49/595.
/...

A/RES/49/195
Page 3

Taking note also of the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, 7/
1.
Supports the efforts of the Secretary-General to enhance the role and importance of the Centre
for Human Rights of the Secretariat, under the overall supervision of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights;
2.
Requests the Secretary-General and Member States to ensure that appropriate additional
financial, material and personnel resources are provided in 1994-1995 from within the programme budget for the
biennium 1994-1995 8/ to enable the Centre and the High Commissioner to carry out, in full and on time, the
respective mandates assigned to them by the competent bodies dealing with human rights;
3.
Calls upon the Secretary-General to include in his submission for the proposed programme
budget for the biennium 1996-1997, giving due regard to development and other priority activities of the United
Nations, human and financial resources for United Nations human rights activities, adequate to respond to the
increase in mandated activities in order to enable the Centre and the High Commissioner to carry out their
respective mandates efficiently and effectively;
4.

Requests the Secretary-General to make available additional human and financial resources:

(a)
To the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights so as to enhance his ability to
coordinate effectively human rights promotion and protection activities throughout the United Nations system,
including the provision of advisory services and technical assistance;
(b)
To the Centre so as to strengthen its ability to discharge all its mandates, as well as its ability
to deal with administrative and budgetary matters, including the provision of advisory services;
(c)
To the High Commissioner and the Centre so as to enhance their ability to carry out mandated
operational activities and to coordinate efficiently with other relevant parts of the United Nations system on
logistical and administrative questions;
5.
Emphasizes that, while steps are being taken to improve the administrative efficiency of the
Centre, and while it has noted with appreciation the measures recently taken by the Assistant Secretary-General
for Human Rights, Head of the Centre for Human Rights, aimed at improving the management of the Centre,
further steps should be undertaken to analyse the present and future utilization of available human and financial
resources as well as additional measures to improve further the administrative efficiency and effectiveness of the
Centre, if required with appropriate technical assistance;

7/

A/49/36.

8/ Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-eighth Session, Supplement No. 6 (A/48/6/Rev.1); and
ibid., Supplement No. 6A (A/48/6/Rev.1/Add.1).
/...

A/RES/49/195
Page 4

6.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit an interim report to the Commission on Human
Rights at its fifty-first session and a final report to the General Assembly at its fiftieth session on the
strengthening of the Centre and on the measures taken to implement the present resolution.

94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994
