S/PV.8052

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8052nd meeting

Thursday, 21 September 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Negewo. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ethiopia)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Mahmoud
Mr. Lemoyne
Mr. Alfano
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Abdrakhmanov
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Wallström
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Burt
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 14 August 2017 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2017/710)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-29567 (E)
*1729567*

S/PV.8052

Threats to international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Threats to international peace and security
Letter dated 14 August 2017 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Iraq to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2017/710)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Ministers and other distinguished representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence today underscores the importance of the
subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representatives
of Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Canada, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Djibouti, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Iceland,
Iraq, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Peru, Poland,
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain and
Turkey to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2017/788, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, Croatia, the
Czech Republic, Djibouti, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Iraq, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Peru, Poland, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the
United States of America and Uruguay.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/710, which contains a letter dated
14 August 2017 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of
the Permanent Mission of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
2/14

21/09/2017

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2379 (2017).
I shall now give the floor to those members of
the Council who wish to make statements following
the voting.
Mr. Burt (United Kingdom): I am delighted to have
cast the United Kingdom’s vote in favour of resolution
2379 (2017), and I am grateful to Council members
for their unanimous support of this United Kingdomdrafted text.
One year after we gathered on the margins of the
seventy-first session of the General Assembly and
promised to do all we could to bring Da’esh to justice,
this resolution is a vital step towards achieving that
profoundly necessary goal. As we vote in the Chamber,
we think of the people who suffered so grievously at the
hands of Da’esh — of the innocents whose homelands
were overrun; of the millions who were forced to flee;
of the suffering inflicted on those who stayed, many of
whom were massacred or enslaved; of the civilians who
died in terrorist attacks in Europe and around the world;
and of the great cities that were occupied, pillaged and
subjected to rule by terror.
There can never be adequate recompense for
those who were forced to endure the wanton brutality
of Da’esh, and the dead will not be brought back. But
this resolution means that the international community
is united in our belief that there should at least be
accountability for those who perpetrated such wicked
acts. The United Nations will now help to gather
and preserve evidence of Da’esh’s crimes in Iraq. I
can announce that Britain will provide £1 million to
establish the United Nations investigative team that will
lead these efforts, and I would respectfully encourage
other countries to contribute.
Bringing Da’esh to justice will be possible
only because Iraq’s courageous armed forces have
liberated one city after another, including Mosul,
and advanced with the support of many nations,
17-29567

21/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security

including my own, that sent their war planes into action
against the terrorists, breaking Da’esh’s grip on about
three-quarters of the Iraqi territory it once occupied.
Wherever Da’esh has been driven back in Iraq, the
painstaking process of gathering evidence of its crimes
can now proceed under the auspices of the United
Nations. As the United Kingdom Commissioner for the
International Commission on Missing Persons, set up
after the conflict in former Yugoslavia, it is my hope
that some of this evidence will help Iraqi families learn
the fate and even find the remains of their loved ones,
especially in the terrible mass graves that dot the lands
which Da’esh occupied.
Britain has worked closely with the Government
of Iraq to bring forward this resolution, and we will
continue to work alongside the Government of Iraq and
our partners to implement it, ensuring that the United
Nations does everything possible to support domestic
and international efforts to hold Da’esh to account.
By striving for justice, we shall also be seeking to
heal the sectarian divides that Da’esh has exploited
and enflamed.
The defeat of Da’esh as a territorial entity is now
within sight, but its downfall will not in itself create
peace and stability. Lasting peace will be secured
only once we have helped Iraq to overcome sectarian
division and achieve the national unity that its people
deserve. Justice is an essential requirement for reaching
that goal, for it is justice that leads to reconciliation, and
reconciliation is the only way to protect a society — any
society — against extremists who would sow hatred
and division.
That is why we must help Iraq to strengthen its
justice system so as to ensure that all those who commit
atrocities in the conflict are brought to justice. In the
meantime, we know that bringing Da’esh to justice will
take time, demanding patience and resolve from us
all. But we owe it to those who have suffered to press
ahead, however long the road might be, remembering
that many offenders have been long prosecuted after
they committed their crimes, as those in Srebrenica
will remember.
I will close by reminding the Council of an old
phrase — the millstones of justice turn exceeding
slow, but they grind exceeding fine. Those millstones
have begun moving today. I want to thank my friend
the Foreign Minister and the Government of Iraq for
our work together in making resolution 2379 (2017) a

S/PV. 8052

reality. Let us make the consequences of the resolution
a reality, too, and bring some justice to those who have
suffered for too long.
The President: I now invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Italy
to take the floor.
Mr. Alfano (Italy): Today’s vote in the Security
Council is a very important step towards holding
Da’esh accountable for war crimes and crimes against
humanity. Inhumanity has been the essence of the
horrific offences perpetrated by Da’esh in its cruel
ideology. Few times in history have we seen such
deliberate and systematic acts of murder, kidnapping,
suicide bombing, sexual violence, enslavement, the
persecution of religious minorities and the destruction
of cultural heritage. I salute the courage of the Iraqi
people, who have made a huge sacrifice in the war
on terror. I also praise the commitment of the Iraqi
authorities to upholding the rule of law.
It was in the land of ancient Mesopotamia that the
world was given its first written laws — the Code of
Hammurabi. In the words of King Hammurabi, it was
intended “to destroy the wicked and the evil-doers so that
the strong should not harm the weak”. However, no one
today is seeking an eye for an eye or a tooth for a tooth,
as in the old days of Hammurabi. We voted in favour of
resolution 2379 (2017) to help achieve something more
difficult — to eradicate impunity by law alone. That is
accountability. At the same time, accountability means
rejecting the temptation of revenge and retribution — for
example, the risk of collective punishment outside of
the law for entire families associated with Da’esh. That
would not help our cause of upholding human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
We voted in favour of the resolution to support
our Iraqi partners in investigating the atrocious crimes
committed and in ensuring that the law is enforced
and violations sanctioned swiftly. In fact, the fear of
being caught is often a more powerful deterrent than
the punishment itself. Therefore, we stand with Iraq in
telling anyone who has joined or will join the cause of
terror that they will be identified and that there will be
serious consequences for their actions. We also stand
with the victims and their families, who have suffered
great pain and are still facing a huge humanitarian
crisis because of Da’esh.
For all these reasons, Italy will do everything
it can to ensure the success of the new investigative

17-295673/14

S/PV.8052

Threats to international peace and security

team and its special envoy. As Council members know,
Italy is a close partner of Iraq in the Global Coalition
against Da’esh. We have helped train around 30,000
Iraqi military and police personnel. Many of those
police officers have also been trained in anti-terrorism
investigation to guarantee security, public order and the
rule of law.
We are entering a new phase of cooperation with
Iraq. We are winning the war on terror militarily, but
where terrorism has left destruction and hatred we
cannot win the peace without a long-term commitment to
stabilization, inclusive political dialogue, reconciliation
and accountability in the eyes of the law. Therefore, I
believe that today’s resolution is an important decision
in the right direction, because the law is the pillar of
our societies. Anyone who subjects other humans to
acts that are less than human offends humankind and
spreads insecurity in our international order, founded
on the principle that respect for the law is the safeguard
of human rights and fundamental liberties.
The President: I now invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Sweden to take the floor.
Ms. Wallström (Sweden): The nightmare of Da’esh
rule is finally coming to an end for the millions of
Iraqis who have been affected. The victory over Da’esh
is a result of the commitment and resilience of the Iraqi
Government and people. I pay tribute to them and to
the Iraqi security forces for their determination. Yet,
in some ways the victory over Da’esh is — as we have
heard already — only the beginning of a long road
ahead. The hard work of healing the wounds of the
survivors, as well as the wounds left on Iraqi society,
must now begin.
Sweden welcomes today’s adoption of resolution
2379 (2017), which is an important first step towards
holding those responsible for the atrocities carried
out by Da’esh to account. We welcome the global
advocacy role of the Special Advisor established by this
resolution, as well as the fact that other Member States
can request assistance from the team with the approval
of the Security Council.
Today’s resolution is also an example of how
the Security Council can take action in support of
accountability. That is encouraging because to date,
advancing international justice in the Council has
sometimes been difficult, not least with respect to
Syria. Accountability is critical to delivering on the
Council’s aims of reconciliation and sustaining peace.
4/14

21/09/2017

Let me make three short points relating to the resolution
we have just adopted and its implementation.
First, Da’esh has shown an extraordinary cruelty
towards men, women and children. Today, I would like to
remind the Council that women and children have been
used as human shields, executed in public, abducted,
enslaved, raped, sold like livestock and exploited as
suicide bombers. We have heard heartbreaking stories
from Yazidis, as well as stories from people from other
religious groups, that testify to such barbaric acts.
We would like to convey our respect to a courageous
survivor of such acts, Ms. Nadia Murad, who is present
with us today.
Today’s action by the Council marks a victory
for the women who have survived Da’esh and who
have bravely spoken out to demand justice. I pay
tribute to their courage. We must now ensure that
the investigative team is equipped with the expertise
and resources necessary to gather evidence of crimes
against women and children, including sexual and
gender-based violence.
Secondly, Sweden was among the first countries to
prosecute suspected perpetrators of alleged war crimes
in Iraq and Syria.
Finally, we urge the Iraqi authorities to put in place
national legislation that ensures all perpetrators of
international crimes are tried in Iraq. All suspected war
crimes must be afforded due process, and investigated
in an impartial and fair way. That is essential for the
maintenance of the rule of law and crucial for the
reconciliation process. Sweden, which is unequivocally
opposed to the death penalty, expects that the
investigative team will not contribute to trials that may
lead to capital punishment, in line with United Nations
standards. We welcome the work of the United Nations
to support the Iraqi authorities’ efforts to reform their
justice sector, strengthen the rule of law and the respect
for human rights.
After the military defeat of Da’esh and the end
of its brutal rule, the Iraqi Government and the Iraqi
people must turn their attention to reconciliation and
building an Iraqi State that represents all Iraqis. That
will take political courage and cooperation. They can
rely on Sweden as a committed partner in the upcoming
critical phase.
The President: I now invite the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kazakhstan to take the floor.
17-29567

21/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security

Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I would like
to express our sincere gratitude for the determined
commitment demonstrated by the Governments of Iraq
and the United Kingdom, which resulted in today’s
unanimous adoption of the landmark resolution 2379
(2017). The resolution also indicates our wholehearted
endorsement of international efforts to combat the
common evil of terrorism that is confronting the entire
international community. The liberation of Mosul, the
last stronghold of Da’esh in Iraq, by Iraqi and coalition
forces was received in Kazakhstan and its entire region
with great satisfaction, as well as with deep sorrow
given the high price paid for the victory by the longsuffering Iraqi people.
The adoption of today’s resolution supporting the
launch of an investigative team to hold the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) accountable is an
important milestone in bringing the terrorist group to
justice for all of the atrocities committed in the territory
of Iraq and beyond. The collection analysis tools used
and the preservation of credible evidence will serve
to implement the principle of the inevitability of the
prosecution and punishment of members of Da’esh,
wherever they may be, for committing atrocious crimes
against humanity, war crimes, terrorism and crimes
against children, women and civilians. We also hold the
perpetrators responsible for the destruction of cultural
heritage sites. My delegation has high expectations of
the investigative team to be established pursuant to the
resolution. We join other Security Council members
in calling on all interested States to cooperate with
the team.
The adopted resolution contains the key elements
to effectively hold Da’esh to account and prosecute
the transnational terrorist group. The courage and
consolidation of Iraqi society required for the liberation
of Mosul commands our respect and confidence that
the Iraqi people will also be united in establishing
the rule of law in the country and in restoring all that
has been destroyed. The unfailing national solidarity
and sacrifice made for their country will also, over
time, return refugees to their homes, normalizing
life, rehabilitating victims of ISIL — among whom,
sadly, there are many families from our part of the
world — and promoting sustainable development. It
is obvious that only the elimination of socioeconomic
factors that give rise to terrorism will prevent the
return of chaos, suffering and irreparable loss among

S/PV. 8052

the civilian population and give them new hope for a
better future.
Kazakhstan is firmly convinced that a holistic and
systematic approach by the international community,
represented by the States Members of the United
Nations and international organizations could be a
solution to the complex phenomenon of international
terrorism. Over the course of its implementation, such a
strategy would ensure responsibility and accountability
for the entire chain of terrorist groups, including
organizers, ideologues, militants, their financiers and
other accomplices. It is very important for my country
and for all of Central Asia that we start work today in
order to prevent a spillover of terrorist activity to the
currently stable parts of our community. Kazakhstan,
which deeply believes in human dignity, justice and
freedom, joins other Member States in striving to uphold
and fully implement today’s resolution, in accordance
with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
Ms. Haley (United States of America): I would like
to thank you, Sir, for your leadership at this meeting.
The idea of seeking justice for victims of genocide,
crimes against humanity and other atrocity crimes had
its beginning in the years following the Second World
War. Nothing could replace the lives lost or make families
whole again, but by holding perpetrators to account for
their crimes, a measure of justice was provided to the
victims and the loved ones they left behind. By acting
here today, we cannot restore the lives, the dignity or
the innocence of the victims of crimes committed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), but by
taking such an important step towards holding ISIL
accountable for its many unspeakable crimes we can
achieve justice. In time, that will hopefully begin a
process of healing.
It may have taken a long time to get here, but today’s
resolution 2379 (2017) is a landmark. It is a major first
step towards addressing the death, suffering and injury
of the victims of crimes committed by ISIL in Iraq. The
crimes include genocide. The victims had been Yazidis,
Christians, Shia and Sunni Muslims and many, many
more. In the long history of human beings committing
atrocities against their fellow human beings, the crimes
of ISIL stand out, especially the brutality they have
inflicted on girls and women. Thousands of Yazidi
women and girls have been kidnapped by ISIL and then
bought and sold like animals. I have met with some of
those women. The victims of rape and sexual slavery

17-295675/14

S/PV.8052

Threats to international peace and security

are understandably reluctant to speak out publicly, but
thanks to what we do here today, the world will still
hear about their suffering.
The investigative team created by today’s resolution
is part of a comprehensive approach to holding ISIL
accountable for its atrocities against the Iraqi people.
Working with Iraq and other partners, it will expose the
depravity of ISIS and provide an indispensable record
of the scope and scale of its criminality. With victory
over ISIS in Iraq on the horizon, that record will play
an important role as Iraqis attempt to reconcile this
painful period in their national life. The team will help
to identify victims and perpetrators and ensure that
the perpetrators face the justice they so richly deserve,
while giving victims their day in court. Through that,
we hope and pray that the Iraqi people can begin the
process of returning to peaceful, normal, everyday lives.
The United States was honoured to work alongside
its Iraqi and British partners over the past year to make
resolution 2379 (2017) a reality. We thank them for their
dedication in seeing it through. While today’s resolution
is specifically about the transnational threat that ISIS
represents, we support accountability for all violations
of international humanitarian law and for human rights
violations and abuses. Above all, we thank the Iraqi
Government and Prime Minister Al-Abadi for taking
an important first step towards demonstrating that
justice is never beyond reach, no victim is voiceless and
no perpetrator is above the law.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We believe firmly that the crimes of the
terrorists of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) should not go unpunished, regardless of where
they are committed. We welcome the successes of the
Iraqi armed forces in their fight against ISIL and in
restoring their country’s sovereignty. We are ready to
continue supporting the efforts of the Iraqi leadership
on both the political and practical fronts.
The threat of ISIL should be eradicated wherever
its terrorists wreak havoc, and we must act as a united
front in doing so. Resolution 2379 (2017), which we just
adopted, notes the global nature of that threat and the
unity of Security Council members in combating it. But
our efforts will succeed only on a solid foundation of
international law that does not disregard the sovereignty
of States that have been victim to terrorist attacks but
rather cooperates with them. The Russian aerospace
forces’ operation in Syria is based on such principles,
6/14

21/09/2017

which is key to their effectiveness. We would like to
emphasize once again the importance of strengthening
States’ coordination and cooperation in the effort to
destroy ISIL, Jabhat Al-Nusra and terrorist groups
linked to them, and without any appearance of double
standards, including in the implementation of justice.
As we understand it, today’s resolution, which
provides for the creation of a team to collect, preserve
and store evidence of crimes committed by ISIL
terrorists in Iraq, was discussed in detail with the
country’s authorities, and we commend that approach.
Regrettably, that has not always been the case, as when,
for example, the initiators of an illegitimate General
Assembly resolution on a similar structure in Syria did
not even consider the necessity of consulting Damascus.
We once again urge the Secretary-General and Member
States to refrain from supporting the so-called
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011, which is a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations.
In the current circumstances, which include
putting military pressure on ISIL, developing national
criminal justice mechanisms based on universally
recognized standards is a priority. Resolution 2379
(2017) demands that we ensure that there is not the
smallest possibility that terrorists can avoid facing
justice. It is important that all of their crimes, whatever
category they fall into — including first and foremost
terrorists’ own acts — be punished with no possibility
for impunity and in accordance with the seriousness
of the crime. However, the primary responsibility
for bringing terrorists to justice still belongs to the
Governments of the States that are affected by such
evil acts. In our view, today’s resolution in no way
undermines that tenet and creates no new precedents.
We are considering it in a context of criminal rather
than international humanitarian law. We welcome
the Government of Iraq’s intention to strengthen its
national criminal justice system and hope that the team
set up by the Council will contribute to that endeavour,
while acting impartially, transparently and fully in
keeping with international law, including the Charter
of the United Nations.
Mr. Lemoyne (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Ethiopian presidency for giving
the Security Council this opportunity to reaffirm
17-29567

21/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security

S/PV. 8052

its determination to fight terrorism and support the
Iraqi people and authorities on their path to peace,
stability and unity. And I would like to welcome the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Iraq, who is here with
us this morning.

the investigative team’s terms of reference, and we urge
it to work in close coordination with the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, the relevant international
criminal justice mechanisms and the competent
national jurisdictions.

On Tuesday, in his address to the General Assembly
(see A/72/PV.4), President Emmanuel Macron brought
up the subject of the duty we have to speak for those
who go unheard and whose voices are forgotten. For
example, we have all heard the voice of Nadia Murad,
the Yazidi victim who is seeking justice through the
establishment of an investigation mechanism, and I
would like to thank those who made sure that we heard
her voice in the Assembly (see A/71/PV.3).

Justice and the rule of law are a corollary of lasting
peace and stability in Iraq. This new chapter in Iraq will
be possible only with the resolute commitment of all
to work together on issues of governance and national
reconciliation so as to ensure that everyone has a place
in the Iraq of tomorrow. That is needed if Da’esh is to
be fully defeated, and until that long-awaited moment,
today’s vote is a useful and valuable symbol.

Eradicating Da’esh and stabilizing Iraq are major
priorities for France, which will continue to support
the reconstruction of Iraq with the goal of achieving a
lasting peace that can reconcile every element of Iraqi
society, as Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, France’s Minister
for Foreign Affairs, committed to in Baghdad. The
Council’s unanimous adoption today of resolution 2379
(2017), proposed by the United Kingdom in response
to a request from the Iraqi Prime Minister, will enable
the United Nations to support the Iraqi authorities in
collecting evidence of serious crimes committed by
Da’esh through the deployment of an investigative
team. Such crimes are intolerable and ineradicable, and
the proof of that must not be erased with the passing
of time. Nor must they go unpunished. We owe that
to the far too high number of victims of this terrorist
organization in Iraq.
We welcome today’s resolution, which represents
a concrete contribution to justice on the part of the
Security Council. It is a major first step and a sign
that the consolidation of the rule of law in Iraq is
under way, with France’s full support. In that regard,
France reiterates its support to the Iraqi Government in
combating impunity for any crime, whoever commits
it, within a framework of independent and impartial
judicial institutions and with all the necessary
procedural safeguards for human rights.
The Council is aware of France’s commitment to
respect for human rights and its unconditional rejection
of the death penalty. It will be essential to ensure
that the evidence collected by the United Nations
investigative team is used in procedures that conform to
those requirements, in accordance with United Nations
practices. Those requirements should be reflected in

Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like begin by
thanking the United Kingdom for initiating today’s
resolution 2379 (2017) and for taking a number of
suggestions on board, including from my delegation.
As the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
continues to lose territory, there are many challenges
that the Government of Iraq has to tackle to ensure
post-conflict restoration. They include rebuilding
vitally important infrastructure, carrying out national
reconciliation, facilitating the safe and voluntary return
of internally displaced persons and ensuring respect for
human rights, fundamental freedoms and international
humanitarian law. Bringing to justice those who made
the country and its people suffer from acts of terrorism
is also high on the list of priorities. Therefore, this
resolution is a welcome and much anticipated initiative
which gives Iraq the necessary support in addressing
this issue with the aid of the United Nations investigative
team. It will put at Iraq’s disposal available international
and regional mechanisms for judicial cooperation and
technical assistance in investigating terrorist crimes and
gathering credible evidence quickly before perpetrators
can cover up their wrongdoings. It will facilitate and
streamline the international community’s efforts in
assisting the country with strengthening the capacity of
its law enforcement and judicial bodies.
I should like to raise a few points with regard to the
implementation of the present resolution.
First, the team should cooperate fully with the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and international
and regional governmental and non-governmental
organizations that can assist in collecting evidence and
testimony on the crimes committed in Iraq by ISIL.

17-295677/14

S/PV.8052

Threats to international peace and security

Secondly, unprecedented numbers of foreign
terrorist fighters among ISIL’s ranks make the crimes
perpetrated by them transnational. Therefore, for the
sake of efficiently apprehending and prosecuting those
terrorists, we encourage the Government of Iraq to
join efforts with other States and share the evidence
collected by the team without any limits or reservations.
Thirdly, these pieces of evidence have to be
admissible not only to the Iraqi national courts, but
also to the courts of other States upon their request.
For this purpose, the team has to conduct its work in
accordance with universally recognized standards for
collecting evidence.
Last but not least, it is imperative that all those
responsible for committing crimes against the civilian
population, in particular violations of international
humanitarian law and abuses of human rights, be held
accountable without any preconditions. Victims of
those crimes deserve nothing less. In this regard, we
call on the Iraqi authorities to meticulously observe due
process and uphold human rights, in particular the right
to a fair trial, as there can be no place for victor’s justice.
Finally, Ukraine stands ready to further contribute
to the cost of accountability for terrorist crimes
committed by ISIL.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes the Security Council’s unanimous adoption
of resolution 2379 (2017).
The Iraqi Government, under the leadership
of Prime Minister Al Abadi, has made substantial
progress in advancing institutional reform of the
Government, promoting national reconciliation, easing
the humanitarian situation and fostering economic
development. China commends those efforts. We hope
that Iraq will achieve national security and stability at
an early date and that the Iraqi people will soon lead a
peaceful and stable life.
The terrorist acts in Iraq committed by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) seriously threaten the
peace and security of Iraq, as well as those of the region
and the world. China commends the Iraqi Government
for its unrelenting efforts in combatting ISIL and the
progress it has achieved in combatting terrorism. China
supports Iraq in its efforts to bring ISIL members to
justice, in accordance with its domestic laws, and
supports the international community in providing
assistance to the Iraqi Government at its request.
8/14

21/09/2017

Resolution 2379 (2017) specifies the principle
of respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
independence and unity of Iraq, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations; establishes an investigative team to assist
the Iraqi Government in collecting evidence of ISIL’s
crimes committed in Iraq; and emphasizes that the
investigative team shall respect the sovereignty and
jurisprudence of Iraq and carry out its responsibilities
strictly in accordance with the mandate requested by
Iraq, and that the Iraqi Government must agree to the
use of evidence.
The Iraqi Government recognizes the content of
the resolution and China supports this. We hope that the
resolution will be implemented effectively and play a
constructive role in strengthening the capacity-building
of the Iraqi Government in seeking accountability for
terrorist organizations in Iraq.
The international counter-terrorism situation
remains serious. Terrorist organizations, such as
ISIL and Al-Qaida, are conducting terrorist activities
and spreading extremist ideologies in many different
ways. The international community should strengthen
cooperation, support all counter-terrorism efforts,
including those of Iraq, unify standards, adopt effective
measures, and resolutely combat terrorist organizations
listed by the Security Council.
China shall continue to work with Iraq and all
other countries in a joint effort to make new progress in
international counter-terrorism cooperation.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and
the delegation of the United Kingdom for its work in
promting the adoption of resolution 2379 (2017). We
also extend our greetings to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Iraq, Mr. Ibrahim Abdulkarim
Al-Jafari, who is joining us at today’s meeting. I also
welcome Ambassador Nadia Murad, who is also at
this meeting.
Bolivia voted in favour of the resolution adopted
today because it believes that the fight against
Da’esh, as led by the Iraqi people, deserves the full
support not only of the Security Council, but also of
the entire membership of our Organization. We wish
to express our most sincere recognition of the brave,
self-sacrificing and determined struggle waged by the
Iraqi people and security forces in general and continue
17-29567

21/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security

to wage in order to definitely eradicate Da’esh from
the Republic of Iraq. It is a battle they are fighting on
behalf of all of us.
It is important to bear in mind that the brutality of
Da’esh continues to take the lives of innocent people.
It is not only a regional threat, as we saw with the
attack perpetrated on 14 September, in which more
than 80 people lost their lives in southern Iraq; it is
also a global threat, as we recently saw in Barcelona,
Afghanistan, Egypt, the United Kingdom, Belgium
and France.
We believe that the resolution just adopted must
undoubtedly be implemented in the framework of
full respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of the Republic of Iraq, and as a
complement to the efforts of Government institutions,
so that the Da’esh perpetrators of atrocities — which
include crimes against humanity, violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law — can be
duly investigated, tried and punished.
We hope that the work and evidence collected by the
investigative team will contribute to bringing justice to
the Iraqi people and to all the victims of the atrocities
committed by Da’esh around the world. We also hope
that this work will make it possible to bring to justice
the perpetrators of illicit trafficking and the destruction
of cultural heritage, such as the 21 June attack on the
Great Mosque of Al-Nuri, whose incalculable historical
and cultural value is an irreparable loss for the historical
heritage of Iraq and of humankind as a whole. It is an
unfortunate testament to the savagery of Da’esh.
Bolivia once again condemns in the strongest terms
any act of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of where, when and by whom it is committed;
and reaffirms that all States must fight terrorism by all
means, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law.
Reconciliation is not synonymous with forgetting;
reconciliation is not synonymous with impunity.
Reconciliation is synonymous with satisfaction with the
right to truth, the right to justice, the right to reparations
and the right for these acts to never be repeated.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the outset,
the Senegalese delegation would like to thank the
Ethiopian presidency for having organized this meeting.
We also welcome the presence of His Excellency

S/PV. 8052

Mr. Ibrahim Abdulkarim Al-Jafari, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq, among us this morning.
Senegal was a sponsor of resolution 2379
(2017), which the Security Council has just adopted
unanimously in order to reaffirm the position that all
of us here share as a community of nations regarding
the reprehensible nature of terrorism and violent
extremism, in particular the actions of and violations
of human rights and international humanitarian law
committed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), known as Da’esh, an organization that now more
than ever appears to pose a global threat.
With the setting up of the investigative team led by a
Special Adviser, in implementation of the mandate that
has just been adopted, the United Nations will be able to
lend the necessary assistance to the Iraqi authorities to
gather evidence on the basis of the highest standards in
the field on acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and crimes of genocide committed by
ISIL. This will help shed light on the truth and facilitate
the necessary process of bringing the perpetrators to
justice. It also opens the door to interesting prospects in
terms of cooperation with Member States in the field of
international criminal justice concerning acts carried
out by Da’esh.
Though this resolution, we are also showing our
active solidarity with the people and the Government
of Iraq, to which we wish to reiterate our sincere
congratulations for the decisive victories they have
achieved in the fight against ISIL. We have no doubt
that with the ongoing support of the international
community, including the United Nations, through
its United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq, the
Iraqi authorities will continue their efforts aimed
at reconciliation so as to eradicate in a lasting way
ISIL’s ideology.
By way of conclusion, I would like to convey my
gratitude to the delegation of the United Kingdom
for its ongoing efforts during the whole process of
negotiations, which, of course, enabled us to achieve
this outcome, which is a harbinger of great hope for the
many victims who deserve that justice be done.
Mr. Kawamura (Japan): Japan welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2379 (2017) and is
pleased to have co-sponsored it. I would like to express
my gratitude to the United Kingdom for having taken
the lead on drafting this important resolution.

17-295679/14

S/PV.8052

Threats to international peace and security

We support the resolution’s setting up of an
investigative team to assist Iraq in collecting evidence
of the crimes committed by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL), including those that may amount
to war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.
Collecting and preserving evidence is essential in order
to bring the perpetrators of those crimes to justice
in future.
We strongly hope that through its impartial and
independent investigation, the team will help Iraq in
preventing violent extremism and in promoting national
reconciliation among the people.
Japan will continue to stand with the people of Iraq
in fighting violent extremism.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
commend the presence in this Chamber of a number
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Deputy Ministers.
We also extend our greetings to Ms. Nadia Murad,
to whom we pay heartfelt tribute for her dignity and
courage. We thank the United Kingdom and Iraq for
their leadership in negotiating resolution 2379 (2017),
which we just adopted today unanimously.
Uruguay voted in favour of the resolution and
co-sponsored it because it views it as an important
initiative that seeks to bring to justice the members of
the Da’esh terrorist group, who are responsible for the
worst possible crimes.
War crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide
cannot go unpunished under any circumstance, wherever
such acts may be committed. The crimes committed by
Da’esh cannot and should not be exceptions to this rule.
Their actions should be punished with full force of law.
Respect for human rights and justice are two
concepts that are intrinsically linked. Ensuring
justice for victims and their families and protecting
all members of a society, without ethnic, religious
or gender-based distinction, is a duty of States. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights indicates in its
preamble indicates that freedom, justice and peace in
the world are based on the recognition of the inherent
dignity and the equal and inalienable rights of all
members of the human family.
Example-setting can also be an important factor.
In addition to the efforts undertaken by the Iraqi
Government to military combat Da’esh, bringing to
justice its leaders and members who are responsible for
having committed crimes will contribute to discrediting
10/14

21/09/2017

the group, making the heinous nature of its actions
known to public opinion, with positive effects in terms
of dissuading anyone who might have been otherwise
attracted to this group.
For that reason, we believe that the request for
international assistance made by the Government of
Iraq, aimed at collecting and preserving evidence that
will make it possible to bring to justice the members
of Da’esh who have perpetrated such crimes on its
territory, deserves the support and attention of the
Council and the United Nations as a whole.
We trust that similar support will also be provided
when the time comes for accountability, because that
time will come in connection with the crimes committed
in Syria, Somalia, Yemen and, unfortunately, so many
other areas.
Uruguay deems it key to eliminate discrimination
and sexual violence against women in all arenas. The
widespread and systematic use of sexual violence
against girls and women as a weapon of war and its
use by terrorists as a terror tactic deserves the strongest
condemnation by all societies without distinction of
any kind. Such condemnation must be effective and
translated into action. We believe that it is key that
the investigative team have at least one expert on the
issue of gender, sexual violence and the protection
of children.
Finally, we would like to recall at this time the
importance of international legal cooperation in the
fight against terrorism, as stated in resolution 2322
(2016), which in its preambular part underscores the
importance of strengthening international cooperation
by investigators, prosecutors and judges to prevent and
investigate terrorist acts and bring their perpetrators
to justice.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate Ethiopia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month of September. I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for its initiative and efforts throughout
the past month, which led to resolution 2379 (2017),
which we have just adopted. I wish also to congratulate
Iraq, that brotherly country, for its contribution to this
important step towards holding Da’esh accountable for
the crimes it committed in Iraq.
The crimes committed by Da’esh in Iraq and in
other places where it exists are unprecedented in their
17-29567

21/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security

criminality and cruelty. They make no distinction
between children, women and the elderly. Hence
it is imperative to ensure accountability for these
crimes, either to seek justice for innocent victims or
as deterrence. Accountability should not be limited
to the direct perpetrators of these crimes. Those who
incite, finance or provide weapons or safe haven, or
facilitate the commission of such crimes, should also
be held accountable.
In that vein, we stress that holding accountable
those responsible for the crimes committed in the name
of ISIS in Iraq is a crucial aspect in fighting terrorism
in that brotherly country, and is a vital element in the
framework of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy. Resolution 2379 (2017) includes a
number of provisions related to the establishment of the
investigative team, which will collect evidence related
to crimes committed by ISIS. The team will help in the
relevant investigations.
Since Egypt was briefed on this topic a year ago,
as well as throughout consultations on the resolution,
Egypt has insisted on respect for the sovereignty of Iraq
and the independence of its judiciary. It has stressed
that Iraq must approve the provisions and details of the
resolution. Furthermore, Egypt has also emphasized
that the approval of any country other than Iraq should
be obtained before the new team takes any action or
initiate investigations related to nationals of those
other countries.
I would also like to stress that accountability for
ISIS in Iraq is an important step towards achieving
intercommunal reconciliation. That would prevent
the re-emergence of ISIS and any other terrorist
organization. In addition, the international community
should move ahead in its efforts to rebuild areas
liberated from ISIS in order to shore up Iraq’s
capacities, in particular in the areas of the judiciary,
security and counter-terrorism in general. In carrying
out those tasks, it should adhere to the principle of
national ownership.
In that context, I stress that Egypt, as Chair of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, has focused on building
the capacities of Iraq to counter terrorism and hold
accountable those responsible for crimes committed
in that country. The Committee held a number of
meetings in Iraq with donors, and the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate has visited

S/PV. 8052

Bagdad on numerous occasions to support Iraq’s efforts
to combat terrorism.
Today’s resolution sends an important message to
terrorists that the international community is united
and determined to eradicate terrorism, and a message
to the international community that it must end any
form of support for terrorism. The Council’s adoption
of a resolution holding ISIS accountable for its crimes
is important. More important still, however, is the
political will of States to implement this and other
relevant resolutions concerning counter-terrorism.
The Council should closely follow the implementation
of the resolution and hold accountable those States that
do not fully comply and those that continue to support
terrorism and shelter terrorists. I stress that Egypt will
maintain its commitment to being at the forefront of the
international community’s efforts to defeat terrorism.
Egypt will take all possible measures in accordance
with the international law to counter terrorism and deal
with those States supporting it.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia.
We welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2379 (2017), on ensuring the accountability of members
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/
Da’esh for their crimes in Iraq, including those that may
amount to crimes against humanity. We would like to
thank the penholder, the United Kingdom, for all its
efforts on this text.
The adoption of this resolution today is indeed
an appropriate response to the request made by the
Iraqi Government calling for the assistance of the
international community to ensure accountability
for members of Da’esh and the crimes that they have
committed. We would like to take this opportunity
to express appreciation to the Government of Iraq for
all its efforts in that regard. The presence today of the
Foreign Minister of Iraq demonstrates the importance
that his Government attaches to this matter.
Without any doubt, ISIL/Da’esh continues to pose
a global threat to international peace and security, and
that does not require lengthy explanations. It is selfevident. Through the commission of acts involving
murder, kidnapping, hostage-taking, suicide bombings
and the destruction of cultural heritage, Da’esh has
committed very serious crimes that may amount to
war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide. We

17-2956711/14

S/PV.8052

Threats to international peace and security

21/09/2017

will never forget the loss of our Ethiopian compatriots
who were mercilessly massacred by ISIL in Libya, and
that is why we supported this resolution, which aims
to hold members of ISIL/Da’esh accountable for the
crimes committed in Iraq. Its resolution is indeed very
significant not only in its role to address the plight of the
victims and serve justice, but also to assist significantly
in countering terrorism and violent extremism. The
proper collection and preservation of evidence related
to crimes that have been committed by ISIL/Da’esh is
indeed critical to ensuring accountability.

human rights violations committed by Da’esh terrorist
gangs in Iraq and pledged to bring the perpetrators
to justice. Today’s historic resolution 2379 (2017)
is the result of constructive cooperation and a clear
understanding between Iraq and the United Kingdom.
Its goal is to establish legal foundations for an
international mechanism that respects Iraq’s sovereignty
and its jurisdiction in the area of evidence-collection in
order to prosecute terrorists before international courts
for their grave crimes in Iraq and other countries in
the world.

In that regard, we support the establishment of
an investigative team, headed by a special adviser, to
support Iraqi efforts through collecting and preserving
evidence of acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide committed by ISIL/
Da’esh in Iraq. We therefore believe that should be
done with full respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and its
jurisdiction over crimes committed in its territory. In the
light of the severity of the crimes committed by Da’esh
and the magnitude of the challenges that the country is
facing, Iraq will need the appropriate technical support
and capacity-building. We understand that it is in that
context that the resolution encourages Member States
and regional and intergovernmental organizations to
provide the appropriate legal assistance and capacitybuilding to the Government of Iraq so as to strengthen
its courts and judicial system.

The Council is well aware of the fact that the Iraqi
judicial system dates back to the Code of Hammurabi,
established between 1792-1742 B.C, which became the
world’s penal code.

Let me therefore conclude by expressing our full
support for efforts to ensure accountability for members
of ISIL/Da’esh for all the crimes they have committed
not only in Iraq, but also in other parts of the world.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Iraq.
Mr. Al-Jafari (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): If I may, at
the outset I should like to congratulate Ethiopia on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month and thank it for its work in convening
this meeting. I would also like to thank Egypt for its
work during its presidency of the Council last month.
On 19 September 2016, we held a high-level meeting
(see S/PV.7775) at Headquarters in which Iraq, the United
Kingdom and Belgium, among others, participated.
On that ocassion, we demonstrated the unity of the
international community by condemning the grave
12/14

Iraq applauds the efforts of the United Kingdom
to work with Iraq, in Baghdad and New York, over the
past months in order to come up with draft a resolution
that would respond to Iraq’s concerns. We would
like to extend our special thanks to the Permanent
Representative and his team at the British Mission
in New York, as well as the team working at the
British Embassy in Baghdad. Both worked tirelessly
and with great professionalism with the Permanent
Representative and his team at our Mission to the United
Nations to reach a consensus-based and balanced text.
Iraq appreciates the valuable contributions made
by Member States of the Security Council during the
negotiations on the resolution 2379, which no doubt
enhanced the language of the resolution in both
substance and form. We would also like to thank them
for their understanding and response to Iraq’s request
for international assistance in the area of evidence
collection concerning the crimes committed by Da’esh.
The Council is aware of the magnitude of the
sacrifices, the human losses and the destruction as
a result of the war against terrorism in Iraq. That
destruction did not occur in Iraq alone, however.
Wherever Da’esh enters, destruction and chaos follow.
We cannot afford to relinquish what we have achieved
together in this war. We cannot afford to renounce
the huge sacrifices made by our people. We have
lived a bitter experience in Iraq, with the suffering
and atrocities endured by civilians, in particular
minorities — including Christians, Yazidis, Sabians,
Turkmen and Shabak — as well as the oppression
of women and children in areas under the control of
Da’esh. The international community must consider the
17-29567

21/09/2017

Threats to international peace and security

gravity of this experience for humankind. We must do
all we can to prevent it from happening again anywhere
else in the world.
Resolution 2379 (2017), intended to hold Da’esh
accountable, is a victory for human justice as well as for
the victims. It is a concrete manifestation of rejection
of the brutality of Da’esh and effective condemnation
of its deviant behavior. Prosecuting Da’esh criminals
and bringing them to justice will send a message of
deterrance to those criminals, while also sending one
of reassurance to all our peoples.
When we called for a Security Council resolution
to prosecute Da’esh, we were well aware that it would
be a very effective form of deterrence. This serves as
a firm warning to the financiers of this gang and its
ideological, financial and media supporters.
Resolution 2379 (2017) is based on solid foundations
and a clear framework of full respect for Iraq’s
sovereignty and its jurisdiction in the field of criminal
evidence-collection about crimes committed by
Da’esh, including the international mechanism for a
joint investigative team, to include Iraqi judges and
international experts. Those foundations consist of the
following pillars.
The first entails international assistance for Iraq
in the area of evidence collection, in line with robust
international legal standards concerning international
crimes that do not fall under the purview of the Iraqi
penal law.
Secondly, the resolution calls for the team to ensure
that international legal expertise is shared with Iraqi
experts and judges, who better understand the Iraqi
legal system duly applicable to such investigations.
Thirdly, Iraq would like to assist other countries
whose nationals might be members of Da’esh by sharing
evidence with them, in accordance with the measures
stipulated in the terms of reference of the agreement
between Iraq and the Secretariat, with a view to holding
Da’esh gangs accountable globally, in line with the
global campaign to bring Da’esh to justice.
Fourthly, the success of the global campaign to
bring the leaders of Da’esh to justice requires serious
cooperation among all States Members of the United
Nations, including sharing information they have about
Da’esh criminals in accordance with the mechanism
for mutual legal assistance between the investigative
team and the State concerned. Iraq made sure that this

S/PV. 8052

provision was included in the wording of resolution
2379 (2017) so as to highlight the importance of
respecting State sovereignty in line with the Charter of
the United Nations.
Fifthly, we call on Member States and international
and regional organizations to provide all possible
assistance to the team so as to strengthen Iraq’s legal
and judicial system and promote the rule of law and
end impunity.
Sixthly, during the negotiations on resolution 2379
(2017), Iraq underlined that the terms of reference for
the work of the investigation team in Iraq must be
acceptable to the Iraqi Government. That total consent
illustrates respect for national sovereignty and Iraq’s
jurisdiction over crimes committed in Iraq against Iraqi
nationals. We will work with the Secretariat to ensure
that those terms are suitable for the team to carry out
its work effectively in accordance with the resolution.
The Iraqi Government will work with the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General, who will lead the
investigative team in a constructive manner. We will
do that in way that facilitates his work in Iraq pursuant
to the mandate conferred upon him. We will provide
him with the necessary assistance to ensure his success
in implementing his mission.
In that regard, the Government of Iraq calls on
the international community to provide the Special
Adviser with as much assistance as possible to socially
reintegrate and rehabilitate survivors of terrorism and
violence, including through training programmes, so
that they can overcome the devastating impact of the
psychological and physical suffering that they had
to endure.
Finally, I would like to state that victory in Iraq
is the result of the unity of Iraq and all its constituent
people — Muslims and Christians, Shias and Sunnis,
Arabs and Kurds and Turkmen, and Yazidis and
Sabians — an unprecedented illustration of a united
Iraq. At the same time, that victory was a reflection
of the unity among the States represented om the
international coalition.
For the first time, the countries of the world are
standing together to fight a common enemy: Da’esh. In
this very Chamber in September 2014, I delivered my
first speech after Da’esh entered Mosul. And here we are
now. We have come a long way, with milestones marked
by bloodshed, sacrifice, economic destruction and

17-2956713/14

S/PV.8052

Threats to international peace and security

devastated towns. Yet the result is still the same, and the
facts are unchanged. The will of Iraq and of the world’s
peoples prevailed against Da’esh, our common enemy.
We strive to achieve normalcy in our communities so
that citizens can be reassured and refugees and the

14/14

21/09/2017

displaced can return home. The road ahead will require
serious, genuine cooperation to prevent the return of
extremism, terrorism and terrorist crimes.
The meeting rose at 11.20 a.m.

17-29567
