A /67/PV.98

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-seventh session

98th plenary meeting

Wednesday, 4 September 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Serbia)

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly concluded its consideration of agenda item
17 at its 61st plenary meeting, on 21 December 2012.
In order for the Assembly to take action on the draft
resolution before it today, it will be necessary to reopen
the consideration of agenda item 17. May I take it that
it is the wish of the General Assembly to reopen its
consideration of agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 17 (continued)
Information and communications technologies
for development
Draft resolution (A/67/L.78)
The President: Members will furthermore recall
that at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 21 September 2012,
the General Assembly decided to allocate agenda item
17 to the Second Committee. To enable the General
Assembly to take action expeditiously on the draft
resolution, may I also take it that the Assembly wishes
to consider agenda item 17 directly in plenary meeting
and proceed immediately to its consideration?
It was so decided.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Azerbaijan to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.78.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I have the honour, on
behalf of the sponsors — Afghanistan, Belarus, China,
Georgia, Israel, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, the Republic
of Moldova, New Zealand, Sri Lanka, Turkey, Ukraine,
Uzbekistan and my own country, Azerbaijan — to
introduce draft resolution A/67/L.78.
The draft resolution, submitted to the Secretariat on
28 August, is the result of several informal consultations
convened by the delegation of Azerbaijan in an open
and transparent manner throughout August, as well as
bilateral meetings, information sessions and briefings.
Following its submission, the delegation of Azerbaijan
continued its engagement with interested delegations to
accommodate the remaining concerns and to reach an
agreement on the text. In that respect, I am pleased to
introduce the relevant changes to document A/67/L.78.
First, the title of the draft resolution should
read as follows: “Developing cooperation for better
connectivity and telecommunications transit routes in
the Trans-Eurasian region”.
Secondly, the second preambular paragraph has
been largely merged with paragraph 1, which should
read as follows:
“Emphasizes the importance of improving
connectivity and telecommunications transit routes
in the Trans-Eurasian region and, in this regard,
takes note of the proposal on the establishment

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U‑506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-46363 (E)

*1346363*

A/67/PV.98

of the Eurasian Connectivity Alliance, aimed
at highlighting synergies among Governments,
the private sector, civil society, academia
and
international
development
institutions
towards improving the development of regional
telecommunications transit routes”.
Thirdly, paragraph 2 should read as follows:
“In this regard, invites Governments, the United
Nations system and international development
institutions, within their current mandates and core
competencies and within existing resources, as well
as the private sector, civil society and academia,
to engage in relevant discussion on the proposed
Eurasian Connectivity Alliance.”
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all
delegations for their flexibility and cooperation. My
special thanks goes to the sponsors.
The draft resolution before us seeks to renew
attention and support for the proposal to establish a
Eurasian connectivity alliance, initially recognized in
consensus-based resolution 67/194, entitled “Building
connectivity through the Trans-Eurasian Information
Super Highway”. The Eurasian connectivity alliance is
being proposed as a platform for a regional structure
that can help to enhance transregional cooperation in
the area of information and communications technology
(ICT), assist Governments in better responding to the
needs and challenges existing in the ICT sector through
broader regional dissemination, attract stronger interest
from the private sector, as well as effectively manage
the telecommunications infrastructure by facilitating
experience- and knowledge-sharing.
The support of Member States is crucial for the
success of the initiative. We believe that such broad
political support can contribute to a more conducive
environment to address the issue of connectivity at
a broader regional level and to consolidate ongoing
efforts in the respective area.
Equally important is the interest of and cooperation
with the International Telecommunication Union and
the United Nations, given their experience, technical
expertise and outreach capacity through established
channels for communication with Government
and industry leaders and civil society. We strongly
believe that the adoption of the draft resolution will
further encourage discussion of the proposal at the

2

intergovernmental level and planning for the work
ahead of us.
In conclusion, I once again thank all delegations
for their constructive participation and support to the
process and invite them to join the list of sponsors and
to adopt the draft resolution by consensus.
The President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.78, as orally
revised, entitled “Developing cooperation for better
connectivity and telecommunications transit routes in
the Trans-Eurasian region”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/67/L.78, as orally revised?
Draft resolution A/67/L.78, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 67/298).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position, I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Sahakov (Armenia): I have requested the
floor after the adoption of resolution 67/298 in order to
explain my delegation’s position on it.
My delegation recognizes that regional connectivity
solutions can enable countries to achieve economies of
scale by offering reduced costs and better quality of
services. We are ready to discuss possible options for
enhanced regional connectivity in that regard.
Armenia strongly advocates, in every possible
sphere, the principles of regional cooperation, which are
significant contributors to peace, confidence-building
and relations based on the general principle of good
neighbourliness. In that respect, it is important to note
that the realization of the regional project should be
open to all interested States, including Armenia. We
also believe that it should not result in the creation of
more favourable conditions for those countries whose
aim is to use economic projects as tools to impose
pressure in order to reach their political goals.
Ms. Derderian (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports the goal of increased
connectivity and the need to bridge the digital divide,
and has spoken out in favour of many of the initiatives
that we understand resolution 67/298 intends to further.
The process and timing of the resolution are, however,
less than ideal. Resolution 67/194, which was adopted
earlier during this session, also addressed the Eurasian

13-46363

A/67/PV.98

connectivity alliance. In addition, taking this matter
up so late in the session, after the Second Committee
has concluded its work, deprives delegations of the
benefit of their experts and does not facilitate careful
deliberation.
Nevertheless, the United States joined the consensus
on the resolution and looks forward to working with
its proponents and other Member States to expand
connectivity in the Trans-Eurasian region.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union, who wishes to make a statement
following the adoption of the resolution.
Mr. Poulsen (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
member States.
Let me start by emphasizing the importance that
the European Union (EU) and its member States attach
to the development of information and communications
technology (ICT) and to further regional integration and
connectivity in the Eurasian region and beyond. The
EU is currently providing funding for a range of ICT
projects that address Eastern Europe and Central Asia,
including €5 million for the Central Asia Research and
Education Network, which links scientists and students
in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan
and Uzbekistan with more than half a million users in
500 universities and research institutions, and provides
access to European and global research communities;
€1 million for regional electronic communications
and regulatory framework harmonization between the
European Union and its Eastern Partnership partner
countries of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia,
the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine; €2.1 million to
ensure the stable operation of the connections of South
Caucasus national research and education networks
with the European academic network; and additional
funding for the Eastern Partnership partner countries
and Central Asian countries through the Poverty and
Information and Communication Technologies in Urban
and Rural Eastern Africa ICT research project, which is
expected to be succeeded by additional projects in the
same region that are currently under formulation.

Despite the substantial, concrete support
to the development of regional information and
communications technology connectivity in Eurasia,
and while we do not want to oppose a consensus in the
Assembly on the resolution on cooperation for better
connectivity and data communications transit routes,
the European Union and its member States would like
to stress that we do not see specific value added in
resolution 67/298. Indeed, it is not common practice for
the General Assembly to issue multiple resolutions on
the same topic during the same session, unless there
are prevailing reasons to do so. Resolution 67/194,
adopted a few months ago during this session, includes
a specific paragraph — paragraph 7 — that takes note
of the proposal to establish a Eurasian connectivity
alliance. We recall that we were not in favour of a
standalone resolution at that time, given that the yearly
ICT resolution allows us to take stock of and evaluate
the progress of regional initiatives. However, in the
end, we engaged constructively, on the understanding
that any follow-up would be integrated in the next ICT
resolution, during the sixty-eighth session.
On the issue of substance, we believe that resolution
67/194 provides the right General Assembly measures,
both emphasizing the importance of improving regional
connectivity and taking note of the proposal to establish
a Eurasian connectivity alliance. We do, however,
believe that the proper place for these messages are the
ICT resolution, and we will work to ensure that any
follow-up to today’s resolution is integrated in the ICT
resolution at the sixty-eighth session.
In conclusion, the European Union and its member
States remain committed to practices that promote the
effectiveness of the General Assembly. The European
Union and its member States are also committed to
remaining strong partners with the Eurasian region on
ICT and regional integration.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

13-463633
