A /67/PV.58

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

58th plenary meeting
Monday, 17 December 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Charles
(Trinidad and Tobago), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 15 (continued)
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/67/283)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/67/284)
Draft resolutions (A/67/L.44, A/67/L.45 and
A/67/L.46)
Mr. Srivali (Thailand): Thailand aligns itself
with the statement made at the 57th plenary meeting
by the representative of Cambodia on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). As
an ASEAN member State, Thailand is proud to be a
sponsor of the draft resolution entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace” (A/67/L.44).
We would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his report entitled “Intercultural and inter-religious
dialogue” (A/67/283), and the Director-General of
UNESCO for the report on the implementation of the
Declaration and Programme of Action on the Culture
of Peace (see A/67/284). We also wish to commend the
role of United Nations entities, especially UNESCO, in
embracing the idea of a culture of peace, including their
efforts in translating that ideal into reality.

Peace has been the raison d’être of the United
Nations since its inception. The horrors of the two
world wars compelled all nations to come together to
lay down the foundation for durable peace. While we
so far have avoided another global conflagration, a
durable, universal peace continues to elude us. Issues
of sovereignty and territorial claims and sectarian
conflicts, such as those driven by ethnic and religious
animosities, all remain potential powder kegs that must
be managed and defused if possible. A key to doing so is
tapping into people’s hearts and minds. In today’s world,
if sufficiently motivated and equipped, an individual
can inflict large-scale violence with relatively little
effort. One important constraint against that is a set of
societal norms and values that reject violence outright.
Thailand believes that conceiving peace as a way
of life and rejecting the alternative is the best way to
prevent violence that often stems from intolerance,
discrimination, exclusion and hatred. Those problems
also need to be addressed at their roots, such as through
training, tolerance and exposure to diversity, which
would help foster peaceful coexistence and deepen the
culture of peace.
In the international context, Thailand believes that
there are certain elements that should inform our efforts
to cultivate a culture of peace.
The first is the idea of a culture for development
that emphasizes the links between cultural diversity,
dialogue and development. Both the fourth Global
Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations and the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-65206 (E)

*1265206*

A/67/PV.58

(Rio+20) outcome document, “The future we want”
(resolution 66/288, annex), reaffirmed the positive
role of cultural diversity in economic development and
social cohesion. A culture of backwardness and stasis is
a recipe for restlessness. Societies need to feel that they
are moving forward towards a shared goal, preferably
one of sustainable economic prosperity. Thailand
therefore attaches great importance to promoting
the mutual reinforcement between a cultural peace
and dialogue, on the one hand, and socioeconomic
development, on the other.
Secondly, we share the view that peace can be
real only when human rights, justice and equality
are upheld. At the same time, we also concur with
the report by the Director-General of UNESCO:
“The fundamental principles of peace ... must be
‘appropriated’ by different cultures so that ... they do
not remain abstract concepts” A/67/284, para. 3). We
note that such appropriation should be in the direction
of the protection and promotion of those principles.
Thailand therefore supports a rights-based approach to
intercultural and interreligious dialogue. We commend
the work of the Human Rights Council and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights in that respect. We also share the view among
ASEAN member States that violence and extremism
should be countered by encouraging, among other
things, the voices of moderation and reason to exercise
their rights of expression.
Finally, a culture of peace requires a holistic
approach. In terms of participation, that means
involving Member States, United Nations agencies,
civil society and all other stakeholders in order to have
the broadest and deepest possible impact. It also means
a multipronged approach that is not afraid to include
disciplines and industry traditionally devoted to the
waging of war. If we are truly to devise more effective
machinery for peace, we must understand better the
machinery of war in all its aspects. To strengthen the
global movement for a culture of peace and to achieve
the ultimate goal of sustainable peace would therefore
be an immense task that involves everyone and may
take generations. All members of society can and should
play a role; for peace or the essence thereof affects us
all, whether we realize it or not.
Education must be enhanced so that peace is
cherished, while war and violence are stripped of any
glamorous or romantic connotations. When people
refuse to raise a hand against one another, for any

2

reason, when people prefer to engage one another in
dialogue to resolve any dispute, only then will our work
here be done.
Human history is so steeped in blood and war that
the notion of a culture of peace can seem impossibly
utopian. But we would not be here if we truly believed
that. Indeed, there are cultures when peace is so deeply
ingrained that violence is all but unthinkable. Those
are cultures we should learn from. We must persist in
our efforts to create a global culture of peace. It is not
beyond our reach if we can first grow it in our hearts
and minds as individuals, communities and societies.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Albania is happy to sponsor
draft resolution A/67/L.45 as introduced this morning
by the representative of Hungary. I would like to thank
Hungary for taking the initiative and for the excellent
work done in presenting the text after having conducted
a very smooth and effective process of negotiation.
While over all the years, the calendar is
meaningfully enriched with important remembrance
dates, the text presented today shows that we have been
missing something important. Charity is work with
a basic definition, but it has a much deeper meaning
and has different perceptions and understandings in
different regions, cultures and civilizations. Yet the
term translates everywhere into a highly noble action.
Every year, hundreds of billions of dollars or euros
are donated to charity in order to help the poor, assist
those in need and to care for victims of wars, conflicts
and human and natural catastrophes. But it would
be missing an essential part if it were to be confined
only to financial or material health. Charity is also
about time, energy, dedication, comfort, warmth and
love to those in need. The act of spending one’s time
in an effort to enrich the enjoyment of others in need
and to contribute to alleviating their pain or improving
their situation, their everyday lives, even if just for
a day or more, has proved to be crucial and to have
lasting effects. We know only too well that charity also
advances and supports the human rights and dignity of
those marginalized and in need, and by doing so it helps
to create a better and safer world.
Charity is the fruit of the work of millions of people
who can care for millions of people who are in need. Yet
in choosing a symbol, an individual person of highest
charity at its best, there hardly would have been another
person than Mother Teresa. In choosing the date of
5 September, the day the world lost Mother Teresa, as a

12-65206

A/67/PV.58

national day of charity, the General Assembly helps to
make it more tangible, to bring it closer to the people,
and to serve better the aim of recognizing the role
and promoting charity worldwide. It also pays welldeserved tribute to the tiny woman with a great heart,
internationally recognized for her lifelong work helping
the sick, the poor and the marginalized.
Albanians will always feel proud of Mother Teresa,
of her work and her legacy, which we consider our best
gift to humankind. We always recall one of her sayings,
as it translates the essence of her work: “By blood I am
Albanian. By citizenship, an Indian. By faith, I am a
Catholic nun. As to my calling, I belong to the world”.
It is precisely that calling that on 5 September of every
year we will celebrate and remember the irreplaceable
role of charity in every society and in every work in
every country — in order to recognize the work and
contribution of different people from different regions
across the world, to raise awareness about it, to help
mobilize the resources for charitable actions across the
world, including the United Nations, and last but not
least, teach and transmit it to younger generations.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 49/2, of 19 October 1994, I now call on the
observer of the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Lobry-Boulanger (International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies): The
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies (IFRC) welcomes the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on intercultural and interreligious dialogue
(A/67/283) and of the Director-General of UNESCO on
the implementation of the Declaration and Programme
of Action on a Culture of Peace (see A/67/284), as well
as the progress described in those reports.
The IFRC is strongly committed to fostering a
global culture of respect for peace and non-violence,
intercultural dialogue and social inclusion, wherein
human values and dignity are truly celebrated. Indeed,
promoting social inclusion and a culture of non-violence
and peace is one of our three strategic aims for the
present decade. In that context, the IFRC has articulated
the promotion of a culture of non-violence and peace
around three pillars — non-discrimination and respect
for diversity; violence prevention, mitigation and
response; and intercultural, intergenerational and
interreligious dialogue.

12-65206

Violence exists in every corner of the world — in
low-, medium- and high-income countries, in urban
slums, in school classrooms, as we have recently seen,
behind the locked doors of homes and institutions and
through technology — and it can boil to a peak in
disasters. Again and again in disasters the risk of selfdirected and interpersonal violence — people hurting
other people, or people hurting themselves — intensifies
as fragile protective systems become strained or
even collapse, stress levels soar and people engage in
harmful or exploitive behaviour.
Populations that already face the highest risks, such
as children, women and the elderly, become even more
threatened. A woman is attacked at dusk as she seeks
shelter in a crowded camp. A girl is forced to trade her
body to feed her family. A boy is beaten, as others watch
in silence, and then abandoned in a frightening and
lonely environment. A gang steals from and threatens
people in a shelter. A father loses his livelihood and
unleashes his sense of shame and anger on his family.
An elderly man’s despair leads him to take his own life.
Such stories are common in disasters — and they are
not acceptable.
Yet, for all the challenges, the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
is not without solutions. Violence, while complex and
frustrating, is not inevitable. In fact, like the risk of
other public-health crises, such as cholera, respiratory
illnesses, measles, malaria and a lack of nourishment,
which can escalate in disasters, self-directed and
interpersonal violence can be contained, curbed and
ultimately prevented. The ability of violence to thrive
on ignorance, secrecy, denial and the chaos of disasters
can be thwarted.
An IFRC report published this year jointly
with the Canadian Red Cross entitled “Predictable,
preventable: best practices for addressing interpersonal
and self-directed violence during and after disasters”
challenges all of us, and the humanitarian community
in particular, to respond to the problem through early
and proactive action, using a public health approach,
incorporating gender and including children and youth
in our approach.
We should ensure, for instance, that our own
internal systems — policies, standard operating
procedures, education and monitoring — are in place
to create safe environments. We must also integrate
the prevention of violence within vulnerability and

3

A/67/PV.58

capacity assessments, to better understand the risks
and strengths of communities in preparing for disasters
and to ensure the do-no-harm principle in addressing
violence. Additionally, we must educate and support
communities and disaster responders at all levels to
be prepared to minimize the risk of violence and to
respond rapidly and effectively if it does occur.
While the International Federation has an essential
role and benefits from many assets to tip the scales in
favour of safety — our fundamental principles, dedicated
local volunteers and networks of diverse partnerships,
including auxiliaries to Government — today all of
us must acknowledge the predictable and preventable
problem of violence in disasters, accelerate our actions
and respond.
The IFRC views education as a key tool to foster
such an individual, family, community and societal
transformation towards building respect for diversity,
non-violence and social cohesion. As enshrined in
international human rights law, a major purpose of
education is to promote a culture of non-violence and
peace at many different levels. Regrettably, education
that fosters a culture of non-violence and peace is not yet
embedded in most national educational systems. When
it is incorporated, it is often in post-conflict settings
rather than serving a preventive, transformative role for
society. The essential mission of education thereofre
needs to be translated into action by policy-and
decision-makers at international and national levels.
Goals 2 and 3 of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) aim at universal primary education
and equal access for boys and girls, and by doing so
focus only on educational availability and accessibility.
Echoing the second priority of the Secretary-General’s
Education First initiative, which is quality of learning,
the IFRC calls upon policymakers and decision-makers
to dedicate equal importance to the quality and
acceptability of education in the post-MDGs reflections
and policy dialogues.
The motto adopted for IFRC 2020 is “Saving lives,
changing minds”. While we are well known for our work
in saving lives in disaster situations, we count also on
our 187 National Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
to work at the community level to change mindsets.
Changing minds is not only relevant but also critical
to saving lives, to alleviating suffering and to building
resilience. We believe that tolerance, social inclusion

4

and respect for diversity are important building blocks
for a more resilient community.
That belief is translated into one of our IFRC’s
flagship programmes, called Youth as Agents of
Behavioural Change. It raises young people’s awareness
and understanding of issues related to the promotion
of a culture of non-violence and peace, such as
non-discrimination and respect for diversity, violence
prevention, intercultural dialogue, social inclusion,
gender equality, the Red Cross and Red Crescent
fundamental principles and international humanitarian
law. The programme does not convey knowledge, or
tell youth what to think. It encourages youth to change
perspective, to realize that there is no black-andwhite truth, to break conditioning transmitted through
upbringing, education or media and to develop and act
upon one’s own position.
In conclusion, let me underscore that violence is
predictable and preventable. Violence prevention is a
moral and humanitarian imperative. As such, it behoves
all of us to garner all the human and financial resources
at our disposal and commit them to the prevention of
self-directed and interpersonal violence of all kinds.
In the context of disasters, as I have shown today,
concrete steps can be taken to prevent and minimize
the occurrence of violence, especially towards the most
vulnerable populations. Within our communities, and
particularly with our youth, the role of education in
changing minds and fostering tolerance, social inclusion
and respect for diversity are important building blocks
for a more resilient community.
Violence obsesses and consumes our world; if we
do not seek to prevent it, our future and the future
of our children and grandchildren will be seriously
jeopardized. Promoting a culture of non-violence and
peace is necessary, because the human cost is just
too severe to bear. That cost manifests itself in the
stunted growth of children, in lives brutally snuffed
out prematurely, in psychological damage that lasts a
lifetime, in the physical pain of the countless millions
who have been maimed, in the intergenerational
transmission of violent tendencies and, finally, in
the financial burden imposed on families, hospitals,
humanitarian agencies and Governments.
The Acting President: I now call on the observer
of the Holy See.
Archbishop Chullikatt (Holy See): My delegation
is pleased to express its support for the draft resolution

12-65206

A/67/PV.58

introduced this morning (A/67/L.45) entitled
“International Day of Charity”, and wishes to thank in
particular the main sponsor, Hungary, for its initiative
in that regard and for the collaborative manner in which
consultations were conducted.
The fifteenth anniversary of the death of blessed
Mother Teresa of Calcutta, Nobel Peace Prize laureate,
affords us a welcome opportunity to reflect anew on the
importance of public support for charitable activities
at the local, national, regional and international levels.
Far more than simply collecting and distributing
funds — necessary as that may be — charity speaks
rather to the underlying motivation urging individuals
or societies to reach out to one another in true
solidarity. Without recognizing this deeper meaning
and understanding, charity risks becoming nothing
more than mere sentimentality and emotionalism,
which deprives it of its relational and social content
and its ability to teach people the importance of
sharing, respect and love for their brothers and sisters
in need. Today’s draft resolution is an opportunity to
reawaken and renew the international community’s
understanding of the concept of charity, which was so
eloquently exemplified by blessed Teresa of Calcutta,
by demonstrating that true charity must be rooted in
both truth and love.
We all recall Mother Teresa, who addressed the
General Assembly on 26 October 1985. In introducing
her to the Assembly, the then-Secretary-General Pérez
de Cuéllar said:
“This is a Hall of words. A few days ago we had,
in this rostrum, the most powerful men in the
world. Now we have the privilege to have the most
powerful woman in the world. I do not think I need
to present her. She does not need words. She does
need deeds. I think that the best thing I can do is to
pay tribute to her and to [say] that she is much more
than I, much more than all of us. She is the United
Nations. She is peace in [the] world.”
In her address to the General Assembly on her
works of charity, Mother Teresa then highlighted the
need for a deeper understanding of charity when she
asserted that works of love begin at home and works of
love are works of peace. The simplicity of that message
highlights a great truth: that charity is an expression of
love received and given.

12-65206

The Holy See continues to urge charitable or
philanthropic organizations to be committed to
achieving truly humanitarian solutions to the social
and political problems of the day, independent of
parties and ideologies, and remains ready to cooperate
with charitable agencies to achieve the goal of a true
humanism, which acknowledges the dignity of each
person and strives to aid him or her to live in a way
consonant with that dignity.
With modern means of communication now
virtually eliminating the distances between peoples,
charitable activity can and should embrace all
people and all needs. In carrying out such activities,
organizations should show special concern for people
in need and exercise a valuable educational function,
helping them to appreciate the importance of sharing,
respect and love. Accordingly, different stakeholders
will appreciate the contribution that this draft resolution
makes towards establishing a universal framework for
realizing our common objective of helping communities
and individuals to fulfil their physical, social, economic
and spiritual needs.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 15.
Before proceeding further, in view of the desire of
members to dispose of this item expeditiously, I should
like to consult the Assembly with a view to proceeding
immediately to considering draft resolution A/67/L.45.
In that connection, since the draft resolution was
circulated only this morning, it would be necessary to
waive the relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of
procedure, which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objection, I will take it that the
Assembly agrees with that proposal.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolutions A/67/L.44, A/67/L.45 and
A/67/L.46.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position, may I remind the delegations that

5

A/67/PV.58

explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of Saudi
Arabia.
Mr. Alyas (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): May I
begin by extending our warmest thanks to the delegation
of Hungary for introducing the draft resolution entitled
“International day of charity” (A/67/L.45). We would
also like to express our appreciation of the Member
States who participated in the negotiations to reach
consensus on the text. The draft resolution seeks to
make 5 September each year the International Day
of Charity, which should show how much importance
the international community attributes to charity and
the important role played by States and individuals to
alleviate suffering throughout the world.
Like other societies throughout the world, charity
and giving are essential underpinnings in the lives of
Saudi citizens. There is no doubt that charity at the
international level has an important impact on reducing
the suffering of those in need. However, my delegation
would like to reiterate that charitable action cannot
replace international aid for development, whose role
is essential for achieving the Millennium Development
Goals and for resolving the problems of poverty,
particularly in the least developed countries. The debt
situation of such countries is therefore particularly
relevant in that regared. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia plays an important role in providing relief and
assistance to poor countries, as well as in the sphere of
development. Among donor countries, we are leaders in
allovating a higher rate of our gross domestic product
to official development assistance than the 0.7 per cent
that other countries devote — a figure that amounts to
more than $100 million annually.
To date, Saudi Arabia has devoted $7 billion to
debt cancellation, in addition to our contributions to the
World Food Programme and other charitable activities.
King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud believes, along
with others, in the importance of charitable activity
for individuals and for the community. We appeal to
the countries of the world to stand by the international
commitments agreed upon in order to carry forward the
process of development in developing countries so that
poverty can be alleviated.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position.

6

The Assembly will first take a decision on
draft resolution A/67/L.44, entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Saijin Zhang (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/67/L.44, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan, the Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, China, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea,
Fiji, Grenada, Jordan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon,
Libya, Madagascar, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nepal, New
Zealand, Oman, Peru, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the
Russian Federation, Seychelles, Singapore, the Sudan,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia and
Turkmenistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.44?
Draft resolution A/67/L.44 was adopted (resolution
67/104).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.45 entitled
“International Day of Charity”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Saijin Zhang (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/67/L.45, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Angola, Belarus,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cyprus,
the Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Estonia, Georgia,
Greece, Honduras, Ireland, Jordan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Pakistan, Serbia,
Slovenia and Turkey.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.45?

12-65206

A/67/PV.58

Draft resolution A/67/L.45 was adopted (resolution
67/105).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.46 entitled
“Follow-up to the Declaration and Programme of
Action on a Culture of Peace”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Saijing Zhang (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/67/L.46, the following countries have
become sponsors: Brazil, Cameroon, Chad, Chile,
Dominica, the Dominican Republic, Eritrea, Georgia,
Grenada, Israel, Kazakhstan, Lesotho, Myanmar, the
Niger, Oman, Paraguay, Peru, the Republic of Korea,
the Russian Federation, Senegal, Seychelles, Suriname,
Tunisia and Vanuatu.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/67/L.46?
Draft resolution A/67/L.46 was adopted (resolution
67/106).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to the speaker in explanation of position following
the adoption of the resolutions, may I remind the
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States.
Ms. Phipps (United States of America): The United
States firmly supports efforts to foster peacebuilding,
conflict prevention, peacekeeping and interreligious
and intercultural dialogue and cooperation. We are
pleased to have joined the consensus on all three of the
resolutions adopted under the agenda item “Culture
of peace”. The United States strongly believes in
encouraging a culture of peace through the adoption
and promotion of values based on freedom, justice,
democracy and human rights that reject violence and
address the root causes of conflict. We are encouraged
by the consensus-based efforts to promote tolerance,
solidarity, dialogue, reconciliation and respect for
cultural diversity. As a multi-ethnic, multicultural and
multireligious nation, the United States also believes

12-65206

that dialogue, understanding and cooperation among
and between members of different religious and
cultural backgrounds is important to the development
of peaceful and harmonious relations between groups
and between States.
We understand the resolution 67/104, on the
promotion of interreligious and intercultural dialogue,
reaffirms the international community’s recognition
that article 19 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights in its entirety provides the international
framework for the protection of the freedom of
expression. In that regard, the United States reaffirms
our well-known position that the exercise of the right
to the freedom of expression should be afforded the
maximum possible protection.
With respect to language in paragraph 6 of that
resolution, the United States would also highlight our
understanding that the paragraph refers to human rights
obligations to which States have consented, and having
willingly entered into such agreements, they must
comply with those obligations.
We support the intent behind the Declaration of
the International Decade for the Rapprochement of
Cultures. With regard to the financial implications of
conducting the activities that the International Decade
will entail, we would note that, as the lead agency,
UNESCO will be responsible for supporting many of
those activities. The necessary decisions on committing
resources to support those activities properly belong
to the UNESCO General Conference and Executive
Board.
Turning to resolution 67/106, on the follow-up to
the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture
of Peace, the United States would like to express its
appreciation for the recognition of International Jazz
Day, which uniquely contributes to a culture of peace.
Jazz music has been a medium for bringing people
together from diverse backgrounds and cultures for
decades around a shared interest and enthusiasm for
that art form. We look forward to continuing to work
together to build mutual understanding, including
through next year’s celebrations of International Jazz
Day, to be hosted in Istanbul, and through activities
throughout the world to promote peace.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of position. The General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 15.

7

A/67/PV.58

Agenda item 29
People’s empowerment and a peace-centric
development model
Draft resolution (A/67/L.47)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Bangladesh to introduce draft
resolution A/67/L.47.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I have the honour, on
behalf of approximately 20 sponsors, to introduce,
under agenda item 29, entitled “People’s empowerment
and a peace-centric development model”, draft
resolution A/67/L.47, entitled “People’s empowerment
and development”.
A year ago, the Prime Minister of Bangladesh,
Her Excellency Sheikh Hasina, proposed at the
General Assembly a development model based on
people’s empowerment. Her inspiration for the concept
stemmed from the fact that billions of people around
the world suffered from political, economic, social and
cultural disempowerment, deprivation and exclusion.
It is believed that the empowerment of those people
can foster just and sustainable development. That
is a dedicated development philosophy that targets
marginalized and vulnerable peoples. At its previous
session, the General Assembly adopted a resolution on
people’s empowerment and development (resolution
66/224), which highlighted the interlinked and mutually
reinforcing elements of people’s empowerment and
development as envisaged by the Prime Minister. I
express sincere gratitude to all Member States for
their overwhelming support, which resulted in the
consensual adoption of the resolution last year. I hope
that the resolution will receive members’ full support
this year.
In a world in which billions of people suffer from
extreme poverty, hunger, disease, malnutrition and
illiteracy, and millions live in situations of conflict
and deprivation of their fundamental freedoms and
human rights, peace remains more elusive than ever;
development an ever-widening challenge; and the
marginalization of the poor, the vulnerable and the
excluded are an everyday story. Millions of people
around us are unable to meet their basic needs and
remain disempowered and voiceless. Even high
economic growth in many developed countries has not
been translated into people’s empowerment. It is evident
that the disempowerment of a sector of the population

8

remains at the core of most of the problems of the
contemporary world and has resulted in sociopolitical
unrest, insurgency, terrorism, fundamentalism and the
like.
The major United Nations conference of the 1990s,
as well as the Millennium Summit, recognized that
development, peace and security were interlinked
and mutually reinforcing. It is no wonder that in the
outcome document of the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development — “The future we want”
(resolution 66/288, annex) — consensus was reached to
have a world of inclusiveness and a holistic programme
that encouraged social, economic and environmental
issues. Yet, the goal of creating societies for all — societies
that are stable, just and equitable — remains elusive.
Many developing countries, in particular the least
developed ones, cannot guarantee on their own the
much-needed social protection, or address widening
inequality. The systematic exclusion of selected
groups and persons from fundamental freedoms and
employment opportunities still remains impediments
to socioeconomic stability in many societies.
The philosophy of people’s empowerment and
development is dedicated to bringing empowerment,
especially to the voiceless and the deprived, by giving
them a voice, social equity and safety, human capability
and economic opportunity through the promotion
of mutually reinforcing peace and development
multipliers. It has the potential to bring hope, relief and
redress to the disempowered and marginalized all over
the world.
Our confidence in the concept lies in its inherent
strength in addressing deprivation and disempowerment,
which economists and social scientists have branded as
the usual causes. In a society where people are the prime
movers and the agents of change and where people’s
participation in spheres of political, economic, social
and cultural life is guaranteed, development is certain
to gain momentum. It is so very important that people
should be at the centre of endeavours to achieve lasting,
holistic and sustainable peace and development and be
the key focus of all plans, programmes and policies at
all levels.
The global community and individual nations will
face new and emerging challenges. As people are fully
empowered with skills, technical know-how, education
and the like, it will be easier for them to manage and
face the challenges.

12-65206

A/67/PV.58

Extremism and terrorism are contemporary
threats to peace, security and development. Poverty
and underdevelopment, inequality and deprivation
are largely at the root of those global menaces. As
a result, eradicating poverty and hunger, reducing
inequality, mitigating deprivation, accelerating human
development and employment, empowering with
skills and education and guaranteeing participation in
Government are essential for curbing extremism and
rooting out terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 29?

In this short draft resolution, the General Assembly
appreciates our efforts in bringing this issue to the fore
and acknowledges the international conference that we
organized in Dhaka, as mandated in last year’s resolution.
In order to deepen understanding of the value of people’s
empowerment for development, it is requested that the
draft resolution be brought to the attention of the highlevel panel on promoting the empowerment of people in
achieving poverty eradication, social integration, full
employment and decent work for all, to be held during
the fifty-first session of the Commission for Social
Development, in 2013. The Assembly has also requested
the Secretary-General to include information relevant
to the draft resolution in his report on the progress in
the implementation of the Millennium Development
Goals to the General Assembly at its the sixty-ninth
session. I therefore call upon the Assembly to support
the draft resolution and adopt it by consensus.

Reports of the Secretary-General (A/67/161 and
A/67/255)

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.47, entitled
“People’s empowerment and development”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Saijin Zhang (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should like
to announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution, in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/67/L.47, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Chile, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Eritrea, Georgia,
Grenada, Guinea, Malaysia and Nigeria.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.47?
Draft resolution A/67/L.47 was adopted (resolution
67/107).

12-65206

It was so decided.
Agenda item 114
Follow-up to the commemoration of the twohundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade

Draft resolution (A/67/L.41)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belize to introduce draft resolution
A/67/L.41.
Ms. Young (Belize): I have the honour to address
the General Assembly on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM)
and to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.41, entitled
“Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the
victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade”, on
behalf of the 54 members of the African Group and the
other States Members of the United Nations that are
sponsors of the draft resolution.
Slavery and the transatlantic slave trade were
abolished some 200 years ago. Eleven years ago, in
Durban, South Africa, the States Members of the United
Nations resolved, in paragraph 101 of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action, to honour, inter
alia, the victims of slavery and the transatlantic slave
trade. We thank the Secretary-General for continuing
to keep the momentum going, as reflected in his
reports (A/67/161 and A/67/255) regarding the activities
undertaken earlier this year in commemoration of
the anniversary of the abolition of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade, and in the status of the United
Nations Trust Fund for Partnerships – Permanent
Memorial, respectively.
Within our respective communities, we have a long
tradition of honouring the legacy of slavery through
music and poetry. I am reminded of our own Belizean
poet, Mr. Roy Caetano, whose poem “Drums of my
father”, rejoiced in our spirit of survival:
“I, stretched and taut, have taken the beating and
the pounding. But my spirit and my voice will
not be quieted, will not be muffled. For I am the

9

A/67/PV.58

hollowed, hallowed, haloed trunk and the hills and
the vales and the streams and the soul of Africa, and
the banks and the waters and the heart and the mind
of the Amazon and the Orinico, and the wrinkled
calloused handsdragged across the Atlantic and
dumped on the golden studs and shores of the
Carib-being waters”.
But the remembrance of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade must transcend our respective
communities to reach a global public. In that regard,
CARICOM States remained committed to the erection
of a permanent memorial in a place of prominence
at United Nations Headquarters in New York. As the
representative of Guyana, Mr. George Talbot, noted in
2011, the last occasion on which a previous iteration of
this draft resolution was introduced (resolution 66/114),
the permanent memorial will “serve as a source of
inspiration, a symbol of the indomitable spirit of human
beings and their capacity to triumph over the worst
forms of oppression and bigotry” (A/66/PV.83, p. 3).
CARICOM also commends the leadership of
Jamaica’s representative, Ambassador Raymond
Wolfe, who serves as Chair of the Permanent Memorial
Committee. The Committee, under his stewardship,
has made significant strides in its efforts to realize
the erection of the permanent memorial, in particular
through its collaboration with UNESCO for the
successful conclusion of an international design
competition for the permanent memorial. On behalf of
CARICOM States, we would also like to express our
appreciation for the contributions and pledges received
from Member States to date towards the Trust Fund.
We would like to encourage other Member States
and interested parties to contribute to this important
initiative.
The fifth annual commemoration of the
International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of
Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade was held in
March under the theme “Honouring the heroes, resisters
and survivors” and was marked by, inter alia, a panel
discussion, a commemorative meeting of the General
Assembly and a global videoconference for students.
Indeed, educating our children and youth about slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade, its history, its toll, its
legacy — that is a memorial in its own way.
CARICOM wishes to acknowledge the work of
UNESCO, in particular its Slave Route Project, started
in 1994 in Benin, West Africa, which last year made

10

its way through the CARICOM member State of Saint
Kitts and Nevis. The Project seeks to raise global
consciousness about slavery and the slave trade and
to provide wide public support for the erection of the
permanent memorial.
The draft resolution before us today retains the core
elements of past versions of the resolution, including,
first, references in the fourth and fifth preambular
paragraphs to paragraphs 101 and 102 of the Durban
Declaration, which, inter alia, invited the international
community and its members to honour the memory
of the victims of slavery; secondly, the continued
importance of educating and informing current and
future generations about the causes, consequences and
lessons of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade;
thirdly, the establishment of a committee of interested
States to oversee the permanent memorial project,
drawn from all geographic regions of the world, with
member States from the Caribbean Community and the
African Union playing a primary role, in collaboration
with various United Nations departments and agencies;
and, fourthly, the importance of sustained voluntary
contributions in order to achieve the goal of erecting
the permanent memorial in honour of the victims of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade, an issue that
cannot be overemphasized.
A new and important element is the inclusion of a
paragraph — paragraph 9 — which reads as follows:
“Notes with appreciation the commitment of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization to the permanent memorial initiative,
and in this regard, requests increased collaboration
with the Permanent Memorial Committee towards
the successful conclusion of the international
design competition for the permanent memorial”.
The intention is to ensure the completion of the first
phase of the international design competition launched
by UNESCO.
In response to inquiries about the budgetary
implications arising from the adoption of the draft
resolution, let me clarify that the permanent memorial
will become a reality through the generous contributions
received voluntarily from Member States and other
interested parties, as well as the resource-mobilization
activities that will be organized by the Permanent
Memorial Committee.

12-65206

A/67/PV.58

CARICOM remains appreciative of the invaluable
support, technical advice and assistance received from
the Secretary-General, the Secretariat and members of
the Permanent Memorial Committee.
By adopting this important draft resolution by
consensus, the General Assembly would acknowledge
the continuing legacy of slavery and the moral imperative
to remember its impact, honour the descendants of
slaves for what they have endured and pay tribute to the
brave men and women who valiantly fought against the
inhumane practices of slavery.
Mr. Doubane (Central African Republic) (spoke in
French): Before I proceed to make my statement, allow
me to express the condolences of the Group of African
States to the host country and pay tribute to the memory
of the deceased, while sending our sympathy to their
families and loved ones at this very difficult time.
On behalf of the African Group, on whose behalf I
have the honour to take the floor at today’s important
debate on agenda item 114, entitled “Follow-up to the
commemoration of the two-hundredth anniversary of
the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade”, I wish
to thank the Secretary-General for his reports on the
subject (A/67/161 and A/67/255).
At the outset, allow me to convey our appreciation
to and commend the member States of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) for their commitment and,
above all, their efforts, which allow us to continue to
reflect upon and examine past injustices that continue
to have an adverse impact on our history, but more
important, to celebrate the resilience of the human
spirit to survive such adversity, as well as the efforts
made to prevent our having to relive that unfortunate
period in our history.
Six years ago, the General Assembly designated
25 March as the International Day for the
Commemoration of the Two-hundredth Anniversary
of the Abolition of the Transatlantic Slave Trade. By
recognizing the effect of slavery in the modern world,
Member States have acknowledged that slavery is at
the heart of profound social and economic inequality,
hatred, bigotry, racism and prejudice that continue to
affect people of African descent today. As the largest
forced displacement in history, the transatlantic slave
trade decimated millions of Africans, separated them
from their families and their homes, dragged them in
chains to the Americas and sold them as slaves. Its most
salient outcome was the dehumanization of persons of

12-65206

African descent, which led to a disturbing legacy of
racism and racial discrimination in many countries.
Last year, the United Nations observed the fourth
International Day for the Commemoration of the
Two-hundredth Anniversary of the Abolition of the
Transatlantic Slave Trade with the theme “The living
legacy of 30 million untold stories”. That occasion was
an opportunity to recognize the dearth of inquiry into
the experiences of enslaved Africans and the continuing
gap in the scholastic literature regarding their
individual and collective perspectives. The relevance
of the theme can be seen in the gap in the academic
literature on the subject and should provide precious
insight on the magnitude of the brutal treatment and
the condition of slaves. To date, however, only a limited
number of narratives have addressed the essential issue
of the identities of enslaved Africans, their beliefs,
value systems and expertise. As such, the diversity of
skills and technological know-how that they brought
to the Americas and their invaluable contributions
to nation-building there have not been sufficiently
acknowledged.
In that regard, the African Group believes that
more efforts are needed to promote education and
outreach programmes to ensure that that gap is
filled. We therefore appreciate the outreach work of
UNESCO, the committee of permanent representatives
and the Department of Public Information. We hope to
see that effort extended through the establishment of
new scholarships in the field in order to provide a more
insightful look into the history of enslavement during
the 400 years of the triangular trade, as well as the
legacy from the point of view, this time, of the victims.
We further express our appreciation to the
Department of Public Information for its education and
outreach programmes on the transatlantic slave trade
and slavery organized in 2011, while encouraging it to
continue its efforts to make the annual commemorative
activities a fitting and solemn tribute to the victims of
slavery.
One of the ways of sustaining lasting outreach
efforts with regrd to slavery and the slave trade is the
erection of a permanent memorial to and remembrance
of the victims of slavery and the slave trade. We
therefore welcome the initiative taken to date by States
members of the Caribbean Community on the matter.
We also recognize the need for sustained voluntary
contributions — which we hope to see increase — to

11

A/67/PV.58

build the permanent memorial at an early date. Several
countries have contributed to the United Nations Trust
Fund for Partnerships — Permanent Memorial. I am
glad to report that several African countries are among
the contributors. The African Group would like to
commend all those that have contributed to date, and
we invite other countries to make timely contributions
to this worthy project as well.
It goes without saying that the African Group
remains firmly committed to the project, as we believe
that the memorial will serve to recall the heroic actions
of slaves and abolitionists who, in the face of grave
dangers and adversity, stood up and took action. It
will also serve as an educational venue for lifelong
learning, a reconstruction of the past, a repository of
memory, a lens through which to mould the future
and, most importantly, a constant reminder of human
vulnerability.
This is an apt moment to recognize the efforts and
dedication of the Permanent Mission of Jamaica and
to commend the personal engagement of Ambassador
Raymond Wolfe, who has been unflaggingly committed
to the initiative since 2007. He has our deepest gratitude.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the African
Group’s support for the efforts of the United Nations
and countries in raising awareness about slavery and
the transatlantic slave trade over the past year. It is our
sincere hope that more will be done this next year and
in years to come to honour all victims of the slave trade
and all brave abolitionists, as well as the collective
international efforts that led to the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade and of slavery itself.
Mr. Wolfe (Jamaica): My delegation wishes
to associate itself with the statements made by the
representative of Belize on behalf of the Caribbean
Community (CARICOM) and by our colleague the
Permanent Representative of the Central African
Republic on behalf of the Group of African States.
At the outset, let me express my delegation’s
gratitude to the Secretariat for the reports contained
in documents A/67/255 and A/67/161, which serve
to inform our discussions under this agenda item.
We are encouraged to learn that several Member
States — including El Salvador, Greece, Jordan, Kenya,
Qatar, Senegal, Spain, Togo and my own country,
Jamaica — have undertaken national educational
programmes in fulfilment of resolution 66/114. That is
a clear indication of their commitment to ensuring that

12

the inhumane indifference to human life demonstrated
by the terrible crimes committed under the callous
system of slavery is never repeated.
It is often said that those who cannot remember
the past are condemned to repeat it. In that light, our
reflection on the tragedy of slavery and those who fell
victim to it must transcend into action as we continue
to grapple with the ills of today’s society. It is for that
reason that Jamaica remains committed to spearheading
the initiative to erect a permanent memorial at the
United Nations to honour the victims of slavery and of
the transatlantic slave trade, and that we will continue in
our efforts to educate others on the history, legacy and
lingering effects of the barbarism of the transatlantic
slave trade.
Draft resolution A/67/L.41, which we are about to
adopt, carries added significance for me, as it bears
testimony to the journey I have taken over the past six
years. Not long after arriving in New York, I humbly
assumed the responsibility entrusted to the Government
of Jamaica as Chair of the Permanent Memorial
Committee, established to implement the decision taken
in resolution 62/122 to erect the memorial — a decision
reiterated in successive resolutions on the subject.
For me, it has been a long and arduous journey,
which came with its ups and downs, but one that has
given me a sense of personal fulfilment and continues
to be a source of pride, because it has allowed me to
pay homage to my ancestors as I have contributed to
a process of immense historic significance in honour
of their memory. As most of us are aware, slavery and
the slave trade would today be condemned as a crime
against humanity and an act of genocide. It has been
a distinct honour and privilege to have worked with
colleagues from CARICOM and the African States,
who are more than passionate advocates of this and
other initiatives of significance to persons of African
descent.
I take this opportunity, as Chair of the Permanent
Memorial Committee, to provide a brief update on the
activities of the Committee over the past year. The
Committee is proud to report that the first phase of the
international design competition has been completed
and that more than 300 design proposals, representing
83 nationalities, were submitted to UNESCO. From
those, 16 semi-finalists were selected. The Committee
is currently working to complete the second phase of
the project, wherein an independent international panel

12-65206

A/67/PV.58

of judges will review the 16 semi-finalist designs and
identify seven finalists, who will be invited to New York
for interviews — ending in a winner being selected. In
that regard, the Committee has already selected eight
eminently capable individuals from various regions
around the world, who will make up the international
panel of judges.
The Committee has also endorsed and supported
an initiative to host a concert and black-tie grand gala
event in the General Assembly Hall to commemorate the
on hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the abolition of
slavery in the United States. Those events are scheduled
to be held on 22 March 2013, just prior to the week of
activities that will be held in tandem with the annual
United Nations International Day of Remembrance
of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave
Trade, as agreed by the General Assembly in resolution
62/122.
It is the intention of the organizers to use the
opportunity to raise much-needed funds for the
permanent memorial. To date, the United Nations
Trust Fund for Partnerships — Permanent Memorial
has received voluntary contributions from 61 Member
States and 71 private individuals, amounting to some
$1.3 million. In this connection, I wish to encourage
those Member States that have not yet made a
contribution to graciously consider doing so.
I am delighted to report that some Governments
have made multiple contributions to the Trust Fund,
and I commend their decision to do so. I am particularly
pleased to highlight the contribution made by the
Government of India, which has provided the single
largest voluntary contribution to the Trust Fund to
date — $260,000 — and we commend and thank the
Government of India for its display of moral leadership
in this cause. In this connection, I draw attention
to document A/67/161, which reports the status of
voluntary contributions.
Let me also pay a special tribute to the United
Nations Office for Partnerships, which administers the
Trust Fund, for its continued support for the permanent
memorial initiative. Under the able guidance of the
Office, we have managed to establish a new relationship
with the prestigious Humpty Dumpty Institute, which
will guarantee tax exemptions for donations made by
United States residents under section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code.

12-65206

I applaud the members of the Permanent Memorial
Committee themselves for their unwavering support
and for the long hours they have committed to the
myriad issues considered in our efforts to advance
the permanent memorial initiative. For the record, the
members of the Committee are Brazil, Ghana, Jamaica,
Kenya, the Netherlands, Portugal, Qatar, Senegal,
Suriname, the United Kingdom, the African Union,
the Chair of CARICOM, the Chair of the African
Group of Ambassadors, the United Nations Office for
Partnerships, UNESCO, the United Nations Department
of Public Information, the New York Public Library
Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture,
and the Chairperson of the Subcommittee for the
Elimination of Racism of the NGO Special Committee
on Human Rights.
The achievements we have made so far would
not have been possible without the commitment and
support of my own staff, and I publicly acknowledge
their contribution to the process, and in particular my
Third Committee officer, Ms. Andrea Wilson.
In closing, I would like to take this opportunity to
express my sincere appreciation of all those who have
positively contributed to the draft resolution, which
we expect will be adopted by consensus. I would like
to encourage all stakeholders to keep in mind the aim
of acknowledging the tragedy and considering, the
legacy, lest we forget, and to remain steadfast in their
commitment to make the permanent memorial a reality.
On a personal note, for me as an Ambassador to
the United Nations, this is the last public statement
that I will be making to the Assembly, and I would
like to express my thanks to all colleagues for their
cooperation and support.
The Acting President: I would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Ambassador Raymond
Wolfe on his efforts with respect to the permanent
memorial, as this, as he has indicated, may very well
be his last speech in the General Assembly. I take this
opportunity on behalf of us all to wish him all the best
in the future.
Ms. Cousens (United States of America): On
22 September, the United States commemorated the
one hundred and fiftieth anniversary of the preliminary
Emancipation Proclamation, in which President
Abraham Lincoln boldly declared that, on 1 January
1863, all people held as slaves would thenceforward be
forever free. The Emancipation Proclamation stands as a

13

A/67/PV.58

milestone in the advance of freedom for all humankind.
As we pay tribute to that historic break with a painful
past, we recognize the foundational chapter in American
history and reflect on the progress that our country has
made towards realizing its founding promise of liberty
and justice for all.
The transatlantic slave trade has marked all of us,
and the United States is steadfast in its commitment
to remembering that history and to educating future
generations about it. This shameful trade and the proud
struggle for freedom to end it are part of our shared
history. It remains our common duty to raise public
awareness about its victims and its consequences, even
as we work to combat racism, inequality and the deepest
of inhumanities wherever they occur today. American
voices will always be part of the global conversation
about the transatlantic slave trade. We will always fight
for its stories of suffering, struggle and redemption to
be told.
The United States has supported UNESCO’s
Breaking the Silence: The Transatlantic Slave Trade
Education Project. As part of that effort, we engage
Governments and civil society organizations alike to
raise awareness about the history of the slave trade, as
well as to highlight the invaluable contributions made
by persons of African descent in every field of human
endeavour. We are committed to UNESCO’s work on
the permanent memorial.

some 1.3 million Africans, mostly from sub-Saharan
Africa. Our cultural diversity and characteristics
are also the expressions of the bitter cultural history
of the African peoples who enriched us with their
wisdom, traditions, languages, religious beliefs, music,
temperament and rebellious spirit. The bravery and
resolve of the slaves who rebelled against exploitation
fed the Cuban people’s spirit of freedom and love of
independence.
As long as the current unjust and unsustainable
international political and economic order exists and
the majority of the peoples of the planet are deprived
the benefits of neo-liberal globalization, Africa will
remain marginalized and that colonial legacy will never
end. The former colonial mother countries must honour
their historic debt to those who suffered during the
centuries of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
The past cannot be ignored, and their responsibility for
that past cannot be neglected.
Africa is now having to pay far more to service
its foreign debt than on education and health. If we
stay that course, Africa will continue to finance the
opulence of rich countries that have pledged further
official development assistance (ODA), but in most
cases default on their pledges and continue to charge,
in the form of debt servicing, hundreds of times more
than the amount of the original ODA promised.

The United States is honoured and humbled to
co-sponsor resolution A/67/L.41, which insists that
we remember one of the most searing chapters in the
history of man’s inhumanity to man — one we must
never forget. As President Obama has said, “Slavery is
barbaric and evil and has no place in a civilized world”.
The United States remains dedicated to continued
efforts and abiding partnerships to commemorate
the victims of slavery, to ameliorate its lingering
consequences, and to end its modern forms.

Cuba supports and sponsored draft resolution
A/67/L.41, under agenda item 114. A similar text has
been submitted annually to the General Assembly by
the Member States from the Caribbean Community and
African countries. The 2009 saw the founding in Cuba
of the Museum of the Slave Route, the first of its kind on
the continent, as a living educational instrument in the
hands of the entire community. The museum has hosted
a number of artistic events addressing the transatlantic
trade, and has participated in educational programmes
on this important theme.

Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cubans are proud of our African roots. The identity
of the Cuban nation is the outcome of the process of
transculturation that took place with the integration of
many ethnic groups into colonial society beginning in
the sixteenth century. As a result, we are a combination
of Hispanic and African people.

Cuba recognizes the importance of holding annual
events in the context of the United Nations, and
looks forward to the outcome of the project for the
construction of a permanent memorial at Headquarters,
dedicated to the victims of slavery and the transatlantic
slave trade. It is the least that our Organization can do
to remember the effects of the slave trade.

In Cuba, as in nearly all of Latin America and
the Antilles, we see traces of the slave trade. In one
component of that cruel trade, our island was home to

Mr. Magid (Israel): Allow me first to recognize
and honour Ambassador Raymond Wolfe, Permanent
Representative of Jamaica to the United Nations.

14

12-65206

A/67/PV.58

We deeply appreciate Ambassador Wolfe’s immense
contribution and dedication as Chair of the Permanent
Memorial Committee on Slavery and the Transatlantic
Slave Trade.
Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel once wrote, “If anything
can, it is memory that will save humanity. … [H]ope
without memory is like memory without hope”. Today,
we recommit ourselves to memory so as to ensure that
the tragedies of the past serve as clear lessons for the
future.
The transatlantic slave trade casts a dark shadow
over history. In its course, 30 million people were
forced from their homes, uprooted from their villages
and forced into lives of bondage. Too many stories of
unspeakable injustice, pain and slavery will remain
forever untold. And yet, among the stories that have
been told, among the stories of unimaginable suffering,
there are stories of hope. There are stories of survival
and stories of people who found unimaginable strength,
even in the darkest of times and the darkest of places.
The Jewish people know too well the evils of
oppression, persecution and slavery. We also know
the joy of freedom. We understand what it means to
realize aspirations and to fulfil dreams. We have built
and rebuilt our national homeland in Israel as a free
people. Driven by our own experience, the Jewish
people and the Jewish State continue to lead global
efforts to advance the values of tolerance, freedom and
understanding.
As we have done every year, Israel proudly
co-sponsors the draft resolution before us on this
item. We are proud of our financial contribution to the
permanent memorial in honour of the victims of slavery
and the international slave trade. The permanent
memorial will be seen by world leaders and citizens
alike. The memorial will provide a permanent reminder
here at the United Nations of the abhorrence of slavery.
It will remind us of the words, ideas and deeds that
led to millions being enslaved. It will remind us that
everyone is born free, born equal and born with the
right to decide his or her own destiny. The memorial
must also serve as a call to action — a call to every
nation, every leader and every citizen to do everything
that they can to ensure that no human being is ever
again enslaved.
And yet, as we sit here in the Assembly Hall,
millions of people in the world are not free. Women
are abused as sex slaves and children are being traded

12-65206

as property. Millions are suffering. Too many children
around the globe are being taught to hate. Racism and
prejudice are all too prevalent in our world. They are the
evil spark for persecution, violence and war. We must
remember, we must memorialize and, most crucially, we
must educate. Education is the only way to prevent such
crimes. It is the only way to ensure that our children
and our societies understand their obligation to prevent
such a tragedy from ever occurring again. It is the duty
of the United Nations to take up the challenge.
Israel today stands with the international
community to make a solemn promise. Together, we say
that freedom is universal. We promise to our children
that we will never stand idle when we see others being
enslaved.
Ms. Hosking (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to align itself with the statement made by the
representative of the Central African Republic on
behalf of the Group of African States. We welcome
the General Assembly’s coming adoption of draft
resolution A/67/L.41, on the permanent memorial to
and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade.
We wish to convey our sincerest appreciation to the
States members of the Caribbean Community for their
efforts over the past several years, under the exemplary
leadership of the Jamaican delegation and Ambassador
Raymond Wolfe, and working in partnership with other
relevant players, to establish a permanent memorial at
the United Nations in commemoration of the victims
of slavery and of the transatlantic slave trade. We
furthermore express our profound gratitude to the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, representatives of the Secretariat, civil
society and others for their tireless efforts and resources
expended in support of this historically important
project.
Undoubtedly, the permanent memorial will
represent a powerful symbol of the victory of
humankind over inhumanity, underscoring the
indomitability of the human spirit and its ability to
overcome unimaginable adversity and hardship against
seemingly insurmountable odds. Consequently, and
as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General
in document A/67/255, we commend the ongoing
public outreach and educational projects undertaken
by the Department of Public Information, together
with other partners, in giving visibility and voice to

15

A/67/PV.58

the memories of countless millions of victims who
suffered and perished as a terrible consequence of
slavery and the transatlantic slave trade. South Africa,
in recognition of this critically important initiative,
is pleased to have contributed to the United Nations
Trust Fund for Partnerships — Permanent Memorial,
as a demonstration of the importance we attach to its
establishment and to the objectives it aspires to uphold.
We must all draw on the lessons learned from that
tragic chapter of human history — which, alongside
others, constituted crimes against humanity — so as to
collectively address the immense challenge facing the
global community in combating contemporary forms
and manifestations of slavery.
We see an inextricable link between South Africa’s
struggle for political freedom and emancipation from
the shackles of colonialism and apartheid, and the
campaign to end slavery. The transatlantic slave trade,
however, stands unprecedented in the annals of human
history in terms of its massive scale and reach and the
legacy of devastation it wrought — the consequences
of which are still felt today in Africa and the nations of
the Caribbean.
South Africa therefore urges all Member States to
recommit themselves to the full implementation of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action and, in
particular, the relevant articles aimed at countering the
legacy of slavery and contributing to the restoration of
the dignity of the victims of slavery and the slave trade.
Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
begin by welcoming the Secretary-General’s report
on the programme of educational outreach on the
transatlantic slave trade and slavery (A/67/255) and for
his status report on the permanent memorial to victims
of slavery and on the United Nations Trust Fund for
Partnerships — Permanent Memorial (A/67/161). I also
want at the outset to pay strong tribute to Ambassador
Raymond Wolfe and his untiring efforts to get the idea
of the memorial off the ground and to take the entire
project to where it is today — that is, a very advanced
stage — although much more still needs to be done.
The transatlantic slave trade ravaged African and
Caribbean nations to satisfy the rapacious economic
greed and exploitation of the colonizers. The effects
of its violence and human suffering are still visible
today. It is therefore imperative that we commemorate
the great struggles and battles that have been fought to

16

get rid of that scourge, and that we pay homage to the
victims of slavery and the slave trade.
The permanent memorial will be a small
commemoration of the millions of victims who
suffered silently, with no hope of freedom, before they
disappeared into the night. The memorial will not only
serve as a landmark where we can pay our respects, but
will also be a reminder for the international community
of the grief and tragedy borne by the victims of slavery
and the transatlantic slave trade.
We have noted that the fi rst phase of the international
design competition for the permanent memorial has
been completed. UNESCO has shortlisted designs
from a number of proposals received globally, which
are now being considered by the Permanent Memorial
Committee.
The
United
Nations
Trust
Fund
for
Partnerships — Permanent Memorial, established to
receive contributions to erect the permanent memorial,
has so far received only about $1.3 million, as against
the anticipated expenditure of about $4.5 million for the
construction of the memorial. India, with a contribution
of $260,000, is the lead contributor to the Trust Fund.
The international community, in particular those who
benefited from the transatlantic slave trade, must come
forward and contribute generously to this noble cause.
The international community cannot let the idea of
this memorial just remain on the drawing board. Once
again, now that I have seen Ambassador Wolfe here
in the Hall, I would once again like to reiterate my
great praise for him and his untiring personal efforts
in getting the project off the ground and to its current
stage.
We also recognize the importance of educating
current and future generations about the history, causes
and impact of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade.
We support the initiatives the United Nations has
undertaken to spread awareness of this important issue.
India welcomes the various remembrance activities and
programmes of the Department of Public Information
(DPI), including the commemorative activities held
at the United Nations in March. We support the DPI’s
efforts to use its global network to build awareness and
promote partnership activities with Member States in
this area of activity. We also welcome the initiatives
taken by States to reaffirm their commitment to
implementing paragraphs 101 and 102 of the Durban
Declaration, aimed at countering slavery’s legacy and

12-65206

A/67/PV.58

honouring the memory of the victims of slavery and the
slave trade.
Let me conclude by quoting George Mason, one
of the founding fathers of the United States, who said,
“The augmentation of slaves weakens the states; and
such a trade is diabolical in itself and disgraceful
to mankind”. We have a chance to pay tribute to the
victims who suffered this disgrace by openheartedly
contributing to the Trust Fund.
Ms. Williams (Grenada): I am honoured to speak
on behalf of Grenada and Trinidad and Tobago on
draft resolution A/67/L.41, “Permanent memorial to
and remembrance of the victims of slavery and the
transatlantic slave trade”. We associate ourselves with
the statements made by the representatives of Belize,
on behalf of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),
and of the Central African Republic, on behalf of the
African Group.
We thank the Secretary-General for his reports on
the work of the Permanent Memorial Committee and
the programme of educational outreach, as contained
in documents A/67/161 and A/67/255, respectively.
Grenada supports the draft resolution as part of our
ongoing commitment to this item, and proudly returns
this year as a sponsor. We note the near-universal
sponsorship of the draft resolution and look forward to
its adoption by consensus.
As we have said in this and other forums, Grenada
continues to feel deep abhorrence for the inhumanity
that was slavery and also continues to commit to
working for its rejection through remembrance work,
aimed at eliminating its horrific legacy, including
ignorance and denial, as recorded in paragraph 22 of
the Secretary-General’s report contained in document
A/67/255. We are pleased that the international design
competition launched last year has made progress, and
we encourage UNESCO and the Committee to make
every effort to provide the necessary support to ensure
a successful conclusion.
We wish to highlight the importance of 2013
as marking the hundred and fiftieth anniversary
of the Emancipation Proclamation in the United
States of America. We hope that this pivotal year of
commemoration will attract tremendous support for
this project. Grenada strongly believes that a memorial
place in a very prominent place in the grounds of the
United Nations is the very least that can be done to
recognize this most heinous crime committed against

12-65206

humanity. We remain heartened by the fact that the
resolution was again adopted by consensus last year,
and, as I said, we look forward to its happening again
this year.
Grenada and Trinidad and Tobago take this
opportunity to warmly acknowledge the sterling
leadership of Ambassador Raymond Wolfe, Permanent
Representative of Jamaica to the United Nations, and his
country’s contribution to the slavery and transatlantic
slave trade memorial initiative here at the United
Nations. We wish him well in his retirement after 39
years in the Jamaican foreign service. May the wind
be on our good friend’s face, fanning the fire of the
slavery memorial that blazes in his heart, and may his
country and his team here at the United Nations follow
in his great footsteps and continue to pay tribute to him.
Those of us in CARICOM left here will be doing well
if we can but carry on a modicum of the noble work he
has started here.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 114.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/67/L.41, entitled “Permanent memorial
to and remembrance of the victims of slavery and
the transatlantic slave trade”. I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/67/L.41, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Cambodia, Cuba, the Czech Republic, the Dominican
Republic, Fiji, Georgia, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras,
Iceland, Japan, Lebanon, Maldives, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Peru, the Philippines,
Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Solomon Islands,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Ukraine and Vanuatu.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.41?
Draft resolution A/67/L.41 was adopted (resolution
67/108).

17

A/67/PV.58

The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 114.
Agenda item 121 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Draft resolution (A/67/L.27)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a debate on agenda item 121 and
its sub-items (a) to (w) at its 40th plenary meeting, on
19 November.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Azerbaijan to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.27.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): On behalf of its
sponsors, Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine, I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/67/L.27, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM”.
GUAM, the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development, was formally established
on 10 October 1997 in Strasbourg, France, when the
Presidents of the four States involved signed a joint
communiqué. In accordance with the decision taken at
a summit in Kyiv on 23 May 2006, the group of four
States became the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development — GUAM. Over the 15 years
of its existence and activity, GUAM has become a
full-fledged international regional organization with
a well-formed structure and distinct identity devoted
to promoting democracy and economic development
in its member countries. During that time, GUAM has
undergone various tests and proved its strong viability
and practical relevance, successfully developing a vision
for its strategic objectives based on a commonality of
historical ties, political views and interests.
The States members of GUAM are guided by
and strictly adhere to the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. Its main
purposes are, first, promoting democratic values and
ensuring the rule of law and respect for human rights;
ensuring sustainable development; strengthening
international and regional security and stability;
improving integration with Europe in establishing a
common security space and expanding cooperation
in the economic and humanitarian fields; developing

18

potential, whether social and economic, transportation,
energy, scientific and technical or humanitarian;
and intensifying political interaction and practical
cooperation in areas of mutual interest.
Stretching along the historic Silk Road, the
territories of the States members of GUAM constitute
a natural transport corridor, bridging Europe and Asia
through the South Caucasus and the Caspian and Black
Sea areas. GUAM is working actively to promote its
geopolitical and geoeconomic advantages and exploit
its role as an efficient component of the international
transport system, with fewer barriers and more cost
savings for moving passengers and shipping cargo.
GUAM’s working methods are based on the
principle of consensus and on a developed network of
mechanisms and instruments of interaction. Various
projects and programmes are being implemented within
GUAM, as well as with partner countries in the GUAMplus format and with international organizations.
Through resolution 58/85, of 8 January 2004, the
General Assembly granted GUAM observer status. In
recent years, cooperation between the secretariats of the
United Nations and GUAM has developed, including
by holding regular meetings in their respective
headquarters in New York and Kyiv and implementing
joint projects. Thus, in 2009 and 2010 two subregional
workshops for GUAM States members, on preventing
nuclear terrorism and enhancing international legal
cooperation in the field of counter-terrorism and
mutual legal assistance, which were also attended by
several non-member States and other international and
regional organizations, were organized in Kyiv jointly
by the Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) and the
Secretariat of GUAM.
In 2012, in cooperation with the GUAM secretariat
and with the assistance of the Bureau for International
Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs of the
United States Department of State, UNODC started
implementing a project on strengthening the capacity
of GUAM member States to cooperate at the national
and regional levels in combating money-laundering
as well as in seizing and confiscating crime proceeds.
GUAM has been participating in the UNODC Afghan
Opiate Trade Project since the beginning of 2012. We
also look forward to developing our interaction with
UNODC in combating nuclear terrorism, capitalizing
on experience gained at a subregional workshop on the
topic held in 2009.

12-65206

A/67/PV.58

The States members of GUAM are confident that
the adoption of the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM will
further promote development and strengthen mutually
beneficial cooperation between the United Nations
and GUAM, and will contribute to peace, stability and
development in the countries of the region. The text
of the draft resolution has been extensively discussed
and negotiated in an open and transparent manner with
Member States, and we look forward to its adoption by
consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.27,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM”. May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/67/L.27 was adopted (resolution
67/109).
The Acting President: The representative of
Armenia has asked to speak in explanation of position
on the resolution just adopted. I remind him that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I have requested the
floor after the adoption of resolution 67/109 in order to
present my delegation’s explanation of position.
First, we would like to express our regret that the
consultation process on the text of the resolution was
not sufficiently open and transparent. Despite what was
just declared, the text was not extensively discussed.
We would like to draw the attention of the sponsors,
particularly Azerbaijan, to this fact, and to remind the
latter that chairing a regional organization is indeed a
highly challenging endeavour that requires the Chair
to put aside national and personal agendas and to
display a great sense of responsibility, impartiality and
inclusiveness. Such essential qualifications, however,
were not displayed by the delegation of Azerbaijan
in its capacity as Chair of the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM,
while conducting informal consultations on the draft
resolution.
Regarding the substance of the text of the
resolution, specifically clauses relating to cooperation
among States, let me reaffirm that Armenia strongly

12-65206

advocates the principles of regional cooperation in
every possible sphere that contributes significantly to
peace, confidence-building and good-neighbourliness.
Although
the
resolution
acknowledges
the
Organization’s aims of encouraging democracy and
economic development in further developing partnership
relations with States Members of the United Nations,
based on the principles of sovereign equality, mutual
respect and mutually beneficial cooperation, one of the
members of GUAM, namely Azerbaijan, continues to
use economic projects as tools for imposing pressure
and carrying on a unilateral and coercive blockade and
measures in order to attain its political goals.
Such behaviour does not contribute to promoting
the purposes and principles of the United Nations, or
to achieving international cooperation and solving
international problems of a political, economic, social,
cultural or humanitarian nature, which the resolution
highlights in its preambular paragraphs. My delegation
hopes that Azerbaijan will follow up and implement
Security Council resolution 1631 (2005), by which the
Council recalled its invitation to regional organizations
to improve and strengthen cooperation between the
United Nations and regional arrangements or agencies
in maintaining international peace and security. In that
regard, it is important to note that regional cooperation
in the South Caucasus should be open to all interested
States.
My delegation joined the consensus on the draft
resolution in the belief that its adoption will strengthen
States’ responsibility in promoting inclusive and
mutually beneficial regional cooperation.
The Acting President: I shall now give the floor
to representatives who have asked to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. May I remind members that
statements in the exercise of right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes for the first intervention and five minutes
for the second, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Russian): I
would like to speak in exercise of my right of reply in
order to shed some light on the remarks just made by
the representative of Armenia.
I would first like to remind those present that on
10 December, resolution 67/109, which the Assembly has
just adopted by consensus, was submitted for informal
consultations, which the Armenian representative
attended without making any comments or additions

19

A/67/PV.58

to the proposed text. The representative of Armenia
also had a hard copy of the draft resolution. After that,
and since no comments or proposals were made by the
participants, draft resolution A/67/L.27 was circulated,
according to General Assembly procedure, until
12 December. Again according to procedure, since no
additions or amendments was proposed, the draft was
transferred to the Secretariat after the expiry of the
deadline. Thus Azerbaijan, as one of the resolution’s
sponsors and Chair of the Organization for Democracy
and Economic Development — GUAM, fully complied
with all existing procedures, and we categorically
deny any comments suggesting that there was a lack of
transparency.
Regarding the second comment about an economic
blockade and other measures, I would like to remind
the representative of Armenia that today Azerbaijan
does not occupy one centimetre of Armenian territory,
has no territorial pretensions in Armenia and has not
carried out ethnic cleansing in its territory. Armenia, on
the other hand, is occupying 20 per cent of Azerbaijan’s
territory and last year ethnically cleansed more than
1 million Azerbaijanis from Armenian territory last
year, as well as all the Azerbaijanis living in the
occupied territory, and is continuing its aggressive
policies towards our country.
In my view, therefore, there are two possibilities
here — either the Armenian representative is making
a blatant attempt to confuse the Assembly or he simply
does not possess any information about what his
colleagues are doing and they are not enlightening him
about it.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): I regret that the
representative of Azerbaijan has decided to exercise his
right of reply. I would like to remind him that it is the
duty of the Chair of a regional organization to inspire
trust and confidence in all the other Member States that
are actively seized of the affairs of that organization.
My delegation was not given sufficient time to consider
resolution 67/109 or to submit its proposals during the
informal consultations.
The statement we just heard about the so-called
occupation of Azerbaijani territories and ethnic
cleansing proves that Azerbaijan is still far from
adhering to the goals and aims of the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM. We
would like to draw the attention of the organization’s
member States, the other sponsors of resolution 67/109,

20

to the fact that Azerbaijan is pursuing a policy geared
to the total isolation of Armenia. In particular, the
President of that country clearly stated in a recent
address that they would never let Armenia join any
political, economic, energy or transport project; that
they seek to isolate Armenia and do not hide it; and that
they will continue their policy of isolating Armenia, as
they see that it brings results.
The Azerbaijani Head of State and Government
officials waste no opportunity to chatter about their
desire to isolate Armenia and leave us out of projects
that are expected to bring economic development to the
region. But in reality it is Azerbaijani society that is
being isolated. The Azerbaijani Government promotes
war and xenophobia. It also restricts freedom of speech
and information and perceives the Internet and social
networks only as means to spread hatred, lies about
Armenia and Armenians, and futile bragging.
This unacceptable behaviour on the part of
Azerbaijan at the highest level is subject to international
condemnation. It hinders the full exercise of the right
to development of countries and peoples in our region,
and violates the principles and purposes of the United
Nations, as well as the intentions of the Organization
for Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM
reflected in the resolution we have just adopted. We
strongly believe that the international community, and
GUAM members above all, should no longer tolerate
Azerbaijan’s isolation policy, which lays the ground
for a hostile regional environment for nations in our
part of the world. We also call on the representative
of Azerbaijan to renounce the use of provocative
remarks and to respect the time and agenda of the
Member States present in this Hall. We would also like
to remind the Azerbaijani delegation that the principle
of expanding economic and humanitarian cooperation
is an aim of GUAM’s European integration process, as
was mentioned in the representative of Azerbaijan’s
statement.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan) (spoke in Russian):
I apologize to the Assembly, but it was not I who
initiated this polemic. I did not plan to do so, but I have
a moral duty to respond when my country is confronted
by such a flood of lies and slander about it. In typical
fashion, Armenia is doing all it can to turn things on
their head and falsify the facts. I repeat that we have
not occupied anyone’s territory. The war is being
conducted against us. Our population is being occupied
in our own territory. The Parliament of Armenia has

12-65206

A/67/PV.58

adopted legislation annexing Azerbaijani territory. If
all of these facts are ignored, I do not know what we are
calling aggression nowadays.
Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): My delegation had
no intention of using its right of reply a second time,
but after hearing the representative of Azerbaijan’s
unacceptable remarks it is hard to remain silent. It is
particularly unethical to proceed with defamatory
statements at a time when a large number of Member
States are trying to contribute to the work of the General
Assembly. We believe that the time has come for the
Azerbaijani delegation to refrain from its traditional
means of propaganda and instead realize the paramount
importance of debating serious thematic matters here
in this body.
At present, we can only characterize the statement
of the Azerbaijani representative as a desperate
attempt to sidetrack the General Assembly from its
basic tasks. We are not talking about that conflict in
this Hall; we are talking about economic cooperation.
Let me also remind the Azerbaijani representative that
the framework for discussing the Nagorno Karabakh
issue is the Minsk Group of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), led by
its co-Chairs, and not the General Assembly, and that
the first meaningful step that Azerbaijan should take
is to engage with the elected authorities of Nagorno
Karabakh in constructive negotiations. It is of the utmost
importance that Azerbaijan implement in their entirety
all the agreements reached within the framework of the
OSCE Minsk Group-sponsored meetings and summits,
remove all the blockades that hinder people’s free
movement, renounce the hate rhetoric and provocations,
and allow the expansion of economic and humanitarian
cooperation in order to strengthen regional security.
We would also like to remind Azerbaijan that these are
the stated main goals and principles of GUAM member
States.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
121.

Agenda item 121 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Draft resolution A/67/L.40
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a debate on agenda item 121 and
its sub-items (a) to (w) at its 40th plenary meeting, on
19 November.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Representative
of Cambodia to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.40.
Mr. Sea (Cambodia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the States members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN): Brunei Darussalam,
Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore,
Thailand, Viet Nam and my own country, Cambodia,
to introduce, under agenda item 121 (c), draft resolution
A/67/L.40, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations”.
So far, more than 70 States have sponsored the
draft resolution. In addition to the 10 ASEAN member
States, the following are sponsors: Angola, Australia,
Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Chile, China, Costa Rica,
Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Estonia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Greece, Guinea,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Lesotho, Mauritania,
Mongolia, Montenegro, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, the
Republic of Korea, Romania, the Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Sri Lanka,
Sweden, Tajikistan, the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago and
Turkey.
The United Nations and regional organizations have
unique and complementary capacities with real potential
to help Member States effectively address current
and emerging global challenges, as well as to achieve
several long-standing international goals. Based on that
understanding, in recent years we have seen relations

12-65206

21

A/67/PV.58

and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations strengthen and deepen across a
wide spectrum of activities. In the past 10 years, the
relationship between the United Nations and ASEAN
has been strengthened and accelerated so as to reach
a new, high level of cooperation and partnership that
is increasingly mutually beneficial. That is reflected
in our biennial resolutions on cooperation between
the United Nations and ASEAN, which over the years
have clearly charted a positively evolving collaboration
on a broad range of issues including, but not limited
to, peace and security, socioeconomic development,
environmental protection, disaster management and
humanitarian assistance and the promotion of human
rights and democracy.

Mr. Nakano (Department of General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/67/L.40, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Bangladesh, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Estonia,
Gabon, India, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Mongolia, Montenegro, New
Zealand, Nicaragua, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Romania, the Russian
Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Sweden
and Turkey.

I wish to highlight that this year’s draft resolution
is based on resolution 65/235 of 22 December 2010,
with updates reflecting the strengthened cooperation
between ASEAN and the United Nations, particularly
the adoption of a Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership at the Fourth ASEAN-United Nations
Summit in Bali in November 2011. The Declaration is
meant to facilitate closer collaboration between ASEAN
and the United Nations in collectively addressing
emerging global challenges, drawing on the experiences
and expertise of both organizations. The Declaration
established more coordinated and cohesive cooperation
among ASEAN sectoral bodies in their relations with
United Nations specialized agencies, and in so doing
aims to bolster ASEAN’s capacity to contribute and
respond to global challenges. This important document
has become a milestone by providing not only a firm
foundation but, and most importantly, a clear vision for
making cooperation between the United Nations and
ASEAN strong, active and concrete.

The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/67/L.40?

In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity
to express, on behalf of all the ASEAN Nations, our
sincere thanks to all Member States for their support
for the past resolutions on cooperation between the
United Nations and ASEAN that have been adopted
without a vote in the General Assembly since 2002. In
that connection, I would like to ask all Member States
to continue their support for this year’s draft resolution
by adopting it by consensus, as in previous years.

Draft resolution A/67/L.40 was adopted (resolution
67/110).
The Acting President: Several representatives
have asked to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted. May I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Plaisted (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the strengthening of cooperation
between the United Nations and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in the support of
peace and security in the region. Towards that end, the
United States reiterates its position that the ASEAN
Human Rights Declaration be implemented consistent
with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
international human rights agreements. The United
States remains a committed partner with ASEAN in the
protection of human rights.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.40.

Ms. Ventura (Canada): Canada is pleased to
join consensus on resolution 67/110. We welcome the
strengthening of cooperation between the United
Nations and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) in various fields, including the promotion
and protection of human rights, which, in all contexts,
are to be implemented in accordance with international
obligations. Canada looks forward to deepening its
partnerships with ASEAN on human rights and other
issues.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position.

22

12-65206

A/67/PV.58

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 121?
It was so decided.
Programme of work

role of diamonds in fuelling conflict”, will take place
tomorrow morning, 18 December 2012, immediately
following the consideration of the reports of the Special
Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth
Committee).
The meeting rose at 5.35 p.m.

The Acting President: I should like to announce
that consideration of agenda item 32, entitled “The

12-65206

23
