On the same day, the President issued the following
statement: 25
"With reference to the statement made public by
the Secretary-General today, and after consultations
with the members of the Council, I confirm, as
President of the Security Council, that his statement
has the support of the members of the Council."

sovereignty and authority of the Government of
Lebanon.
"I wish to repeat that the humanitarian factor is the
one which concerns me. I have consulted the Security Council because I felt that this was the right
thing to do on a matter of such importance.
"In taking my decision therefore, I would like to
have the understanding of the Council on this
matter."

" S/16195.

THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAN AND IRAQ 26

· 'The members of the Council request the Secretary-General to continue his efforts, in consultation
with the parties concerned, with a view to achieving
a peaceful settlement and to keep the Council
informed."

Decision

On 21 February 1983, the President of the Council
issued the following statement 27 in connection with
the item entitled "The situation between Iran and
Iraq".
"The Security Council met in informal consultations on 21 February 1983 to consider the recent
escalation of the conflict between Iran and Iraq.
"The members of the Council express their deep
concern at the serious situation between Iran and
Iraq which gravely endangers international peace
and security and at the fact that resolutions 479
(1980), 514 (1982) and 522 (1982) have not yet been
implemented.
"The members of the Council continue to urge
that all concerned be guided by Member States'
obligations under the Charter: to settle their international disputes by peaceful means and in such a
manner that international peace and security and
justice are not endangered and to refrain in their
international relations from the threat or use of
force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State.
"The members of the Council express their
profound regret at the continuation and the escalation of the conflict and deplore the grave human
losses and the considerable material damage resulting therefrom. They reaffirm the necessity of
implementing the Council's previous resolutions
on the subject which were unanimously adopted.
•'The members of the Council urgently call once
again for an immediate cease-fire and an end to all
military operations as well as the withdrawal of
forces up to internationally recognized boundaries
with a view to seeking a peaceful settlement in
accordance with the principles of the Charter.
"The Council remains seized of this question and
urges all Member States to exert all efforts to assist
in the restoration of peace and security in the region.

26

At its 2493rd meeting, on 31 October 1983, the
Council proceeded with the discussion of the item
entitled "The situation between Iran and Iraq".

Resolution 540 (1983)
of 31 ~tober 1983

The Security Council,
Having considered again the question entitled "The
situation between Iran and Iraq",
Recalling its relevant resolutions and statements
which, inter alia, call for a comprehensive cease-fire
and an end to all military operations between the
parties,
Recalling the report of the Secretary-General of
20 June 1983 28 on the mission appointed by him to
inspect civilian areas in Iran and Iraq which have been
subject to military attacks, and exp~ssing its appreciation to the Secretary-General for presenting a
factual, balanced and objective account,
Also noting with appreciation and encouragement
the assistance and co-operation given to the SecretaryGeneral's mission by the Governments of Iran and
Iraq,
Deploring once again the conflict between the two
countries, resulting in heavy losses of civilian lives
and extensive damage caused to cities, property and
economic infrastructures,
Affirming the desirability of an objective examination of the causes of the war,

Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted

by the Council in 1980 and 1982.

2
" Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-eighth Year,
Supplement .f,,r April. May and June 1983. document S/I5834.

27 S/15616.

6

cessation of hostilities, including the possible dispatch
of United Nations observers, and to submit a report
to the Security Council on the results of these consultations;
5. Calls upon both parties to refrain from any
action that may endanger peace and security as well
as marine life in the region of the Gulf;

1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
mediation efforts with the parties concerned, with a
view to achieving a comprehensive, just and honourable settlement acceptable to both sides;
2. Condemns all violations of international
humanitarian law, in particular, the provisions of the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 in all their aspects,
and calls for the immediate cessation of all military
operations against civilian targets, including city and
residential areas;
3. Affirms the right of free navigation and commerce in international waters, calls on all States to
respect this right and also calls upon the belligerents
to cease immediately all hostilities in the region of the
Gulf, including all sea-lanes, navigable waterways,
harbour works, terminals, offshore installations and
all ports with direct or indirect access to the sea, and
to respect the integrity of the other littoral States;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the parties concerning ways to sustain and verify the

6. Calls onc·e more upon all other States to exercise
the utmost restraint and to refrain from any act which
may lead to a further escalation and widening of the
conflict and, thus, to facilitate the implementation of
the present resolution;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to consult with
the parties regarding immediate and effective implementation of the present resolution.
Adopted at the 249Jrd meeting
bv 12 votes t" none, with J
abstentions ( Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan).

LETTER DATED 19 FEBRUARY 1983 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE LIBYAN
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA TO THE UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Decisions

At its 2417th meeting, on 23 February 1983, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of
Czechoslovakia, the German Democratic Republic,
Hungary, Madagascar and Viet Nam to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At its 2415th meeting, on 22 February 1983, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Benin,
Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Ghana, the Islamic Republic of Iran, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, the Sudan
and the Syrian Arab Republic to participate, without
vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "Letter
dated 19 February 1983 from the Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 15615)". 29

At its 2418th meeting, on 23 February 1983, the
Council decided to invite the representatives of
Algeria, Bulgaria, Cuba and Ethiopia to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At its 2416th meeting, on 22 February 1983, the
Council decided, at the request of the representative
of Jordan, 30 to extend an invitation to Mr. Clovis
Maksoud under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, at
the request of Togo, 31 to extend an invitation to
Mr. Ike F. Mafole under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure.

29
See Of]idal Records of the Security Council. Thirty-eighth
Year, Supplement for January, February and March /98J.
30
Document S/15619, incorporated in the record of the
2416th meeting.

-'' Document S/15621, incorporated in the record of the
2418th meeting.

7
