S/2020/1202

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 December 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 16 December 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided
by Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Mr. Fernando Arias, Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons, as well as the statements delivered by the representatives of
Belgium, China, the Dominican Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia,
the Niger, the Russian Federation, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa,
Tunisia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United
States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the video-teleconference on
“The situation in the Middle East (Syria)” convened on Friday, 11 December 2020.
Statements were also delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372) from the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent
Representatives of the members of the Security Council, which was agreed in
the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease
pandemic, these briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Jerry Matthews Matjila
President of the Security Council

20-17240 (E) 211220 110121

*2017240*

S/2020/1202

Annex I
Briefing by the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
Izumi Nakamitsu
I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief the Council on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), on the elimination of the chemical
weapons programme of the Syrian Arab Republic. I hope that today’s format will
enable a substantive, informative and civilized debate on this important international
security issue.
It is a pleasure to be joined here today, virtually, by the Director-General of
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), Mr. Fernando
Arias, who will update the Council on the elimination of the Syrian Arab Republic’s
chemical weapons programme.
Since my last briefing, on 5 November (see S/2020/1088, annex I), the
Office for Disarmament Affairs has continued to maintain regular contact with its
counterparts at the OPCW on its activities related to this matter. On 2 December,
we received information from the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic
concerning chemical issues for the current period. That information was studied
carefully and was also forwarded to the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to affect the
OPCW’s ability to deploy to the Syrian Arab Republic. The Technical Secretariat
has nonetheless continued with its mandated activities related to the elimination
of the Syrian chemical weapons programme and its engagement with Syria in
that regard.
The Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) is continuing its efforts to clarify
all outstanding issues regarding the Syrian Arab Republic’s initial declaration to
the OPCW. As I mentioned in my previous briefing to the Council, the DAT was
deployed to Damascus between 22 September and 3 October to conduct the twentythird round of consultations with the Syrian National Authority. As reported to the
Executive Council through an addendum dated 18 November to the note by the
Director-General entitled “Report on the Work of the Declaration Assessment Team”
(EC-95/HP/DG.2), dated 1 October, and through a further note by the DirectorGeneral entitled “Report on the Work of the Declaration Assessment Team” (EC95/HP/DG.3), dated 18 November, some progress was made during that round of
consultations, with three outstanding issues being closed related to the Syrian
National Authority’s initial declaration. However, as the Director-General also
reported, 19 issues remain outstanding.
It is therefore the continuing assessment of the Technical Secretariat that
at this stage, owing to the identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that
remain unresolved, the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic cannot
be considered accurate and complete, in accordance with the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction. During the September-October deployment, the
DAT also collected samples to replace those taken during its previous deployment.
I am sure that the Director-General of the OPCW will provide an update on the
activities conducted by the Technical Secretariat, including in relation to the seventh
round of inspections at the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the Syrian Scientific
Studies and Research Centre between 8 and 13 November.
Pursuant to OPCW Executive Council decision EC-M-43/DEC.1, dated 24
July 2014, the Technical Secretariat has been monitoring and maintaining the remote
monitoring systems installed at four sealed underground structures within the
2/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

territory of the Syrian Arab Republic. In accordance with the Executive Council’s
decision, the Technical Secretariat was deployed to the Syrian Arab Republic between
15 and 18 November to conduct its final visit to the underground structures and to
observe the removal of the monitoring equipment. I understand that the Syrian Arab
Republic was informed by the Technical Secretariat that the underground structures
should remain sealed as part of the destruction plan agreed by the Executive Council.
I note that the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission is still in the process of studying
all available information related to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic and is continuing its engagement with the Syrian Government
and other States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention with regard to a
variety of incidents. As previously reported, further deployments of the Fact-Finding
Mission will be subject to the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Investigation and Identification Team is continuing its investigations
into incidents in the Syrian Arab Republic in which the Fact-Finding Mission has
determined that chemical weapons were used or likely used and will issue further
reports in due course. I would like to take this opportunity to once again reiterate
my full support for the integrity, professionalism, impartiality, objectivity and
independence of the work of the OPCW.
With regard to the implementation of Executive Council decision EC-94/
DEC.2, of 9 July, entitled “Addressing the Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons
by the Syrian Arab Republic” (see S/2020/724), I look forward to Director-General
Arias’s update on that matter.
Before concluding, I wish to echo the Secretary-General’s message on the Day
of Remembrance for all Victims of Chemical Warfare, which was commemorated on
30 November:
“The use of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone, under any circumstances
is intolerable and a serious violation of international law…. There can be no
justification for the use of these abhorrent weapons. We must remain united and
determined in preventing their use or the threat of their use…. It is imperative
that those who use or have used chemical weapons are identified and held
accountable. That is the only way to meet our moral responsibility to the victims of
chemical warfare.”
As the Secretary-General urged,
“[L]et us renew our unequivocal commitment to the Chemical Weapons
Convention and our support to the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons.”

20-172403/41

S/2020/1202

Annex II
Briefing by the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, Fernando Arias
I thank the South African presidency for this opportunity to inform the
Security Council about developments at the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) since my previous briefing, on 12 May, at the invitation
of the Estonian presidency.
At that time, I briefed the Council on the first report issued by the
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT), which identified the perpetrators of
several cases of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Over the past seven months,
the OPCW Technical Secretariat has continued to adapt its activities to the impact
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in order to continue to deliver
its services to member States and implement the mandates received. Verification
has progressed at chemical-weapon destruction facilities thanks to modifications
that ensure the health and safety of inspectors and personnel on site. The Technical
Secretariat resumed its industry inspections in mid-September based on an adjusted
prioritization plan. Old chemical-weapon inspections were conducted this year at a
number of sites.
The OPCW’s International Cooperation and Assistance Division was able
to deliver 38 online capacity-building events this year, benefiting some 1,400
participants. And on 30 November and 1 December, the first part of the Conference
of the States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development,
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction
(CWC) was held in The Hague. In preparing for the Conference, we took into
consideration the COVID-19 situation in The Hague, the guidance of the Dutch
authorities and, at the same time, the need to fulfil the Conference’s obligations.
The Conference concluded with the adoption of the programme and budget for 2021,
which are vital to the functioning of the OPCW. The Conference will most likely
resume in spring 2021 and will address all of the remaining agenda items.
I will refer now to the Syrian chemical weapons dossier. As I mentioned in my
briefing to the Council in May, the Technical Secretariat released the first report of
the IIT on 8 April. The report concluded that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that individuals belonging to the Syrian Arab Air Force used chemical weapons in
Ltamenah on three occasions in March 2017. Sarin was used on two of those occasions
and chlorine on one. Following the issuance of the IIT report, the Executive Council
of the OPCW adopted a decision in July requesting that the Syrian Arab Republic
declare to the Technical Secretariat, within 90 days, the chemical weapons used in
the attacks in Ltamenah. Under that decision, Syria was also requested to declare all
of the chemical weapons it currently possesses and to resolve all outstanding issues
regarding its initial declaration. On 14 October, I reported to the Executive Council
and all States parties that the Syrian Arab Republic had not completed any of those
requirements. A draft decision was put forward by France on behalf of 46 States
parties with a view to further addressing the issue. It will be discussed during the
second part of the Conference in spring 2021.
In that context, I should recall that while the Technical Secretariat has had the
authority to identify the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in Syria since
June 2018, the Technical Secretariat is neither a public prosecutor nor a court of
justice. States parties do have tools at their disposal to proceed further on the basis
of the information they have received. The same applies to the Security Council and
to the United Nations more broadly.

4/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

In the meantime, the IIT is continuing its investigations into other incidents
falling under its purview. The twenty-third round of consultations between the OPCW
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and the Syrian Arab Republic took place in
Damascus from 22 September to 3 October. In the course of that deployment, the
DAT collected samples, verified the destruction of items previously observed as not
destroyed and discussed the current status of all outstanding issues. The activities
and outcomes of the DAT’s deployment were reported to the Executive Council
in October.
During the recent round of consultations, three issues related to the Syrian
initial declaration were closed, while 19 issues remain outstanding. One of those 19
issues pertains to a chemical-weapon production facility that the Syrian National
Authority declared had never been used for the production of chemical weapons.
The review of all the information and other materials gathered by the DAT since
2014, including samples, indicates that the production or weaponization of chemicalwarfare nerve agents did take place at that facility. The Technical Secretariat therefore
requested that the Syrian Arab Republic declare the exact types and quantities of
chemical agents produced or weaponized at the site in question, in line with the
relevant provisions of the CWC.
At this point, I would like to recall that the initial declaration of a State party
is an important and compulsory step upon joining the Convention. Within 30 days
of its accession, each State party has to provide a full declaration of its chemical
weapons programme, if any. During the seven years that have elapsed since Syria
joined the Convention in 2013, the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW has spared no
effort in assessing Syria’s initial declaration and assisting the country in completing
it. To date, given the gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that remain unresolved,
the declaration submitted by the Syrian Arab Republic still cannot be considered
accurate and complete.
On 2 October, the Technical Secretariat released two reports of the OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission regarding the alleged use of chemical weapons in Aleppo in
November 2018 and in Saraqib in August 2016. The reports concluded that it was not
possible for the Mission to establish whether chemicals were used or likely used as
a weapon in those incidents. The Mission is continuing to analyse the information
collected from its most recent deployments in eight different cases. I wish to stress
here that the Technical Secretariat independently collects its own information. At
the same time, it also relies on information given by States parties to the CWC, as
requested in the relevant decisions of the Executive Council.
Aside from its Syria-related work, the Technical Secretariat was called on to
assist with another incident involving the use of chemical weapons. On 20 August,
Alexei Navalny, a Russian citizen and political activist, fell seriously ill while
travelling by plane in Russia. Two days later, Mr. Navalny was taken to Germany for
medical treatment.
In September, the Technical Secretariat conducted a technical assistance visit
in response to a request from Germany under paragraph 38 (e) of article VIII of the
CWC. During the visit, a team of experts from the Technical Secretariat collected
biomedical samples directly from Mr. Navalny, with his consent, for analysis by
OPCW-designated laboratories. The results of the analysis confirmed that traces
of a toxic chemical of the Novichok family were found in Mr. Navalny’s blood.
According to the CWC, the poisoning of an individual through the use of any nerve
agent is a use of a chemical weapon, whether or not that chemical is included in
the Convention. Upon receipt of the analysis of the samples by the designated
laboratories, the Technical Secretariat prepared its report, which was shared with the

20-172405/41

S/2020/1202

German authorities. At Germany’s request, the Technical Secretariat subsequently
shared the summary of the report with all States parties and made it public.
On 6 October, I received a request from the Russian Federation for a technical
assistance visit under paragraph 38 (e) of article VIII of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, concerning the same incident. The Technical Secretariat has since
engaged with the Russian Federation to resolve the outstanding legal, technical and
operational matters necessary for such a visit to take place. The Technical Secretariat
is still awaiting elements in that respect from the Russian Federation before being
able to deploy a technical assistance visit to Russia, as was done for Germany. The
detailed correspondence exchanged on that issue with the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation to the OPCW will be made available via the OPCW’s
public website. The Technical Secretariat and its network of designated laboratories
look forward to assisting the Russian Federation in its request, as has been done
previously with other States parties.
All of those developments demonstrate the need for the OPCW to remain
capable of professionally and independently addressing all challenges related to
chemical weapons. We need to maintain our capacity to render expert assistance
to all 193 States parties whenever we are requested. But we also need to be able to
accompany and support States parties in increasing their own national capabilities
to counter threats of the use of chemical weapons. Plots or attempts to use chemical
weapons by non-State actors have been reported in member States across various
regions. The risk is real, and the international community needs to tackle it up front.
The project to build a Centre for Chemistry and Technology — the ChemTech
Centre — close to the OPCW headquarters in The Hague has made steady progress
this year, within the planned timeline and budget. The construction of the facility
is scheduled to begin in the summer of next year and to be completed by the end
of 2022. The Centre will support international cooperation and capacity-building
activities for States parties in order to better protect them against the risk of the use
of chemical weapons and to enhance international cooperation on the peaceful uses
of chemistry, with the ultimate goal of protecting people and the environment. It
will also house a state-of-the-art laboratory. And not least, the Centre will play an
important role in ensuring the OPCW’s business continuity. That is essential, as the
OPCW’s headquarters has continued to be subjected to various sorts of cyberattacks
throughout the year. The number of those attacks is on the rise, and the level of
sophistication is considerable.
The situation regarding the international non-proliferation and disarmament
regimes is worrisome. Many of those regimes are under threat, while others
continue to lack efficient verification or structured mechanisms capable of ensuring
confidence in their implementation. Against that backdrop, the Chemical Weapons
Convention embodies a total and verifiable ban on an entire category of weapons
of mass destruction. We work for the complete elimination and total destruction
of chemical weapons, with zero tolerance. The Convention is a modern and
comprehensive international legal instrument.
The OPCW is mandated to prevent the re-emergence of chemical weapons,
and there is no room for complacency, because the goal of destroying all declared
stockpiles of chemical weapons, which will be soon accomplished, is only one
important milestone in our work. For the past 23 years, the OPCW has delivered
concrete results. Over the past seven years, it has been under growing scrutiny.
Despite that pressure, the Organization has maintained its professionalism and
focused faithfully on its mission. We will continue to stay the course that was
assigned to us by the 193 States parties to the Convention. We owe it to the victims
of the use of chemical weapons and to future generations.
6/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

In conclusion, let me cite four very short sentences.
“The use of chemical weapons … is intolerable and a serious violation of
international law ... There can be no justification for the use of these abhorrent
weapons ... We must remain united and determined in preventing their use
... It is imperative that those who use, or have used, chemical weapons are
identified and held accountable.”
Those words are not mine. They were part of the message delivered by the SecretaryGeneral a few days ago, on 30 November, on the occasion of the Day of Remembrance
for all Victims of Chemical Warfare.

20-172407/41

S/2020/1202

Annex III
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations, Karen Van Vlierberge
[Original: French]
I would like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu
and the Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW), Mr. Fernando Arias, for their briefings.
Today the Security Council is addressing the subject of the use of chemical
weapons in Syria, essentially for the last time during my country’s term on the
Council. This is an opportune moment to consider how the Syrian dossier has
evolved over the past two years.
First, all the member States of the Security Council have repeatedly stated that
chemical weapons should never be used under any circumstances. The Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction is a testament to our collective aversion to the
use of such weapons. Its full and unconditional implementation is the only way to
guarantee a world without chemical weapons. The Convention is a moral declaration
concerning the dignity of humankind as well as a legal instrument.
Since Syria’s accession to the Convention in 2013, the OPCW has
systematically strengthened its engagement with that country. That has been done
in full transparency and in consultation with the Syrian Arab Republic, notably
through the creation in 2014 of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission. The Declaration
Assessment Team was created in the same year with a view to assisting Syria in
resolving the gaps and inconsistencies identified in its initial declaration. Numerous
meetings have taken place between the OPCW and the Syrian authorities.
Unfortunately, during the period in which Belgium has been a member of
the Security Council, no substantive progress has been made in resolving the gaps
and inconsistencies in Syria’s declaration. It is not a mere technicality that Syria’s
declaration remains incomplete. That leads us to the inevitable conclusion that, unlike
the OPCW in its work, Syria has not undertaken serious efforts to comply with the
demands that it voluntarily accepted when it joined the Convention in 2013. There is
no excuse for that. Furthermore, the possibility that additional stockpiles of chemical
weapons exist in Syria and might again be used against the Syrian population cannot
be denied or ignored.
Secondly, the Fact-Finding Mission concluded that chemical weapons had
been used on numerous occasions, and the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative
Mechanism attributed responsibility for a number of them to the Syrian regime. Faced
with the Security Council’s refusal to extend the mandate of the Joint Investigative
Mechanism, the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) was established as an
instrument of the OPCW to continue to investigate the suspected use of chemical
weapons. The IIT’s April report confirms the use of chemical weapons in Ltamenah
in 2017 and exposes a broader pattern of behaviour by the Syrian authorities of
violence against their own population, including by using chemical weapons, as an
integral part of Syria’s military strategy. We fully support the IIT and urge Syria to
guarantee access to its territory.
Thirdly, the need for the Security Council to discuss this file on a monthly
basis has been questioned as a distraction from more pressing issues. However, this
meeting is not conducted simply out of habit. The Security Council adopted resolution
2118 (2013) in 2013. Syria is still not respecting that resolution and therefore remains
a continuing threat to international peace and security.
8/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Belgium was elected to the Security Council under the maxim “Building
consensus, acting for peace”, and it is that approach that we are guided by on this
dossier. We will always seek to build consensus and, where possible, to create the
conditions for a better understanding among the member States of the OPCW. At
the same time, we will always assume our responsibilities in defending our values.
During our tenure on the Council, however, we have seen efforts to
promote a false narrative through disinformation with a view to polarizing the
Security Council’s discussions. Time and time again, independent surveys have
refuted every attempt to create an alternate reality. It is time to recognize that it
is not in the Council’s interest to espouse conspiracy theories, which serve only
to weaken the role that the Council can play in the maintenance of international
peace and security, undermining its authority and, ultimately, its legitimacy. Both
permanent and elected members have an interest in preserving the Council’s mandate,
as envisioned by the Charter of the United Nations, including when that means
opposing and speaking out against specific actors. Failure to do so is a violation of
the Charter.
Fourthly, accountability is an important tool in preventing the re-emergence
of chemical weapons. The fight against impunity has been at the heart of Belgium’s
efforts for many years. We welcome the role played by mechanisms and bodies
such as the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011 and the International Criminal Court (ICC). The use of chemical weapons in
international conflicts has been a war crime under the Rome Statute of the ICC since
its inception. In 2010, Belgium also successfully proposed an amendment to the
Statute to make the use of chemical weapons a war crime in non-international armed
conflicts. We call on States that have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute and
that amendment.
Since our accession to the Security Council, some progress has been made
in establishing accountability for the crimes committed in Syria. However, there is
still a long way to go. Director-General Arias has a particularly difficult task. Let me
assure him of my country’s full commitment to his organization and its goals, and let
me also congratulate him on his personal commitment.

20-172409/41

S/2020/1202

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Geng Shuang
[Original: English and Chinese]
Before delivering my statement, I would like to take this opportunity to
welcome to today’s meeting Ambassador Barbara Woodward, the new Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the
United Nations. I also thank Mrs. Nakamitsu and Mr. Arias for their briefings.
China has always opposed the use of chemical weapons by any country, entity
or individual under any circumstances and for any purpose. Allegations of the use
of chemical weapons should always be investigated and addressed with impartiality
and objectivity, based on facts and guided by the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and
on Their Destruction (CWC). Regarding the issue of chemical weapons in Syria, I
would like to emphasize the following three points.
First, all parties should encourage the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to maintain good communication and cooperation with
the Syrian Government and take an objective view of Syria’s efforts. The Syrian
Government and the OPCW Technical Secretariat recently held their twenty-third
round of technical consultations, during which they discussed all outstanding
issues concerning Syria’s initial declaration, three of which were closed. Syria once
again expressed its readiness to maintain communication and cooperation with
the Technical Secretariat. Syria’s constructive attitude and the outcomes of those
exchanges should be recognized.
China understands that the proposed plan for this dossier has been postponed
owing to the coronavirus disease pandemic. We hope that Syria and the Technical
Secretariat will resume the relevant deployment and activities when conditions
permit, so as to ensure positive progress on the remaining issues. The Permanent
Representative of Syria recently wrote to the President of the Security Council to
submit detailed information about an Idlib terrorist organization’s attempt to carry
out a chemical attack, and we hope that the OPCW will give that matter due attention.
Secondly, all parties should approach the issue of chemical weapons in Syria
with openness, transparency and inclusiveness, while respecting the facts and the
science. In the past few years, the OPCW has released a number of reports on the
alleged use of chemical weapons in Syria. Many independent experts have raised
doubts about this from a technical standpoint and highlighted contradictions in
the reports, to which the OPCW should provide professional, science-based and
convincing responses. China opposes jumping to conclusions or even rushing into
action at a time when many question marks still remain. Certain members of the
Security Council simply refuse to listen to divergent views and are determined
to apply pressure and place attribution. They want to label anyone with a view
different from their own as undermining the authority of the OPCW. Such conduct is
irresponsible, unconstructive and politically motivated.
Thirdly, all States parties should help to bring the issue of accountability
for the use of chemical weapons back within the framework of the CWC and
should safeguard the authority and integrity of the Convention. Some nations
have weaponized the OPCW in order to undermine and suppress other countries,
substituting votes for dialogue, which has led to deep divisions among OPCW States
parties. The working methods of the Investigation and Identification Team, which
was established by those countries, are opaque, and its reports do not reflect the
10/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

integrity of the chain of custody, meaning they are highly controversial. Pending
a solution to those problems, at the ninety-fourth session of the Executive Council
those countries once again pushed for a vote on a draft decision concerning the
Syrian chemical-weapons issue. That approach is not at all constructive, and if it
continues, the OPCW’s work is bound to become further politicized over time.
China calls on Director-General Arias and the Technical Secretariat to take
steps to conduct their work in an impartial, objective and independent manner,
promote dialogue and communication among States parties, return to consensusbased decision-making and truly safeguard the authority of the Convention and the
long-term interests of the OPCW.
The statement by the representative of the Russian Federation includes a
number of specific questions. We hope that Mr. Arias will provide a timely response
to them.

20-1724011/41

S/2020/1202

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Dominican Republic to
the United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
First of all, we are grateful to Director-General Fernando Arias for his
presence at today’s meeting, and we thank him for his valuable contributions and
leadership. We are also grateful for the briefing delivered by High Representative
Izumi Nakamitsu and would like to take this opportunity to highlight the professional
performance of the members of her team and the support they have provided in the
two years of our Security Council membership.
We welcome the recent holding of the first session of the Conference of the
States Parties to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, as well as
the considerable efforts made by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) to fulfil its mandate, despite the challenges and limitations caused
by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The Dominican Republic reiterates its unwavering commitment to nonproliferation and the total and irreversible destruction of chemical weapons. We also
reaffirm our full support for the OPCW and our confidence in the professional,
impartial and objective work that it has been doing since its foundation in order to
prevent the development of chemical weapons and eradicate their use throughout the
world. In that regard, we commend the efforts made by the OPCW and the member
States that have demonstrated a firm commitment to implementing the provisions
outlined in the Convention and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
With regard to the updates contained in the eighty-sixth monthly report of the
OPCW (see S/2020/1152), we are pleased to note that the information provided by
the Syrian Arab Republic during the twenty-third round of technical consultations
led to the closing of three outstanding issues related to its initial declaration. In
that respect, we encourage the Syrian authorities to continue those technical
consultations in order to strengthen collaboration with the OPCW and provide the
required information to resolve the remaining outstanding issues.
We continue to emphasize that the good-faith collaboration of the Syrian Arab
Republic with the OPCW is an essential element in reaching a final solution on this
dossier. In that regard, we believe that the misinformation, persistent questioning
and discrediting of the work carried out by various OPCW investigation teams are
strategies that are detrimental to the overarching goal of this file.
Despite the momentous achievements of the OPCW in destroying Syria’s
declared chemical stockpiles and production facilities, numerous chemical-weapon
attacks have been documented by various OPCW investigation teams, proving the
existence of toxic chemical agents in Syrian territory. It is also regrettable that the
Syrian Arab Republic has not fully complied with the measures contained in the
Executive Council decision of 9 July, which was based on the findings of the first
report of the Investigation and Identification Team. It is therefore urgent that the
parties show firm signs of political will reflecting significant changes regarding
the total elimination of chemical weapons and guaranteeing full compliance with
the Chemical Weapons Convention and accountability for the heinous crimes that
have been perpetrated against men, women and children. The Dominican Republic
strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under
any circumstances, as a threat to international peace and security and a flagrant
violation of international law and the Convention.
12/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

In conclusion, we believe that greater efforts must be made to ensure that
actions carried out in total disregard of international law do not go unpunished. We
therefore reiterate our call for unity in the Security Council, which is vital if we are
to move in that direction.

20-1724013/41

S/2020/1202

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Estonia to
the United Nations, Gert Auväärt
I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
and Mr. Fernando Arias, Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), for their briefings. We very much appreciate that Mr.
Arias was able to join us today.
The regular sharing of information with the Security Council on the OPCW’s
activities and investigations is very valuable. We were grateful that during Estonia’s
presidency of the Security Council in May, Mr. Arias and Mr. Santiago Oñate, the
Coordinator of the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team (IIT), were able to
brief the Council regarding the findings of the first IIT report and shed further light
on that important investigation. Given that the OPCW and the Security Council share
the same objectives of upholding the prohibition of the use of chemical weapons and
supporting chemical disarmament, we need to ensure close collaboration in order to
move things forward on this file.
Let me start by reiterating Estonia’s support for the professional and impartial
work of the OPCW Technical Secretariat. We have full confidence in the technical
expertise and independence of its investigative mechanisms. It is extremely
regrettable that there are countries that deliberately work to undermine the OPCW,
thereby threatening to weaken the international architecture combating the use of
chemical weapons. That is unacceptable and deeply worrying.
We cannot allow the norm against chemical weapons to be eroded and the use
of such weapons to become a normality. The use of Novichok against the Skripals
in the United Kingdom in 2018 and this year in Russia against opposition politician
Alexei Navalny is a very concerning development. We urge Russia to conduct a
thorough and transparent investigation and hold accountable those responsible for
these crimes. We also urge Russia to conclude the necessary agreements with the
OPCW for the swift deployment of the technical assistance mission.
Turning now to the eighty-sixth monthly report of the OPCW DirectorGeneral (see S/2020/1152), we note with regret that outstanding issues persist
relating to Syria’s chemical weapons declaration. While we welcome the fact that
another round of consultations between the Declaration Assessment Team and
the Syrian authorities enabled three outstanding issues related to the declaration
to be closed, there are still 19 remaining — 19 outstanding issues, after six years
and 23 rounds of consultations. The fact is that after signing up to the Chemical
Weapons Convention in 2013 and taking on the responsibility to declare all of its
chemical-weapon stockpiles and facilities, the Syrian regime has failed to do so.
It has deliberately concealed its production facilities and used those horrendous
weapons on multiple occasions against its own people. Independent United Nations
and OPCW investigative mechanisms have found the Syrian regime to be responsible
in seven cases.
Estonia strongly condemns the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab
Air Force, as the first report of the IIT, issued on 8 April, concluded. Using chlorine
and sarin, the Syrian Air Force conducted three chemical attacks in Ltamenah in
2017 in order to suppress the opposition and terrorize its people, with a blatant
disregard for human lives and suffering.
Estonia welcomed the Executive Council decision of 9 July setting out clear
and verifiable parameters for the actions that the Syrian Arab Republic needs to
take in order to return to full compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
14/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

It is very unfortunate and worrisome that Syria has failed to take the required steps.
We hope that once the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention resumes in April, it will take appropriate action regarding Syria’s noncompliance with the Executive Council decision and address Syria’s complete lack
of cooperation with the OPCW. We also hope that the Security Council will not stand
by in the face of clear evidence that chemical weapons have been used by the Syrian
regime and that it will take action to uphold its resolutions and the Charter of the
United Nations.

20-1724015/41

S/2020/1202

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations, Nicolas de Rivière
[Original: French]
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu and Mr. Arias for their briefings.
The presence among us of the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) gives me an opportunity to remind him
of France’s full support for the Organization and to thank him for his commitment
to our collective security. As long as the re-emergence of chemical weapons remains
a major threat, the role of the OPCW is essential. We must support it and defend
it against false accusations that question its impartiality and credibility. Under
Mr. Arias’s leadership, the Organization has maintained the required level of
professionalism and impartiality. I would like to commend once again the remarkable
work carried out by the OPCW’s Investigation and Identification Team, resulting in
the publication in April of a report establishing the Syrian regime’s responsibility for
chemical-weapon attacks in Ltamenah in March 2017.
As we have seen month after month, the Syrian regime continues to ignore its
obligation to cooperate. Its lack of clarity on the status of its stockpiles is unacceptable
and contravenes the provisions of resolution 2118 (2013), adopted more than seven
years ago. The draft decision submitted by France on behalf of 40 delegations and
adopted in July at the ninety-fourth session of the OPCW Executive Council was
quite clear as to the Syrian regime’s obligations in terms of cooperation with the
Organization. In view of the fact that the Syrian regime continues to flout those
obligations, on 24 November, on behalf of 46 delegations from four geographical
groups, France officially submitted to the OPCW Technical Secretariat a draft
decision with a view to taking the necessary collective measures. That draft decision
will be on the agenda of the Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on
the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical
Weapons and on Their Destruction when it convenes again in April 2021. We call on
States parties to learn from the report of 16 October by the Director-General of the
OPCW (see S/2020/1033, annex), which leaves no room for doubt.
The fight against impunity and a total ban on the use of chemical weapons
remain our priorities for the Syrian dossier. They are essential and necessary pillars
for achieving a political solution that will enable lasting peace in Syria. That fight is
also the basis for ensuring the effectiveness and credibility of the prohibition regime.
Together with its partners, France will remain fully mobilized to counter the threat
that chemical weapons pose to our global security. That is why we remain mobilized
in support of the International Partnership against Impunity for the Use of Chemical
Weapons, which we launched with our partners in 2018.

16/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations, Christoph Heusgen
When I was preparing for today’s meeting, I was looking through the press
clippings and saw one published today about two Russian diplomats who were
expelled from the Netherlands yesterday. They worked for Russian spy agencies
and were caught stealing high-tech information from the Netherlands. The article
mentioned the four Russian spies who were caught red-handed two years ago when
they parked their truck outside the building of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and tried to hack the OPCW. The Russian Ambassador
has a very long statement this morning, but he does not mention anything about
Russia’s hacking.
Germany has been on the Security Council for two years, and in all of the
meetings on this topic during that time, Russia has undermined the OPCW. Today
is another example of that. I find it very treacherous that the Russian Ambassador
takes offence at the understanding that questions on this issue should be dealt with in
closed consultations and that we expected only statements to be made today. I would
like to thank Director-General Arias for his statement, and I assume that Russia’s
statement is an attempt at intimidation, to try to catch him off guard.
If Russia were genuinely interested in the substance on this issue, it would not
have obstructed all of the efforts made over the years to gather evidence. It would
not have blocked the OPCW verification mission. It would not have blocked the
attribution of accountability. After two years on the Security Council, we have to say
that the Russian efforts to undermine the OPCW have failed. The OPCW remains a
very strong and respected organization. It has functioned well, despite the constant
efforts to undermine it, or, to quote the Russian Ambassador, despite the smear
campaign that is being led against it.
Under difficult circumstances, Mr. Arias has done a very good job. On behalf
of the German Government, I would like to thank him for his personal commitment
and that of the Technical Secretariat in all of their efforts to uphold the Chemical
Weapons Convention. My thanks also go to Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu. I have a lot of
admiration for her and the way in which she always upholds her unwavering position
in defending the global norm of the non-use of chemical weapons.
After seven years and 86 progress reports, few advances have been made on
the Syrian chemical-weapon file. For seven years, the Syrian regime has stalled
and obstructed the investigations. The regime has failed to make any declaration
concerning its chemical weapons programme and arsenal that can hold up to
scrutiny. We heard from the briefers today that 19 questions remain unanswered.
Among those are questions relating to a chemical-weapon production facility, and
we must not take that lightly. The regime has refused to cooperate with the OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission and the Investigation and Identification Team. It has chosen
to ignore the decisions adopted by the OPCW’s Executive Council. Worse still,
despite the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), the Syrian regime has continued to
use chemical weapons against its own people in their country, in Khan Shaykhun
and Ltamenah, as we have heard today.
Germany calls on the members of the Security Council and those soon to
begin their term on the Council to continue to stand up for international law and the
Chemical Weapons Convention. I implore them not to succumb to the war of attrition
that is being waged here. Germany will continue from outside the Council to support
the OPCW and strive for accountability. We will support the OPCW’s attribution
mechanism, which we believe is key.
20-1724017/41

S/2020/1202

In his statement, the OPCW Director-General confirmed that the use of
nerve agents constitutes a violation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. That reemergence, as we have seen in Syria and in the terrible cases of the Skripals and
Mr. Navalny, must not be tolerated. There can be just and lasting peace in Syria
only if the perpetrators of those most heinous crimes are identified and brought
to justice. National jurisdictions in Germany and elsewhere are starting to fill the
current void. The Office of the Federal Public Prosecutor General in Germany is
collecting information on the use of chemical weapons, and just recently civil-society
organizations filed charges concerning the chemical-weapon attacks in Ghouta and
Khan Shaykhun in Syria. There is a ray of hope.

18/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Annex IX
Statement by the First Secretary of Indonesia to the United Nations,
Yvonne Mewengkang
We thank Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu and Director-General Arias
for their briefings.
We appreciate the Director General’s eighty-sixth monthly report on the
progress made in eliminating the Syrian chemical-weapons programme (see
S/2020/1152, annex). My delegation is also pleased that Director-General Arias is
here with us, virtually, today. Indonesia wishes to highlight the following points.
First, regarding the early resolution of all outstanding issues, we are all aware
that that is possible only through continued and enhanced cooperation between the
Technical Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and the Syrian Arab Republic, with the necessary support of all relevant
parties, including the Security Council.
Since its first Security Council meeting on this dossier (see S/PV.8659),
Indonesia has consistently emphasized the importance of constructive and
substantive engagement on the part of both parties. We sincerely hope that today’s
meeting will serve as one of the ways in which we can further discuss developments
that could lead to future progress on this issue. In that context, we are pleased to note
that three of the outstanding issues related to the Syrian National Authority’s initial
declaration were closed during the recent round of consultations. We commend
the commitment of both the OPCW and the Syrian Arab Republic to closing
those issues and encourage them to continue to review and discuss the remaining
outstanding issues.
Secondly, my delegation notes that the Investigation and Identification Team
(IIT), as a non-judicial investigative body, is continuing its investigations. We want
to reiterate that the IIT must function in a balanced, impartial and transparent
manner, in accordance with the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Any divergences on this particular topic should be discussed in a comprehensive and
constructive manner, free from any kind of politicization. That also applies to the
processes undertaken by the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission.
Thirdly, we appreciate the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s readiness for
deployment, despite the ongoing challenge of the coronavirus disease pandemic. It
is important that the OPCW-mandated activities continue while at the same time the
health, safety and security of all its personnel is maintained. This unprecedented
situation requires some adjustments on the ground. We encourage the OPCW to
carefully plan its future site inspections and deployments, taking into account the
development of the pandemic.
As the Director-General’s latest report makes clear, there are gaps,
inconsistencies and discrepancies that remain unresolved. We therefore once again
encourage the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian Arab Republic to ensure
that the necessary consultations are being held regularly. Moving forward based
on good faith should be everyone’s main goal. My delegation believes that any
provocative rhetoric or actions would only exacerbate this already complex and
sensitive issue.
As this is Indonesia’s last meeting on this specific dossier, I would like to
reiterate the importance of our collective endeavour to prevent the recurrence of
the use of chemical weapons or toxic chemicals as weapons, and the importance of
unity in the Security Council in that regard. Indonesia strongly condemns the use of
chemical weapons anywhere, at any time and by any country, organization, group
20-1724019/41

S/2020/1202

or person, under any circumstances. No one should ever be a victim of chemical
weapons, and together we can accomplish that goal.

20/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Niger to
the United Nations, Niandou Aougi
[Original: French]
I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu and Mr. Fernando Arias for their briefings.
Let me begin by reiterating my delegation’s consistent position that chemical
weapons constitute a threat to international peace and security and that their use
cannot be tolerated anywhere, by anyone, under any circumstances. Any such use is
an act that we strongly condemn and that is in total contradiction of the provisions of
the Chemical Weapons Convention and international law. We therefore support the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and commend its
efforts to shed light on the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
My delegation reiterates its call to members of the Security Council to avoid
any politicization of this topic and to work to create an environment conducive to a
calm and technical analysis of the results of the OPCW investigations. The lack of
consensus on how to deal with the issue of the use of chemical weapons in Syria is
the main obstacle to holding the true culprits accountable, which in turn is likely to
prolong the finalization of the investigations and delay the holding of the perpetrators
of those acts to account. The same also applies to the composition of any team tasked
with investigating the alleged incidents, which must be inclusive and participatory
so as to avoid the outcomes suffering the same fate as previous findings.
We will not cease to reiterate that our common and collective efforts in the
face of the coronavirus disease pandemic must not distract us from the fight against
terrorism. All allegations of the possession and stockpiling of chemical agents
by armed terrorist groups in Syria must also be a focus of the OPCW’s attention,
since if substantiated they would be very dangerous, not just for Syria but for the
entire region.
In conclusion, my delegation encourages the OPCW and the Government of
the Syrian Arab Republic to pursue and strengthen cooperation in order to reach an
agreement on the issues outstanding with regard to Syria’s initial declaration, and
thereby advance the work of the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT), in accordance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention, OPCW Executive Council decision ECM-33/DEC.1 and Security Council resolution 2118 (2013). In that regard, we were
pleased to note in the Director-General’s report (see S/2020/1152, annex) that the
twenty-third round of consultations held in Damascus between the DAT and the
Syrian authorities facilitated the settlement of three outstanding issues concerning
the Syrian authorities’ initial declaration.

20-1724021/41

S/2020/1202

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Vassily Nebenzia
[Original: English and Russian]
I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. I hope I can
count on her understanding, as my statement will focus on the remarks made by the
other briefer at today’s meeting, whose appearance before the Security Council has
been highly anticipated and whose very participation has been the subject of intense
discussion among the members of the Council.
I would like to welcome Mr. Fernando Arias, the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and to take this
opportunity to ask him a number of questions concerning the approach that the
OPCW is pursuing with regard to the Syrian chemical dossier.
With your permission, Mr. President, I will now switch to English to ensure
that it is easier for Mr. Arias to understand my questions without the possibility of
anything being lost in translation.
We all remember when, with our encouragement, Syria joined the OPCW, made
its initial declaration and subsequently got rid of its stockpiles of chemical weapons,
a fact that the OPCW has confirmed on numerous occasions. That development led
to hopes that the allegations that Damascus had used chemical weapons against its
own population would become a thing of the past.
However, the situation gradually changed. Our Western colleagues
consistently increased the pressure on the Syrian authorities, trying in vain to topple
the Government with the help of the armed opposition groups that they supported.
I will not dwell on the details. To cut a long story short, Western countries made
a number of serious accusations against Damascus, mostly on the basis of video
footage from social media and questionable testimonies by witnesses on the
ground, relayed through foreign-based Syrian opposition and non-governmental
organizations such as the White Helmets, which formed the basis for the reports of
the OPCW’s Investigation and Identification Team (IIT). The West has maintained
its anti-Syrian narrative despite all the apparent discrepancies and evidence to the
contrary put forward by Syria, Russia and independent experts, and Western countries
continue to exploit the allegations as part of their political crusade against the
Al-Assad Government.
There can be no doubt that the OPCW, under the leadership of Mr. Arias, plays
an important role in that process and is actively used by our Western colleagues to
support their claims that Syria has used chemical weapons on several occasions.
However, the conclusions of the OPCW have been repeatedly called into question,
not only by external experts but also by those from inside the Organization who
participated in the investigative activities. In general, the public has a lot of questions
for the OPCW. We believe that those questions need to be addressed in order to
uphold the credibility of the OPCW. That is why we insisted on inviting Mr. Arias
to Security Council meetings and believe that he should be welcome to address the
Council regularly.
Russia attaches great importance to the OPCW and strongly condemns all
instances of the use of chemical weapons, no matter who the perpetrators. However,
we reject speculation and political smear campaigns, which, unfortunately, are
poisoning the OPCW on an increasingly frequent basis. In order to facilitate the
Director-General’s work, we have prepared a series of questions.
22/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

First, while investigating the incident in Aleppo in November 2018, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat received exhaustive evidence from the Syrian authorities,
including information from Russian military experts, showing that the opposition
was responsible for that chemical attack. However, the latest report of the OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission claims that the available evidence is not sufficient to conclude
that chemical weapons were used in that attack. In contrast, during the investigations
into the incidents in Douma and Khan Shaykhun, the evidence provided by notorious
non-governmental organizations such as the White Helmets was accepted readily and
without hesitation by the Technical Secretariat. What comments does the DirectorGeneral have regarding that clear example of double standards?
Second, almost every Technical Secretariat report is based on the notion of
“highly likely”, with evidence provided by sources whose reputation is questionable
at best. Rather than collecting samples on-site, the Technical Secretariat is conducting
its investigations remotely, relying on information from external and open sources.
Meanwhile, States members of the OPCW are expected to be satisfied with those
investigations. Does the Director-General accept that such practices violate the basic
requirements of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), in particular with regard
to preserving the chain of custody? What measures does he plan to implement in order
to bring the working methods of the OPCW Technical Secretariat into compliance
with the CWC?
Third, at one point in time the OPCW Technical Secretariat offered to help
Syria in submitting its initial declaration, which was prepared within a limited time
frame and amid an ongoing military conflict on Syrian territory. It is evident, even
to external observers, that the Syrian authorities are willing to cooperate with a
view to closing all outstanding issues. However, the same does not appear to be the
case for the OPCW Technical Secretariat. There are indications that it is deliberately
stalling the process by inventing further pretexts with a view to keeping the Syrian
file open. In particular, Mr. Ian Henderson, a former OPCW inspector, who has
first-hand experience of the situation, claims that several States had issues and gaps
similar to the Syrian Arab Republic related to their initial declarations. Yet none of
those countries have ever faced the same level of criticism as Syria. He described
the Technical Secretariat’s approach to Syria’s initial declaration as “keep the file
open” and “keep the pressure on”. The Technical Secretariat is also attempting to
turn a blind eye to 200 tons of missing chemical-weapon precursors in Libya, while
at the same time pressuring Syria to explain the disappearance of tiny quantities
of chemical substances. Can Mr. Arias confirm that the issues concerning Syria’s
initial declaration are not extraordinary for the OPCW? And if that is the case,
then how does he explain the discrepancy in the way the Technical Secretariat has
approached the Syrian initial declaration as compared to other countries? Why are
the requirements for Libya different from those for Syria, for example?
Fourth, the controversy surrounding the OPCW’s Douma investigation and
report has been widely publicized. Some of the investigators claimed that there
was irregular and scientifically fraudulent behaviour in the process involving the
suppression and manipulation of, among other things, chemical and toxicological
evidence, as well as a failed attempt to publish a doctored version of the team’s
original report. Mr. Arias said that all views were taken into consideration, yet
the inspectors say otherwise. Many, including the first Director-General of the
OPCW, José Bustani, believe that an open and free discussion between the OPCW
management team and all of the investigators would help the organization resolve
that controversy. After all, the CWC provides for inspectors to attach any differing
observations to inspection reports, including reports on the alleged use of chemical
weapons. In that respect, has Mr. Arias met or would he be willing to meet with
those inspectors to allow them the opportunity to share their concerns?
20-1724023/41

S/2020/1202

Fifth, it is now well established via leaked documents and the testimonies
of former OPCW inspectors that the Fact-Finding Mission’s original interim report
on Douma was heavily redacted and that there was a failed attempt to publish that
redacted version without the knowledge of the Douma Mission team, including
the insertion of a number of unsubstantiated conclusions. That failed attempt was
widely reported and, as far as we know, has not been publicly denied. That incident
constitutes a major act of deception on the part of the OPCW and was, as the DirectorGeneral is aware, the cause of the original rift within the Fact-Finding Mission. In an
email recently published by the Grayzone news outlet, it is claimed by the OPCW’s
former Chief of Cabinet that the report was not redacted at the behest of the Office
of the Director-General. Has an investigation been conducted to determine at whose
behest it was carried out, and if so, what was the outcome of that investigation and
what actions were taken as a result?
Sixth, in October 2018 the Courage Foundation panel reported that there
were detailed anomalies in the Fact-Finding Mission’s final report on the Douma
incident, including with regard to chemical analysis, toxicology consultations,
ballistics studies and witness testimonies. Those anomalies were corroborated by
leaked documents and are now well understood. However, the OPCW has refused
to respond to any of those clearly defined issues and instead repeatedly dismissed
those issues based on the assertion that most of the work was carried out after the
departure of Inspector B. But if we compare the final report with the original report
that was leaked, it is clear that the bulk of the text was already written by June 2018.
In the light of those facts, does the Director-General still stand by his assertion
that the bulk of the Fact-Finding Mission’s investigation was carried out after the
departure of Inspector B?
Seventh, in recent weeks OPCW personnel are reported to have leaked a draft
letter to the Bellingcat news website. The Bellingcat article claims that Mr. Arias
said that Inspector B’s assumptions concerning the final report were wrong because
“he simply wasn’t aware of the latest scientific techniques used by the OPCW,
because they were developed after he had left the Organization. It was these
techniques that allowed the OPCW to conclude that chlorine gas had been
released in the building in which the Syrian civilians died”.
Regarding the draft letter that was leaked to Bellingcat, can Mr. Arias confirm
whether the source of that leak was from inside the OPCW, whether he agrees with
the information in the article and whether an investigation has been launched into
the suspected leak?
Eighth, over the past week new documents have emerged, again via the
Grayzone, confirming that other senior officials also shared concerns regarding the
Douma investigation and supported the dissenting inspectors. One senior official is
reported to have made highly politicized and prejudiced comments that the Douma
investigation could not be challenged because that would “feed into the Russian
narrative”. Has the Director-General been made aware of that, and what comments
does he have in that regard?
I will stop there. Eight questions will be enough for now, but I can assure Mr.
Arias that we have many more. I want to draw the Director-General’s attention to
the fact that yesterday we circulated as an official document of the Security Council
and the General Assembly the summary of our Arria Formula meeting in September,
which contains the statements of all the participants who sent them to us. I will
make sure that Mr. Arias receives a copy of that document, which I believe will be
of particular interest to him.

24/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

In conclusion, I wish to remind the Director-General of the special
responsibility that rests with him in leading a key pillar of the chemical-weapon nonproliferation regime, namely the organization responsible for its implementation and
verification. Though it may be technical in nature, its conclusions have far-reaching
political consequences that affect people’s daily lives.
I have intentionally refrained from elaborating on the Executive Council’s
disputed decision of 9 July, which is based on the controversial and biased report
of the illegitimate IIT. However, the Council should be mindful of the fact that that
report, coupled with the artificial delay in resolving the outstanding issues related to
Syria’s initial declaration, triggered a chain of unfair, discriminatory and oppressive
initiatives against Syria, both in The Hague and in New York. One such unfortunate
example is the campaign being led by Western countries to implement a decision
of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention to
disqualify Syria from the OPCW. That is another destabilizing step that could have
severe and irreversible implications.
The Director-General mentioned the Alexei Navalny situation in his briefing.
We also have questions to raise on that issue, but I will save them for the closed
consultations that will follow this meeting.

20-1724025/41

S/2020/1202

Annex XII
Statement by the Counsellor of the Permanent Mission of
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations, Diani
Jimesha Prince
I wish to thank Director-General Arias and High Representative Nakamitsu
for their briefings.
I would like to begin by commending the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for having successfully hosted the first part of the
twenty-fifth session of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons
Convention despite the impediments created by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We look forward to the second part of the Conference taking place in April 2021 or
as soon as the situation allows.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines reiterates its support for the mandate of the
OPCW. Our commitment to ensuring that applied science is used only for peace,
progress and the prosperity of all humankind never wavers. As the implementing
body of the Chemical Weapons Convention, the OPCW plays a tremendous role in
realizing our shared goal of a world free of chemical weapons. We therefore continue
to underscore that it is fundamentally important that its work and that of its various
facets and subsidiary bodies be impartial, independent and free from politicization.
Anything less contributes to the erosion of the multilateral system.
Although the current pandemic has further delayed progress on this dossier,
we recognize the efforts made by both the OPCW and the Syrian Arab Republic to
continue to undertake the critical work in as far as it is possible to do so. We take
note of the seventh round of inspections conducted between 8 and 13 November,
and we look forward to receiving the corresponding report. We also take note of the
reports on the work of the Declaration Assessment Team.
It remains imperative that all gaps and inconsistencies be clarified, and it
is our hope that the continued constructive and inclusive dialogue between the
parties will help to make meaningful progress in that regard. That is the only path
to building trust, fostering cooperation and ensuring the full implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013).
The Security Council should not overlook the notifications issued by the
Syrian Government warning that various armed groups operating in Syria may be
preparing to use chemical weapons. We have an obligation to give that matter due
attention in order to make an assessment and safeguard civilians.
In conclusion, we reiterate our well-known, long-standing and principled
position that the use of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone and under any
circumstances constitutes an abominable violation of international law. The
development, stockpiling, transfer or use of chemical weapons must be prevented, and
the norm against that reprehensible form of warfare must be preserved. Impunity for
their use must not be encouraged through inaction, and the perpetrators of chemical
weapons atrocities must be held accountable. Failure to do so will only embolden
future actors.

26/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of South Africa to the
United Nations, Jerry Matjila
I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs,
and Mr. Fernando Arias, Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), for their briefings.
Let me begin by reiterating South Africa’s position against the use of
chemical weapons under any circumstances. No cause can ever justify the use of any
weapon of mass destruction. South Africa remains committed to its international
obligations as a State party to the Chemical Weapons Convention and a member
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. The use of chemical
weapons undermines those obligations as well as the international norms against the
production, use and stockpiling of such weapons, as established under the Chemical
Weapons Convention. The alleged use of chemical weapons by a State party to
the Convention is a very serious matter that would constitute a material breach of
obligations under the Convention.
South Africa strongly supports multilateralism and the international rule of law,
which includes the non-discriminatory and consistent application of the provisions of
relevant multilateral instruments and the preservation of international norms against
weapons of mass destruction, including chemical weapons. The OPCW is the only
technically competent international authority in the field of chemical weapons. We
therefore appreciate the work that Director-General Arias and the OPCW continue
to undertake in that regard. In order to ensure that States parties adhere to their
obligations, it is imperative that they have full faith and confidence in the work and
processes of the OPCW, without external interference or manipulation of its work.
The States parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention should therefore unite in
preserving the international norm against chemical weapons and the provisions of
the Convention, along with its consistent and non-discriminatory implementation.
South Africa will continue to work for the depoliticization of the relevant
management and decision-making structures established under the Chemical Weapons
Convention, and also towards ensuring that States parties are held accountable for
any violations of their obligations, based on credible, impartial and incontrovertible
evidence. We encourage the Government of Syria to cooperate with the OPCW in
resolving all outstanding issues in order for the international community to have
confidence in the peaceful nature of Syria’s chemical activities. We welcome the
progress made by the Declaration Assessment Team in closing three outstanding
issues related to Syria’s initial declaration during its recent visit to Syria. South
Africa looks forward to additional progress being made in addressing the remaining
outstanding issues.
South Africa reiterates that the only sustainable solution to the Syrian question
remains the achievement of a political solution through an inclusive Syrian-led
dialogue aimed at achieving a political transition that is reflective of the will of the
Syrian people, with guaranteed protection for all groups in Syrian society.

20-1724027/41

S/2020/1202

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the
United Nations, Tarek Ladeb
[Original: Arabic]
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, and
Ambassador Arias, Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), for their briefings.
At the outset, I would like to reaffirm Tunisia’s commitment to the chemicalweapon non-proliferation regime, which is made up of the Chemical Weapons
Convention and its implementing body, the OPCW. That regime constitutes a
comprehensive and balanced framework that is founded on multilateralism,
consensus and cooperation with the aim of ending the possession and use for hostile
purposes of toxic chemicals and completely preventing the proliferation of that type
of weapon of mass destruction, thereby promoting the maintenance of international
peace and security.
I would like to reaffirm my country’s firm and principled position, which is
that Tunisia condemns in the strongest terms the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere and for any reason. We also reaffirm that those who commit such terrible
crimes must be brought to justice. The use of chemicals as weapons constitutes a
threat to international peace and security and a violation of resolution 2118 (2013)
and the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Tunisia supports the important technical work carried out by the OPCW,
in accordance with its mandate. That work led to the elimination of the chemical
stockpile that the Syrian Arab Republic had declared. We commend the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW, as head of the Technical Secretariat, and the various parties
concerned for their efforts, thanks to which the first part of the Conference of the
States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention was successfully convened
despite the difficulties and challenges posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We look forward to the Conference resuming its work next spring on various matters
on its agenda, including the compliance of the Syrian Arab Republic with its treatybased obligations.
In view of the current situation, Tunisia welcomes the resumption of cooperation
between the Syrian Government and the Technical Secretariat. We are therefore
pleased that a team from the Technical Secretariat was able to conduct a seventh
round of inspections last month in the Syrian Arab Republic. In that connection, we
would like to reaffirm the importance of ensuring the safety and security of Technical
Secretariat officials. We urge the Government of Syria to continue to engage in
dialogue and to cooperate with the OPCW in a spirit of constructive engagement in
order to resolve all outstanding issues as soon as possible and ensure full compliance
with its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Tunisia reaffirms that all allegations of the use of toxic chemical substances
as weapons, including by non-State actors, must be investigated in a thorough,
impartial, independent and transparent manner. It is the responsibility of the
international community and the Security Council to work collectively and in a
united and coordinated manner to ensure the continuity and stability of the regime
for the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and to close the issue of
Syrian chemical weapons.

28/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Annex XV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
I would like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu and
Director-General Arias for their briefings today. The Director-General’s presence,
along with Mrs. Nakamitsu, underscores the cooperation between the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations on this
issue affecting international peace and security.
I thank Director-General Arias for his eighty-sixth monthly report (see
S/2020/1152, annex) and for his update today on the work of the OPCW. Despite
the challenges posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has spared no effort in attempting to take forward its mandated activities.
We are grateful for the professionalism and dedication of the OPCW and its personnel.
We take particular note of the updates on the work of the Declaration Assessment
Team. The Director-General’s report raises two important points.
First, we note that the Declaration Assessment Team and Syria were able to
close three outstanding issues related to Syria’s initial declaration. That shows that
contrary to the assertions of some that the outstanding issues are artificial, they are
in fact real and eminently capable of being resolved.
Secondly, the report highlights the evidence collected by the Declaration
Assessment Team since 2014 indicating the production or weaponization of chemicalwarfare nerve agents at a production facility that the Syrian regime declared never
to have been used for such production. That underlines the serious nature and
importance of resolving the remaining 19 issues.
In addition, the unresolved issues related to Syria’s declaration include
thousands of munitions and hundreds of tons of chemical agents that Syria has
not accounted for. Until all of the issues are resolved, the complete elimination
of Syria’s chemical weapons programme cannot be verified, as required under
resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). Given that the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism (JIM) and the OPCW
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) have established that the Syrian regime
has used chemical weapons on at least seven occasions since 2013, it is beyond
dispute that the situation represents an ongoing threat to international peace and
security.
In the light of that situation, we welcome the resolve shown by the OPCW
Executive Council in adopting its decision of 9 July in response to the findings of the
IIT on the 2017 chemical-weapon attacks carried out by the Syrian Arab Air Force
in Ltamenah. In that decision, the Executive Council was explicit in stipulating
that Syria had to declare the chemical weapons and facilities in its possession,
acknowledge its chemical-weapon activity and resolve the outstanding issues related
to its initial declaration. As Director-General Arias has once again confirmed today,
Syria failed to comply with the decision, and that will now be addressed during the
next part of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention
in April 2021.
Just as the OPCW Executive Council and the Conference of the States Parties
have a role to play in upholding compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention
and their own decisions, the Security Council has a clear and distinct obligation to
address Syria’s repeated breaches of resolution 2118 (2013). Those breaches include
the use of chemical weapons, as identified by both the JIM and the IIT, the retention
20-1724029/41

S/2020/1202

and production of chemical weapons in order to carry out those attacks and the failure
to comply fully with the OPCW, including with regard to its initial declaration and
ensuring access for the Investigation and Identification Team. We were unequivocal
on the action that the Security Council should take in response to non-compliance
with resolution 2118 (2013). Not to act would be a dereliction of the Council’s duty.
Finally, I would like to reiterate the United Kingdom’s trust and confidence
in the OPCW, including its work and dedicated staff. We have full confidence in the
expertise of the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the robust methodologies of its
Fact-Finding Mission in investigating the allegations of the use of chemical weapons
in Syria. It is not surprising that the individuals working at the Technical Secretariat
hold a range of views, and a robust assessment process should involve debate and
challenge. However, as the Director-General confirmed, the Technical Secretariat
took all views, evidence and theories into account in reaching its considered overall
judgment regarding the attack in Douma. The OPCW Technical Secretariat and its
multinational personnel showed great professionalism and resilience under intense
external pressure and scrutiny. That included, as we have heard, cyberattacks,
such as the foiled attempted cyberattack by Russia’s Military Intelligence Service
in The Hague in 2018, and a sustained disinformation campaign designed to
undermine its credibility.
Attempts to undermine the OPCW and its staff have intensified since the
use of nerve agents in the Salisbury and Amesbury attack in 2018, the vote by
the Conference of the States Parties to give the Technical Secretariat the role of
attributing responsibility for the chemical-weapon attacks in Syria in 2018 and the
poisoning this year of the Russian opposition politician Alexei Navalny with a nerve
agent from the Novichok group.
Only a year ago, the Security Council adopted a presidential statement
that unanimously reaffirmed its strong support for the work of the OPCW (S/
PRST/2019/14). Just two weeks ago, the overwhelming majority of States parties from
across all regional groups voted in favour of the OPCW’s budget, which included
renewed funding for the IIT and other Technical Secretariat teams working on the
Syria file. As a permanent member of the Security Council, the United Kingdom
is well aware of the responsibility conferred on us by the States Members of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and security. We will
continue to act on behalf of the vast majority of Member States who believe in the
necessity of protecting the long-held norm prohibiting the use of chemical weapons
and holding to account those who violate it.
I have questions for the Director-General, which I will raise now, but he may
prefer to answer them in the closed session, as is customary.
Some have argued that Syria verifiably destroyed all of its chemical weapons
in 2014 and that the OPCW has not been able to find any evidence to the contrary
since then. How would Mr. Arias respond to that?
Our second question is as follows. In some respects, Syria appears to be
engaging in a process with the OPCW, and yet the verification of its initial declaration
has been outstanding for seven years. How can Syria improve its engagement,
and how does the Director-General assess the prospects of achieving a complete
and accurate declaration by the Syrian Arab Republic as to its chemical weapons
programme? What is needed in order to achieve that?
And our third question: does the Director-General know of any other case in
which it has been necessary for the Technical Secretariat to continually engage with
a State party over several years in order to arrive at a declaration that is considered
accurate and complete, in accordance with the CWC?
30/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Annex XVI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations, Richard Mills
We thank Director-General Arias and High Representative Nakamitsu for
their briefings, which were professional as always.
We welcome the opportunity for the Security Council to hear directly from
Director-General Arias and to engage in a transparent and open discussion about
the Syrian regime’s abhorrent use of chemical weapons against its own people,
its refusal to fully declare and destroy its chemical weapons programme and its
continued flouting of its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Given the comments of our Russian colleague, I should begin by saying
that the United States strongly supports the leadership and the impartial and
independent work of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). We applaud the OPCW Technical Secretariat. We believe that it conducts
its work in a professional manner and carries out its mission in accordance with the
international standards that the international community expects. The coronavirus
disease pandemic has raised additional hurdles for the OPCW, yet it has found ways
to continue its important work, investigate when incidents of the use of chemical
weapons take place and assist States parties when asked to do so.
The Al-Assad regime’s violations of the Chemical Weapons Convention go
far beyond its undeclared chemical-weapon stockpile; they also include the barbaric
use of those weapons against the Syrian people, including women and children,
throughout the protracted civil war. We must not allow those types of attacks to be
normalized, nor should we become numb to the depravity of the Al-Assad regime.
The United States condemns in the strongest terms the use of chemical weapons
by the Al-Assad regime. Al-Assad’s chemical-weapon attacks are, tragically, just
one example of the atrocities he has committed and continues to inflict on the
Syrian people.
The OPCW Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) has, in our view,
diligently and professionally carried out the work of its mandate, and in April the
IIT’s first report concluded that the Syrian Arab Air Force was responsible for three
chemical weapons attacks in Ltamenah, Syria, in March 2017, including two sarin
attacks and one chlorine attack, affecting more than 100 Syrian people. The victims of
sarin exposure can experience horrific symptoms, from blurred vision and breathing
difficulties to convulsions and respiratory failure, and it can eventually lead to death.
Unfortunately, the IIT’s findings were not surprising, given the Al-Assad regime’s
repeated and well-documented history of the use of chemical weapons.
In response to the IIT’s findings, the OPCW Executive Council took action
and adopted a decision in July requesting that Syria take measures to redress the
situation. That decision received support from more than two thirds of the Executive
Council, including members from across all regional groups. On 14 October, DirectorGeneral Arias shared a report with the Security Council stating that Syria had failed,
unsurprisingly, to complete any of the measures set forth in July’s Executive Council
decision.
The United States strongly supports providing the highly professional and
hard-working staff of the OPCW’s investigative and attribution mechanisms, such as
the IIT, with the means and the resources they need to be able to fulfil the mission
entrusted to them. We congratulate the Director-General on the overwhelming
adoption of the budget at the recent Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical

20-1724031/41

S/2020/1202

Weapons Convention so that the Organization can continue its important work on
upholding the norm against the use of chemical weapons.
Chemical weapons pose a security threat to all States, and when they are
used, the members of the Security Council must never remain silent about such
inhumane and reprehensible acts or treat them with impunity. The Council has
a solemn responsibility to ensure that there are serious consequences for the
perpetrators of such heinous attacks. Unfortunately, Russia and other members of the
Security Council would prefer to support their friend Bashar Al-Assad and block all
action rather than fulfil the Council’s central responsibility to promote international
peace and security.
It is incumbent upon the Security Council to take steps to hold Syria
accountable for its use of chemical weapons and hold Syria to its obligations under
resolution 2118 (2013). Syria must also uphold its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention, and we call on the Conference of the States Parties to take
appropriate action, when its session reconvenes in the spring, in order to send a
strong message to the Al-Assad regime that its actions have consequences. To
that end, the United States, along with 45 other sponsors with broad geographic
representation, has submitted a draft decision to the Conference of the States Parties
in response to Syria’s brazen violation of its obligations under the Convention and its
failure to fulfil the measures set forth in July’s Executive Council decision. We call
on all countries to support that draft decision, aimed at holding Syria accountable
for its actions.
We urge the Al-Assad regime’s enablers, particularly Russia, to encourage
Syria to come clean about its use of chemical weapons and its current chemical-weapon
stockpiles. We continue to support all efforts aimed at ensuring accountability, not
only to provide justice to the victims and the families who have suffered as a result of
those heinous chemical-weapon attacks, but to support the broader political process,
as called for in resolution 2254 (2015), so as to bring peace and stability to Syria and
the Syrian people.
In conclusion, we continue to support the work of the OPCW as well as
its leadership and experts as they work to rid the world of the risk and scourge
of chemical weapons. We applaud the OPCW’s professionalism and integrity in
undertaking that important and solemn task.

32/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Annex XVII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dinh Quy Dang
At the outset, I would like to thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, Under-SecretaryGeneral and High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for her briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). I would also like to thank Mr. Fernando
Arias, Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), for his presence at today’s meeting and for the update he provided.
As a committed advocate of multilateralism and international law, Viet Nam
fully supports the implementation of the Chemical Weapon Convention (CWC),
including the role and work of the OPCW entrusted to it under the Convention.
Respecting and fully implementing the Convention is undoubtedly of the utmost
importance, as we all aspire to a world free of chemical weapons.
I welcome the participation of the Permanent Representatives of Syria, Iran
and Turkey in today’s meeting.
As our briefers mentioned today, there has been continuing engagement
between the OPCW and Syria over the past few years. We take note of the eightysixth monthly report of the OPCW Director-General (see S/2020/1152, annex) and of
the efforts to continue the work of the OPCW Technical Secretariat in Syria despite
the logistical challenges caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
The clarification of outstanding issues remains crucial to putting an end to
this long-standing matter. After an undesirable period in which little progress was
made, we welcome the fact that three outstanding issues related to Syria’s initial
declaration were closed following the twenty-third round of consultations between
the Declaration Assessment Team and the Syrian National Authority. It is our hope
that the two sides will be able to settle the remaining 19 issues in a constructive
spirit. We call on the relevant parties to step up their efforts and enhance dialogue
and cooperation in a constructive and non-politicized manner. That is the only viable
way to address all of the remaining gaps and work for the full implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013).
Regarding the alleged uses of chemical weapons in Syria, we share the
international community’s concern about the reports on those incidents. Our
delegation strongly believes that investigations into any possible use of chemical
weapons should focus on the goal of establishing irrefutable facts and evidence.
To achieve that, investigations must be carried out in a comprehensive, conclusive,
objective and impartial manner, based on verified information and without any
politicization.
In seeking a solution to this issue, we note with regret that there is a profound
divergence among various parties. Viet Nam would therefore like to stress the vital
importance of unity on this topic, both among States parties to the CWC and among
the members of the Security Council. We share the same goal of ridding the world of
chemical weapons everywhere. We must work together. Viet Nam will continue to
actively participate in the work of the Conference of the States Parties to the CWC
and to closely follow the discussions of the OPCW Executive Council, including on
this subject.
In conclusion, I would like to stress Viet Nam’s consistent policy of supporting
the complete disarmament and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
including chemical weapons. We categorically condemn the use of chemical
weapons in any form, by anyone, anywhere, under any circumstances and for any
reason. It is a flagrant violation of international law and has disastrous effects on
20-1724033/41

S/2020/1202

civilians and their living environment. We reiterate our view that the only path to
ending the current crisis in Syria is through a comprehensive political settlement,
in full accordance with the principles of international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.

34/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Annex XVIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi
I would like to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
In contemporary history, Iran was the main victim of the large-scale, systematic
and frequent use of chemical weapons during the eight-year war imposed on us by
Saddam Hussein, when some Western States not only assisted Saddam in developing
chemical weapons but also refrained from taking any action when he made extensive
use of those weapons against our citizens and later against Iraqi citizens. Those
bitter experiences taught us that no one should possess such inhumane weapons and
that the legal regime to prohibit their development and use must not allow any sort
of politicization.
We understand and feel more than any other country both the horrible nature of
those inhumane weapons and the poisonous nature of politicizing the implementation
of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and the work of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). It is in that context that we condemn
in the strongest possible terms the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anytime,
anywhere and under any circumstances, and also call for the full, effective, balanced
and non-discriminatory implementation of the Convention as well as for upholding
the integrity, authority and legitimacy of the OPCW.
Nevertheless, it is a source of grave concern that in the past several years,
a group of OPCW member States have politicized the consideration of Syria’s
implementation of the Convention, systematically abusing the processes of the
Security Council and the OPCW. They disregard the fact that in her final report
to the Council, in 2014, the Special Coordinator of the OPCW-United Nations
Joint Mission confirmed that Syria had fulfilled all of its commitments and that its
entire chemical stockpile had been destroyed. That was also later confirmed by the
OPCW. They are referring to a technically defective report of the Investigation and
Identification Team, which was prepared without on-site investigation or due regard
for the chain of custody, and they intentionally disregard the progress achieved by
Syria in implementing its obligations. They also overlook Syria’s commitment, which
it reiterated very recently, to continuing to work with the Technical Secretariat in
order to resolve all outstanding issues as soon as possible.
Even the relevant decision of the OPCW Executive Council at its ninety-fourth
session disregarded Syria’s unprecedented cooperation with the OPCW, which it
carried out despite the serious security threats posed by the deadliest of terrorist
groups as well as the restrictions resulting from the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Unfortunately, the unproductive policies of some Western countries, pursued
relentlessly during the course of the past several years, have resulted only in division
within the Security Council and the OPCW, eroding their legitimacy and credibility.
More important, those politically motivated approaches continue to endanger
the consensus decision-making tradition of the OPCW, the latest example of which
was the decision at the recently held twenty-fifth session of the Conference of
the States Parties to the CWC regarding the OPCW’s programme and budget for
2021, which was adopted by a vote. That unconstructive approach will continue to
adversely affect the efforts to achieve the full and effective realization of the very
purpose of the CWC, namely the elimination of chemical weapons, which has yet to
be realized, owing to blatant failure on the part of the United States, as the sole major
possessor State party to the Convention.
20-1724035/41

S/2020/1202

A recent draft decision proposed by a group of countries in order to deprive
a State from continuing to be a party to the Convention despite its having destroyed
all of its chemical weapons, as verified by the OPCW, and despite its continuing
cooperation with the Organization, will set a dangerous precedent and have farreaching, serious consequences for the chemical-weapon disarmament regime.
The continuation of such policies is not acceptable and must no longer be
permitted. Every effort must therefore be made to restore the OPCW’s authority and
promote the full and non-discriminatory implementation of the CWC.

36/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Annex XIX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab
Republic to the United Nations, Bashar Ja’afari
[Original: Arabic]
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, and your friendly country,
South Africa, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We
are confident that you will be able to successfully manage the work of the Council. I
would also like to thank you for convening this open meeting.
I have listened attentively to the statements by my colleagues today. I
would once again like to express our gratitude to those Member States that uphold
international law and the Charter of the United Nations and that have condemned the
use of chemical weapons and other weapons of mass destruction anytime, anywhere
and in any circumstances. I would like to emphasize that the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) is a technical organization. However,
in relation to the Syrian chemical-weapon issue, it has been transformed from a
technical organization with noble goals into a pawn in a geopolitical game controlled
by the United States of America and its allies. Instead of being a faithful custodian
of the Chemical Weapons Convention and ensuring that it is implemented without
politicization or polarization, the OPCW has become a tool that is being used to
pressure and target a State party to the Convention with a view to advancing hostile
agendas directed against the Syrian State.
Since acceding to the Convention in 2013, Syria has made every effort and
strived with the utmost earnestness and diligence to implement all its treaty-based
obligations in a credible and transparent manner, despite the strict timetables
established by the OPCW and the extremely difficult conditions that Syria was
dealing with at the time. Syria nevertheless did everything that was asked of it and
cooperated fully with the OPCW’s Technical Secretariat and teams, to which the
OPCW and its Director-General have attested.
A few days ago, we cooperated with and provided all of the required
assistance to the Declaration Assessment Team, which visited Syria recently, as well
as to another team that departed Syria on 24 November. In its documented reports,
the Technical Secretariat has acknowledged that all Syrian chemical weapons and
declared production facilities were destroyed. Ms. Sigrid Kaag, who is currently a
Minister in the Government of the Netherlands, said in her briefing to the Council
in June 2014 that Syria had fulfilled all of its obligations. At the time, she was the
Special Coordinator of the OPCW-United Nations Joint Mission, a post she held in
2013 and 2014. Syria has fulfilled all of its commitments, while Western countries
and the United States have broken their promises by using the OPCW as a tool to
pursue their political agendas.
The Syrian Arab Republic reiterates that it has not used chemical weapons and
that it remains committed to cooperating with the OPCW and its Technical Secretariat
and the Declaration Assessment Team in order to resolve all outstanding issues and
enable the matter to be closed once and for all as soon as possible, ensuring that it
will no longer be part of a political game or used as fodder for media disinformation.
On 15 November, Syria submitted to the OPCW Technical Secretariat its
eighty-fourth monthly report on activities related to the destruction of chemical
weapons and production facilities in the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic for
the period from 16 October to 15 November. In that report, the Syrian National
Committee for the Implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention reaffirmed
its readiness to continue holding technical meetings and consultations with the
20-1724037/41

S/2020/1202

Technical Secretariat in order to resolve all outstanding issues, as had been previously
agreed. It also reaffirmed that Syria remains completely committed to cooperating
with the Technical Secretariat through structured dialogue aimed at resolving all of
those issues. Such dialogue has led to significant progress on many of those issues,
which can now be closed.
In the light of the ongoing cooperation between the Syrian Government and
the OPCW, the Syrian Arab Republic hosted an OPCW inspection team that carried
out a seventh round of inspections at the Syrian Scientific Studies and Research
Centre facilities in Barzah and Jamrayah. We also hosted an OPCW team tasked with
removing remote monitoring equipment, in accordance with the decision adopted by
the Executive Council on 24 July 2014, which provides that such equipment must be
removed five years after installation.
From 8 to 14 November, the inspection team conducted a seventh round of
inspections at the Scientific Studies and Research Centre. The Syrian National
Committee provided all assistance to and cooperated fully with that team so as to
enable it to complete its mission in full. During the final meeting, the head of the
inspection team acknowledged that the team had been able to conduct all of the visits
it had requested and thanked Syria for the cooperation and support it had provided
during the visit.
Despite the Syrian Government’s cooperation with the OPCW and its teams,
certain Western countries continue to cast doubts on the declaration made by Syria
and question Syria’s cooperation with the Technical Secretariat. In doing that, they
are misrepresenting the cooperation of Syria with the Declaration Assessment Team
and deliberately overlooking the progress made so far in order to perpetuate the
issue. My Government regrets that certain members of the Security Council have not
addressed this issue in an objective and professional manner or complied with the
rules and principles set out in the Charter of the United Nations during the discussions
that take place in the course of the monthly briefings on the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013).
As part of the role-swapping game that the United States is playing with
certain Western countries, France has formally submitted to the OPCW Technical
Secretariat a draft decision prepared by the United States that had already been
distributed secretly by the United States to missions accredited to the OPCW in The
Hague. Moreover, the Netherlands has submitted to the General Assembly a highly
politicized draft resolution entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, directed at a specific State,
my country, which figures in four of the nine paragraphs in the draft resolution.
In that connection, I would like to draw attention to the involvement of the
Netherlands in the scandal related to supporting terrorist organizations in Syria
that played out before the eyes of the international public. Mark Rutte, the Prime
Minister of the Netherlands, recently admitted that he had personally intervened
to obstruct parliamentary investigations into his Government providing millions of
dollars to some 22 terrorist groups, including the Levant Front, which even Dutch
institutions have designated a terrorist group. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands, Stef Blok, previously called for the investigation to be halted, saying
that it would lead to major problems, including the revelation of top-secret matters,
and embarrass allies, which would necessarily be impacted by the investigation.
It should be noted that after Belgium, the Netherlands is the European country
that accounts for the largest number of terrorists, estimated to be in the hundreds,
fighting with terrorist organizations in Syria and Iraq. Moreover, in February 2017,
the intelligence agency of the Netherlands acknowledged that it was dealing with
dozens of Dutch children who had travelled with or without their parents to areas in
38/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Syria and Iraq where the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant was present and had
received military training from that extremist group.
In September 2018, the Dutch broadcasting service NOS also confirmed
that the Government of the Netherlands was supporting the Levant Front group,
which it had designated as a terrorist organization, and had provided equipment
and logistical assistance to that group between 2015 and 2018. Those actions reveal
that the Netherlands and the West are pursuing blatantly hypocritical policies with
regard to counter-terrorism and the protection of human rights. The Government
of the Netherlands fears that those scandals will be uncovered. That is why it has
made new claims and allegations about Syria and recently attempted to submit the
aforementioned draft resolution, which is directed against my country in particular,
to the General Assembly, with a view to covering up its involvement in and support
for terrorism.
It is also not surprising that Western countries, which continue to falsely
claim that they care for the Syrian people, should continue to support and protect the
terrorist organizations and groups that are responsible for inflicting suffering on the
Syrian people and violating their rights.
The German magazine Der Spiegel has revealed that Khalid Al-Saleh, the
leader of the so-called White Helmets terrorist group, and his family were deported
from Jordan and sent to Germany, where they were received with open arms by the
German Government. Two years ago, the German Federal Office for the Protection of
the Constitution, during its review of the request made by the leader of that terrorist
group, concluded that he remained committed to his radical and extremist beliefs
and that he had links to terrorists. The terrorist materials and contacts with terrorist
groups that were found in his telephone left no doubt in the minds of the German
authorities that his arrival in Germany would be fraught with risk and could threaten
German national security. The German Foreign Office nonetheless decided to host
him in Germany, ignoring the warnings about him. He was not found acceptable by
any of the security agencies of either the United States or Jordan.
In conclusion, my country’s Government once again calls on all States
members of the OPCW to reject attempts to politicize what is by nature a technical
organization. We also call on them to address the politicization and serious flaws that
have crept into the work of the OPCW and are undermining its status and credibility.

20-1724039/41

S/2020/1202

Annex XX
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of Turkey to
the United Nations, Raziye Bilge Koçyiğit Grba
I would like to express our thanks to High Representative Nakamitsu and
the Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), Ambassador Arias, for their comprehensive briefings. I would also like
to express our appreciation to Mr. Arias for his able leadership in ensuring the
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention despite the unprecedented
difficulties caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We take note of the Director-General’s eighty-sixth monthly report on the
activities of the OPCW towards ensuring the elimination of the Syrian regime’s
chemical weapons programme (see S/2020/1152, annex). The report draws attention
to the ongoing alarming situation regarding that stated goal. There are still 19 issues
outstanding concerning the Al-Assad regime’s chemical weapons declaration. One
of those issues is particularly concerning, as it proves the existence of a chemicalweapon production facility. Such examples indicate yet again the urgent need to
address the gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies identified in the regime’s
fraudulent declaration.
The Syrian regime’s non-compliance with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention cannot be condoned and requires a firm response from the
international community, in particular from the Security Council. If we overlook
that collective task, the global norm against the use of weapons of mass destruction
will be irreparably undermined. If we do not take the necessary action, the efforts
to hold the regime accountable for its well-documented crimes against humanity run
the risk of failure.
To reverse that ominous trend, concrete steps are required. The Syrian regime
must fully cooperate with the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and immediately
declare the full extent of its chemical weapons programme to the OPCW. It was on
that understanding that Turkey co-sponsored the OPCW Executive Council decision
of 9 July, which set clear and verifiable parameters for action. The decision required
that the Syrian regime return to full compliance with the Convention within 90 days.
Regrettably, the October report of the OPCW Director-General established
that the Syrian regime had failed to fulfil its obligations under that decision (see
S/2020/1033, annex). We therefore support the implementation of concrete measures,
in particular during the second part of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of
the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention, with a view to addressing
the persistent non-compliance of the Syrian regime with the Convention, including
its repeated use of chemical weapons and failure to declare and destroy all of its
chemical weapons and production facilities in a fully verifiable manner. Along with
45 other States parties, Turkey sponsored the relevant draft decision that will be
considered during the second part of the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of
the States Parties.
We look forward to seeing the results of the current investigations of the OPCW
Fact-Finding Mission and the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT). Turkey
reiterates its full support to the IIT, which performs a valuable role in identifying the
perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We have full confidence in the
professionalism, integrity and impartiality of the OPCW Technical Secretariat, the
DAT, the IIT and the Fact-Finding Mission. Their dedicated work is commendable
and should have the support of us all. We regret the attempts to undermine their
integrity and credibility.
40/41

20-17240

S/2020/1202

Turkey remains steadfast in its call for accountability in Syria. The reports
by the OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism and the Fact-Finding
Mission, and most recently the IIT report on the incidents in Ltamenah, provide a
sufficient basis on which we can act to end impunity. In that context, we once again
condemn in the strongest possible terms the use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
Arab Air Force in Ltamenah on 24, 25 and 30 March 2017, as established by the IIT
report.
In conclusion, the Syrian regime must be urged towards result-oriented
cooperation with the OPCW. It is crucial that the Security Council act in unity and
ensure the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). That is the only way to prevent
the Syrian regime’s repeated use of chemical weapons against its own people. In
that regard, we want to once again recall the special responsibility of those who
have influence on the Syrian regime. We need to act decisively in order to ensure
accountability in Syria and honour the victims of those chemical-weapon attacks.
As for the absurd claims made by the representative of the Syrian regime
about my country, it is quite clear that after seven years, 86 progress reports and
many concrete cases of blatant breaches of its obligations, such remarks are nothing
but a futile attempt by the Syrian regime to distract the Council’s attention from
Syria’s well-known crimes against humanity, particularly its well-documented use
of chemical weapons. We refute such fabrications entirely and affirm once again that
we will continue to stand by the Syrian people.

20-1724041/41
