UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3304
4 November 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
THREE HUNDRED AND FOURTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Thursday, 4 November 1993, at 12.45 p.m.

President:

(Cape Verde)

Brazil
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. SARDENBERG
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. DURANI
Mr. LADSOUS
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. MOTOMURA
Mr. BENJELLOUN-TOUIMI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. KHAN
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. JESUS

Mr. RICHARDSON
Mrs. ALBRIGHT
Ms. TRUJILLO

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-87080 (E)

S/PV.3304
2
The meeting was called to order at 12.45 p.m.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
THE SITUATION IN GEORGIA
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL CONCERNING THE SITUATION IN ABKHAZIA,
GEORGIA (S/26646 and Add.1)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Security Council that I

have received a letter from the representative of Georgia in which he requested
to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s
agenda.

In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of

the Council, to invite that representative to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Chkheidze (Georgia) took a place at
the Council table.
The PRESIDENT:

The Security Council will now begin its consideration

of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the report of the Secretary-General
concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia; that report is contained in
document S/26646 and Add.1.

Members of the Council also have before them

document S/26688, which contains the text of the draft resolution prepared in
the course of the Council’s prior consultations.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to proceed to the vote on
the draft resolution before it.

If I hear no objection, I shall take it that

that is the case.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I now put to the vote the draft resolution in document S/26688.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France, Hungary, Japan,
Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan, Russian Federation, Spain,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft resolution

has therefore been adopted unanimously as resolution 881 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
statements following the voting.

make

S/PV.3304
3
Mr. RICHARDSON (United Kingdom):

First, Sir, our congratulations go

to you on assuming the presidency of the Council for this month, together with
our warmest thanks to Ambassador Sardenberg of Brazil for the very skilful way
in which he presided over the Council in the extremely busy month of October.
My delegation was glad to be able to support the resolution which has just
been adopted.

We believe it is entirely right that the Security Council should

be devoting such close attention to the situation in Georgia.

It is also right

that the action taken by the United Nations should take the form not just of
resolutions and discussions in New York but also of practical action in the form
of the continued limited deployment of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Georgia (UNOMIG), with the revised mandate that the Council has just authorized.
Let me add that we are very much aware of the concern of the Government of
Georgia to highlight the need for respect for human rights in Georgia.

We fully

endorse this, and believe that paragraph 3 of the resolution makes very clear
the importance that the international community attaches to this point.
We believe that the onus is now on the parties to work harder and quicker
for a peace settlement.

We are very glad that the two parties have agreed to

meet in Geneva in November.

The international community expects to see concrete

evidence of a serious attempt to make progress.

None of the parties should

interpret operative paragraph 5 as implying that UNOMIG will in practice remain
deployed whatever happens at the negotiating table.
We continue to hope, however, that it will be possible before long for the
Secretary-General to report to the Council that the situation in Georgia merits
a further deployment of UNOMIG, and we therefore welcome the request that the
Secretary-General should now take planning steps to allow any such future
deployment to take place without delay.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the United Kingdom for

the kind words he addressed to me.
Mr. LADSOUS (France) (interpretation from French):

As you are aware,

Mr. President, France is particularly dedicated to the search for a
comprehensive political settlement of the conflict in Abkhazia, with respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia.
France therefore fully supports the efforts made by the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy to achieve a negotiated solution between the parties,
which it encourages to participate in the first round of negotiations to begin
in Geneva at the end of November under the aegis of the United Nations.

S/PV.3304
4
(Mr. Ladsous, France)
The role of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) in
support of this process is of particular importance.

The military developments

which took place on the ground in September, in violation of the Sochi agreement
of 27 July, have in fact made UNOMIG’s mandate obsolete.

There is therefore a

need to revise that mandate, and my delegation welcomes the resolution which has
just been adopted.
The maintenance of a UNOMIG presence in Georgia until 31 January 1994, at
the very latest, with a maximum complement of five observers, will allow it - in
accordance with its new interim mandate - to maintain contact with the parties
and to furnish the Secretary-General and our Council with independent
information on events that might influence the process of a political solution.
My delegation is also pleased that the resolution makes the possible
extension of UNOMIG’s mandate beyond 31 January 1994 conditional on progress in
the negotiation process.

It is clear that the justification for UNOMIG lies in

its potential usefulness for the peace process.
Finally, allow me to express my Government’s great concern over the human
rights violations perpetrated during this conflict.

My delegation awaits the

conclusions of the fact-finding mission sent by the Secretary-General.
Mrs. ALBRIGHT (United States of America):
passage of this resolution.

My Government welcomes the

We would, of course, have preferred that we now be

considering the continuation of the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) in more favourable circumstances - a durable, meaningful cease-fire,
voluntarily agreed to by both parties.

That, unfortunately, is not the case,

because of the unjustified, unilateral Abkhaz violation of the cease-fire
agreement of 27 July.
None the less, the United States sees in this resolution affirmation of the
continuing United Nations commitment to resolution of the conflict in keeping
with the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Georgia, which
we unreservedly support.

UNOMIG, with a new mandate and reduced in size, can

still play a constructive role in monitoring the situation on the ground and
helping to create an atmosphere conducive to a negotiated settlement.
We commend the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy,
Ambassador Brunner, and we look forward to the talks scheduled for later this
month.
While we recognize that a negotiated resolution of this conflict is the
only way to assure a just and lasting peace and the security that a beleaguered

S/PV.3304
5
(Mrs. Albright, United States)
population desperately needs, we must continue our urgent efforts to provide
relief to the innocent victims.

We must also keep in mind the responsibility

for this suffering, about which we shall learn more when the Secretary-General’s
fact-finding mission submits its report.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian):

The

delegation of the Russian Federation fully supports the resolution just adopted
by the Security Council, attaching great importance to the continued presence of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG).

Such a presence is

extremely important, both for the resolution of the practical issues provided
for in its interim mandate and for the promotion of the peace process in order
to achieve a comprehensive political settlement to the Abkhaz conflict.
We attach particular importance to the Security Council’s decision to
request the Secretary-General to take in advance, and very soon, planning steps
which would enable, upon a further decision by the Council, prompt deployment of
additional personnel within the originally authorized strength of UNOMIG.
The United Nations must be in a position to react immediately to any
positive changes in the situation and to help make them stable and ultimately
irreversible.
We also believe it important that the Security Council support the efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Georgia, in cooperation with
the Chairman-in-Office of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
(CSCE), and with the assistance of the Russian Federation as facilitator, to
carry forward the peace process, and in particular to bring both parties
together in late November in Geneva.
Close cooperation between the United Nations and the CSCE in promoting a
settlement of the Abkhaz conflict is also very important.

In view of the

complexity of this issue, only a harmonious combination of the efforts of the
United Nations, the CSCE and other interested parties, and a close interaction
between them, can assure the irreversibility of the peace process.
The Russian Federation, for its part, will attempt to do everything in its
power to bring about a speedy political settlement of the Abkhaz conflict and a
stabilization of the situation in the Republic of Georgia as a whole.
The PRESIDENT:

There are no further speakers on my list.

The

Security Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration of
the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.
