United Nations

A/RES/55/71

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 February 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 108

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/55/596)]

55/71.

Follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women
and full implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third
special session of the General Assembly

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 50/203 of 22 December 1995, 51/69 of 12 December
1996, 52/100 of 12 December 1997, 53/120 of 9 December 1998 and 54/141 of
17 December 1999,
Welcoming the outcome of the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly, entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the
twenty-first century”, namely the “Political declaration” 1 and “Further actions and
initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action”, 2
Stressing the importance of the outcome of the twenty-third special session,
which has assessed the implementation of the Beijing Declaration 3 and Platform for
Action, 4 identified obstacles and challenges thereto and proposed actions and
initiatives to overcome them and achieve full and accelerated implementation,
Deeply convinced that the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the
outcome of the twenty-third special session are important contributions to the
advancement of women worldwide in the achievement of gender equality and must
be translated into effective action by all States, the United Nations system and other
organizations concerned, as well as by non-governmental organizations,
Stressing the importance of strong, sustained political will and commitment at
the national, regional and international levels in order to achieve full and accelerated
implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome
of the twenty-third special session,

1

Resolution S-23/2, annex.
Resolution S-23/3, annex.
3
Report of the Fourth World Conference on Women, Beijing, 4–15 September 1995 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.96.IV.13), chap. I, resolution 1, annex I.
4
Ibid., annex II.
2

00 56365

A/RES/55/71

Recognizing that the responsibility for the implementation of the Beijing
Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session rests primarily at the national level and that strengthened efforts are
necessary in this respect, and reiterating that enhanced international cooperation is
essential for the effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session,
1.
Reaffirms the commitments contained in the “Political declaration”1 and
“Further actions and initiatives to implement the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action”, 2 adopted by the General Assembly at its twenty-third special session,
entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century”;
2.
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General on
the follow-up to the Fourth World Conference on Women and full implementation of
the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action5 and on the implementation of the
outcome of the Fourth World Conference on Women and of the special session of
the General Assembly entitled “Women 2000: gender equality, development and
peace for the twenty-first century”; 6
3.
Calls upon Governments, the relevant entities of the United Nations
system within their respective mandates and all other relevant actors of civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, to take effective action to achieve full
and effective implementation of the Beijing Declaration 3 and Platform for Action4
and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, as elaborated in the abovementioned documents;
4.
Calls upon Governments, in collaboration with relevant actors of civil
society, including non-governmental organizations, to facilitate the translation and
dissemination of the outcome of the twenty-third special session, as broadly and as
accessibly as possible;
5.
Strongly encourages Governments to continue to support the role and
contribution of civil society, in particular non-governmental organizations and
women’s organizations, in the implementation of the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session;
6.
Reaffirms further its decision that the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Commission on the Status of Women, in accordance with
their respective mandates and with General Assembly resolution 48/162 of
20 December 1993 and other relevant resolutions, constitute a three-tiered
intergovernmental mechanism that plays the primary role in the overall policymaking and follow-up and in coordinating the implementation and monitoring of the
Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session;
7.
Invites the Economic and Social Council to continue to promote a
coordinated and integrated follow-up to and implementation of the outcomes of
major United Nations conferences and summits and their reviews, and requests the
Council to intensify further its efforts to ensure that gender mainstreaming is an
integral part of all its activities concerning integrated and coordinated follow-up to

5
6

2

A/55/293.
A/55/341.

A/RES/55/71

United Nations conferences, building upon agreed conclusions 1997/2 adopted by
the Council on 18 July 1997; 7
8.
Also invites the Council to continue to further policy coordination and
inter-agency cooperation towards the achievement of the objectives of the Beijing
Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, including
by considering the dedication of specific segments of the Council to the
advancement of women and implementation of the above-mentioned documents and
by mainstreaming a gender perspective in all its work;
9.
Encourages the Council to request the regional commissions, within their
respective mandates and resources, to build up a database, to be updated regularly,
in which all programmes and projects carried out in their respective regions by
agencies or organizations of the United Nations system are listed, and to facilitate
their dissemination, as well as the evaluation of their impact on the empowerment of
women through the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action;
10. Reaffirms that the Commission on the Status of Women has a central role
in assisting the Council in monitoring, assessing progress made in and accelerating,
within the United Nations system, the implementation of the Beijing Platform for
Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special session, and in advising the
Council thereon;
11. Notes that, at its forty-fifth session, in 2001, the Commission will
develop a new multi-year programme of work, and in this respect requests the
Secretary-General to report to the Commission with recommendations for the
effective implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome of the
twenty-third special session, including by enhancing the effectiveness of its work
and its catalytic role in mainstreaming a gender perspective in United Nations
activities;
12. Recognizes the importance attached to the regional and subregional
monitoring of the global and regional platforms for action and of the implementation
of the outcome of the twenty-third special session by regional commissions and
other regional or subregional structures, within their mandates, in consultation with
Governments, and calls for the promotion of further cooperation in that respect
among Governments and, where appropriate, national machineries of the same
region;
13. Reaffirms that, in order to implement the Beijing Platform for Action and
the outcome of the twenty-third special session, adequate mobilization of resources
at the national and international levels, as well as new and additional resources for
the developing countries, in particular those in Africa and the least developed
countries, from all available funding mechanisms, including multilateral, bilateral
and private sources, will also be required;
14. Recognizes that the implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action
and the outcome of the twenty-third special session in the countries with economies
in transition requires continued national efforts and international cooperation and
assistance;

7

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/52/3/Rev.1),
chap. IV, para. 4.

3

A/RES/55/71

15. Reaffirms that in order to implement the Beijing Platform for Action and
the outcome of the twenty-third special session a reformulation of policies and
reallocation of resources may be needed, but that some policy changes may not
necessarily have financial implications;
16. Also reaffirms that in order to ensure the effective implementation of the
strategic objectives of the Beijing Platform for Action and the outcome of the
twenty-third special session, the United Nations system should promote an active
and visible policy of mainstreaming a gender perspective, including through the
work of the Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women and
through the maintenance of gender units and focal points;
17. Further reaffirms that United Nations bodies that focus on gender issues,
such as the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Development Fund
for Women and the International Research and Training Institute for the
Advancement of Women, have an important role to play in the implementation of
the objectives of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of
the twenty-third special session;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly on the full range of tasks of the Division for the Advancement of Women
of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, including those
that might arise from the implementation of the outcome of the twenty-third special
session and from the entry into force of the Optional Protocol 8 to the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 9 with a view to
ensuring that the Division can effectively fulfil its tasks;
19. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that all United Nations
personnel and officials at Headquarters and in the field, especially in field
operations, receive training so that they mainstream a gender perspective in their
work, including gender impact analysis, and to ensure appropriate follow-up to such
training;
20. Requests all bodies that deal with programme and budgetary matters,
including the Committee for Programme and Coordination, to ensure that all
programmes, medium-term plans and programme budgets visibly mainstream a
gender perspective;
21. Invites States parties to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Discrimination against Women to include information on measures taken to
implement the outcome of the twenty-third special session, as well as the Beijing
Platform for Action, in their reports to the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women under article 18 of the Convention;
22. Requests the Secretary-General to disseminate the outcome of the
twenty-third special session as widely as possible in all official languages of the
United Nations;
23. Also requests the Secretary-General to report annually to the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the Commission on the Status of
Women on follow-up to and progress in the implementation of the Beijing

8
9

4

Resolution 54/4, annex.
Resolution 34/180, annex.

A/RES/55/71

Declaration and Platform for Action and the outcome of the twenty-third special
session;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-sixth session an
item entitled “Implementation of the outcome of the Fourth World Conference on
Women and of the twenty-third special session of the General Assembly, entitled
‘Women 2000: gender equality, development and peace for the twenty-first
century’”.
81st plenary meeting
4 December 2000

5
