S/2001/511

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 May 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 21 May 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I wish to refer to Security Council resolution 1333 (2000) of 19 December
2000, and in particular paragraph 15 (a), in which the Security Council requested me
to establish a Committee of Experts on how the arms embargo and the closure of
terrorist training camps demanded in paragraphs 3 and 5 of the resolution could be
monitored and for the Committee to make recommendations to the Council at the
end of its mandate.
Further to my letter dated 8 March 2001 (S/2001/206), I have the honour to
transmit to you the Committee’s report, submitted to me by its Chairman. I should
be grateful if you would bring the report to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-37828 (E) 240501

*0137828*

S/2001/511

Annex
Letter dated 18 May 2001 from the Chairman of the Committee of
Experts on Afghanistan appointed pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1333 (2000) addressed to the Secretary-General
On behalf of the members of the Committee of Experts on Afghanistan, I have
the honour to enclose herewith a report in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) of
Security Council resolution 1333 (2000).
In this regard, the Committee of Experts would appreciate it if you could
kindly forward this letter and its enclosure to the attention of the President of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Haile Menkerios
Chairman
Committee of Experts on Afghanistan
Security Council resolution 1333 (2000)
(Signed) Reynaldo O. Arcilla
(Signed) Michael E. G. Chandler
(Signed) Mahmoud Kassem
(Signed) Atilio N. Molteni

2

S/2001/511

Enclosure
Report of the Committee of Experts appointed pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1333 (2000), paragraph 15 (a),
regarding monitoring of the arms embargo against the Taliban
and the closure of terrorist training camps in the Taliban-held
areas of Afghanistan
Summary
On 15 October 1999 the Security Council unanimously adopted resolution
1267 (1999), in which it demanded that the Taliban in Afghanistan hand over Usama
bin Laden, in order that he might be brought to justice, and required the Taliban to
cease the provision of sanctuary and training for international terrorists and their
organizations. The Taliban took no steps to comply with the Security Council’s
demands in resolution 1267 (1999), neither with respect to Usama bin Laden nor
with respect to the cessation of sanctuary and training for international terrorists and
their organizations. Consequently, on 19 December 2000 the Security Council
adopted resolution 1333 (2000) to strengthen enforcement of resolution 1267 (1999)
and impose further measures on the Taliban.
In order for the Security Council to take the appropriate decision(s) with
regard to sanctions, the Council recognized the need for an effective mechanism by
which to monitor the degree of compliance with the demands set out in its
resolutions. Consequently the Council decided, in resolution 1333 (2000), paragraph
15 (a), to establish a committee of experts to make recommendations on how to
monitor (a) the arms embargo and (b) the closure of terrorist training camps. A fivemember committee, which was asked to report within 60 days, was thus formed and
commenced its work on 19 March 2001.
In order to fulfil its mandate the Committee undertook a series of fact-finding
and information-gathering meetings with those States neighbouring Afghanistan or
which have a specific involvement concerning the resolutions, that is, the countries
referred to as the “six plus two”, China, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan,
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan and the Russian Federation and the United
States of America.
All the countries visited stressed the fact that without a stable Afghanistan
their own stability and security was threatened. All concurred that there can be no
military solution to the conflict. They stressed that there has to be a political
solution which ultimately is the responsibility of the Afghan people.
To be effective and to ensure the credibility of the United Nations, the
sanctions must be enforced. However, they must also be seen as an inducement to
the Taliban to engage in meaningful negotiations, leading to the establishment of a
broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully responsible government in Afghanistan.
The Six have all stated to the Committee that they will abide by resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1333 (2000) and that they are implementing the requirements of the
resolutions with their border control services. The composition of these services
varies from country to country but, in the main, they are made up of customs, border
guards or police and security service personnel. In some cases the military are also
involved.

3

S/2001/511

The effectiveness of these border services varies, depending on their training,
the equipment they possess and other local parameters, for example, supporting
legislation. All visited have stated that they would welcome the assistance of the
international community in improving the capability of their services in the fight
against organized crime, drugs and arms smuggling and illegal immigration.
Strengthening the border control capabilities of the Six is therefore a key aspect of
the measures that should be adopted, particularly in the areas of equipment,
techniques, training and legislation.
The Committee recommends that the arms embargo and the closure of the
terrorist training camps can best be monitored by making use of the mechanisms
which each of Afghanistan’s neighbours has in place and by enhancing those
countries’ efforts with the establishment of sanctions enforcement support teams in
each country. These support teams, made up of customs, border security and
counter-terrorism experts, should form the basis of a United Nations office for
sanctions monitoring and coordination — Afghanistan. The Office, headed by a
Director and staffed with specialist officers, will support the work of the teams in
the field, as well as task the teams to verify and report to the sanctions Committee
on allegations of sanctions-busting and progress being made, in each of the
countries, to improve the effectiveness of their border control and counter-terrorism
services.
Other recommendations of the
recommendations section of the report.

Committee

are

enumerated

in

the

In the interest of safety and security and speed of implementation the
Committee recommends that the proposed sanctions enforcement support teams be
based with the existing United Nations offices in the countries neighbouring
Afghanistan.

4

S/2001/511

I. Introduction
1.
On 15 October 1999 the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1267 (1999) in which
it demanded that the Taliban in Afghanistan hand over
Usama bin Laden, in order that he might be brought to
justice, and required the Taliban to cease the provision
of sanctuary and training for international terrorists and
their organizations.
2.
Since the adoption of resolution 1267 (1999), the
Taliban have taken no steps to comply with the
Security Council’s demands, neither with respect to
Usama bin Laden nor with respect to the cessation of
sanctuary and training for international terrorists and
their organizations. Consequently, on 19 December
2000 the Security Council adopted resolution 1333
(2000) to strengthen enforcement of resolution 1267
(1999) and impose further measures on the Taliban.
3.
Resolution 1333 (2000), in which among other
measures the Security Council imposed an arms
embargo on the Taliban and demanded that it close all
terrorist training camps, came into effect on 19 January
2001 and remains valid for one year. At the end of that
period, the Council will decide whether the Taliban has
complied with its demands by delivering Usama bin
Laden to a place where he would be brought to justice
and by closing terrorist training camps.
4.
In order for the Security Council to take the
appropriate decision(s), the Council recognized the
need for an effective mechanism by which to monitor
the degree of compliance with the demands set out in
its resolutions. Consequently in resolution 1333 (2000),
paragraph 15, the Council specifically requested the
Secretary-General in consultation with the Committee
to appoint a committee of experts to make
recommendations within 60 days regarding how the
arms embargo and the closure of the terrorist training
camps could be monitored, including inter alia the use
of information obtained by Member States through
their national means and provided by them to the
Secretary-General.
5.
A five-member committee composed of the
following experts was accordingly appointed by the
Secretary-General and commenced its work on 19
March 2001:

Mr. Haile Menkerios (Eritrea) (Chairman)
Mr. Reynaldo O. Arcilla (Philippines)
Mr. Michael Chandler (United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland)
Mr. Mahmoud Kassem (Egypt)
Mr. Atilio Norberto Molteni (Argentina)

Aim
6.
The aim of this report is to make effective,
realistic and affordable recommendations on how to
monitor the arms embargo and the closure of the
terrorist training camps, as requested in Security
Council resolution 1333 (2000).
7.
From the outset of the Committee’s work it
became clear that the matter of financing both the
purchase of arms and ammunition and the training of
terrorists is integral to the overall problem. The
Committee therefore looked into this issue, at every
appropriate level, because of the use by the Taliban of
money obtained from the production and sale of drugs
to support the war in Afghanistan and the training of
terrorists.

Orientation
8.
Afghanistan, a rugged mountainous country,
punctuated by ravines and broader valleys, the latter
often very fertile, lies astride the historical trading
routes between East and West and North and South
Asia and the old Silk Road. The Afghan border totals
5,529 kilometres, being divided, in a clockwise
direction, with its six neighbours. Although officially
recognized international border entry points are few
and far between (see table and map), there are a
number of secondary entry points and many unofficial
crossing points, particularly on the Afghan-Pakistan
border. Smuggling or “trading”, as it is known locally,
is historically endemic to the region. Unless the
Governments concerned pursue an aggressive antismuggling policy, however, the majority of contraband
goods will continue to transit official border entry
points.

5

S/2001/511

Neighbouring country

Joint border (km)

Iran (Islamic Republic of)

936

Islam Qala (on road to Herat)

Turkmenistan

744

Serhetabat (ex-Khuska) and Imamnazar

Uzbekistan

137

Termez (currently closed)

Tajikistan

1 206

China

76

Pakistan

2 430

9.
The terrain and nature of these border zones is
very different from country to country. The areas
bordering the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Turkmenistan are, for the most part, undulating desert,
unlike that with Pakistan, where the border runs for
most of its length through very rugged, hostile
mountainous country. The northern border with
Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, plus a small section with
Turkmenistan, is clearly defined and control of it is
enhanced by the Amu Darya (or Darya ye-Panj) River,
along which lie three ports serving Afghanistan, Keleft
(on the border with Turkmenistan), Jeyretan (on the
border with Uzbekistan) and Shir Khan (on the border
with Tajikistan) (see map).
10. More details on the current situation in
Afghanistan and the context within which the majority
of the Committee’s discussions took place may be
found in the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security, of 19
April 2001 (A/55/907-S/2001/384).

II. Methodology
11. In order to achieve its aim, the Committee
undertook a series of fact-finding and informationgathering meetings with those States neighbouring
Afghanistan or which have a specific involvement
concerning the resolutions, that is, the countries
referred to as the “six plus two”. The Committee met
first with the Permanent Missions to the United
Nations of those countries and then with the
appropriate representatives of their Governments in
their respective capitals, except Beijing. The
programme of visits to the region took a full four
weeks of the time allotted to the Committee and was
carried out in the following order: Washington, D.C.,
Moscow, Ashgabat, Dushanbe, Tashkent, Delhi,
Islamabad and Tehran.

6

International border entry points

Dusti
Torkham (Khyber Pass) and Chaman

12. Visits to all these countries were managed
through their respective Ministries of Foreign Affairs,
and included discussions with all the departments
responsible for border control measures; police,
customs and the security services. In addition, where it
was relevant, the Committee met with Ministry of
Defence officials.
13. The Committee wanted to hear, first hand from
the responsible officials, the commitment of their
respective Governments to the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and the measures they have
initiated to ensure the effective implementation of the
sanctions since the resolutions came into effect. The
Committee was also seeking information as to the
success of the mechanisms they have in place, and the
problems and difficulties, if any, the Governments are
encountering in ensuring compliance with the
sanctions.
14. One country not visited by the Committee was
China, primarily owing to the short time within which
the Committee was required to make its
recommendations. However, the Committee did meet
with China’s Permanent Mission to the United Nations
and with the Chinese Ambassadors in Turkmenistan
and Pakistan.
15. The Committee’s request to visit the United Arab
Emirates was initially refused, which is regrettable.
Although it was later granted, the dates proposed (after
2 June) were well outside the time frame allotted for
the Committee’s mandate. Hence the Committee was
left with questions relating to the arms embargo and
money-laundering, which remain unanswered.
16. A meeting with the Taliban authorities, which had
been requested through their representatives, did not
materialize despite the Committee having made
preparatory arrangements and allowed time, while in
Pakistan, for a visit to Kabul and/or Khandahar.
Unfortunately, the death of Mullah Rabbani and the

S/2001/511

subsequent period of Taliban public mourning
coincided with the Committee’s visit to Islamabad.
This event may have provided the Taliban with a
convenient excuse for not meeting with the Committee.
17. Besides Afghanistan’s neighbours, the Committee
also met in Vienna with the Office for Drug Control
and Crime Prevention of the United Nations Secretariat
and the Director of the Wassenaar Arrangement; in
New York with the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the experts comprising the
Monitoring Mechanism on Sanctions against UNITA;
in Brussels with former members of the now disbanded
Sanctions Assistance Monitoring Mission to the former
Yugoslavia and in Lyon with members of Interpol. The
Committee was particularly interested to hear what
mechanisms these agencies have in place, how these
work and where there might be opportunities for
cooperation. The Committee further had consultations
with French and United Kingdom government officials,
in Paris and London.
18. In addition, the Committee had a number of
informal meetings with other personalities and officials
whose knowledge of the situation in the area was
extremely valuable.
19. The Committee received excellent logistic
support and assistance from the local offices of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) for
the visits to the countries neighbouring Afghanistan.

III. Findings of the Committee
A. General observations
20. The “Six” have all stated to the Committee that
they are prepared to abide by Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333 (2000), despite
Pakistan and, to a lesser degree, Turkmenistan and
China having certain reservations about the two
resolutions.
21. All the countries visited stressed the fact that
without a stable Afghanistan their own stability and
security was threatened. All concurred that there can be
no military solution to the problem. There has to be a
political solution that ultimately is the responsibility of
the Afghan people.
22. The sanctions must be strictly enforced to ensure
the credibility of the United Nations and to be

effective. But they must also be seen as an inducement
to the Taliban to engage in meaningful negotiations
leading to the establishment of a broad-based, multiethnic and fully representative government, which will
benefit all the peoples of Afghanistan.
23. No monitoring of sanctions will be effective
unless there is the total commitment to its
implementation by the Member States directly
involved. This statement refers particularly to the six
countries that border Afghanistan, namely, China, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Pakistan, Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan (“the Six”).
24. The Committee was given detailed briefings on
how each country visited controls its borders with
Afghanistan, including, in general terms, the number
and types of law enforcement agencies deployed, that
is, customs, border guards and security service. Among
them, the Six have around 100,000 troops or border
guards assigned to controlling their borders with
Afghanistan. The methods used, the supporting
legislation and the effectiveness of the various border
control measures differ from country to country. All
those visited stated that they wanted to modernize their
services and that they would welcome training and
equipment support from the international community.
Strengthening the border control capabilities of
Afghanistan’s neighbours is therefore a key aspect of
the measures that should be adopted to ensure effective
monitoring.
25. The Committee has also noted a lack of
coordination among the Six on how to make the control
of their borders more effective. One of the reasons for
this situation is the poor state of their political
relationships. Another reason is incompatibility in their
governmental and security organs, which in many tend
to be centralized and compartmental in structure.
26. Drug-trafficking affects all the countries in the
region, all of which are now suffering an increase in
drug
abuse
among
their
own
populations.
Consequently, there is a genuine interest in controlling
the flow of narcotics into their countries and they have
accepted the presence of international personnel to
assist in combating this difficult problem.
27. The Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention has thus been able to establish field offices
in the region and an assessment and reporting
mechanism between those representatives in the field
and the headquarters in Vienna. (The interrelation of

7

S/2001/511

drug trafficking with the Committee’s task is covered
in more detail in paragraphs 55-65 below.)
28. One peripheral but important aspect which must
be addressed involves illegal flights in and out of
Taliban-controlled
Afghanistan.
The
sanctions
Committee has established a mechanism for approving
and monitoring permitted flights, in and out of Talibancontrolled airspace, as allowed under resolution 1267
(1999). However, no means currently exists for
observing and verifying illegal flights in and out of
Taliban-controlled Afghanistan, which is one possible
way by which arms, terrorists and cash are moving in
contravention of the embargoes.

B. Enforcing the arms embargo
29. The arms embargo is aimed at limiting the
capacity of the Taliban to continue its material support
for armed terrorism and prosecution of the civil war.
The embargo includes a ban on the sale or supply of
arms, ammunition and related materiel to Talibancontrolled Afghanistan, and a ban on the sale or supply
of technical advice, assistance or training, related to the
military activities of the armed personnel under the
control of the Taliban.
30. The Committee was informed on a number of
occasions that the Taliban has more than enough
weapons and that since the Six have been complying
with resolution 1333 (2000) “… no weapons have
crossed their frontiers on route to the Taliban! ...” All
report that Afghanistan has, and continues to suffer
from, a surfeit of weaponry, particularly small arms
and light support weapons, amassed from a variety of
sources over a period of time. Many in fact,
particularly Pakistan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan,
complained that weapons are entering their countries
from Afghanistan, apparently for dissident extremist
groups.
31. Logic suggests that the supply of ammunition for
mortars, artillery, long-range rocket systems and tanks
is a tremendous logistics task for the Taliban,
considering the quantities of all types of ammunition
expended during past offensives. To believe that the
Taliban are still surviving on former stocks is naive.
The replenishment of such quantities would be quite
significant and would involve a large number of trucks
and/or cargo aircraft sorties. Even if the suggestion that
the Taliban received considerable quantities of

8

ammunition and materiel shortly before resolution
1333 (2000) came into effect on 19 January 2001 is
true, it is highly likely, as offensives get under way,
that the Taliban will need to replenish their stocks.
32. Besides ammunition the Taliban needs diesel for
tanks and armoured personnel carriers and aircraft
turbine fuel to fly helicopters and their MIG-21 fighterbombers. A MIG-21 uses about 4,000 litres per 35minute sortie, which means that, even with lowintensity operations, large quantities of fuel will have
to cross into the Taliban-controlled areas, especially as
the fighting intensifies. The Committee therefore feels
that urgent consideration should be given to aircraft
turbine fuel, and possibly the special fluids and
lubricants needed for use in armoured vehicles, being
specified in the embargo.
33. The flow of arms into, within, and from
Afghanistan is a major long-term cause of insecurity
and instability in the central Asian region. Therefore
effective arms control measures need to be
implemented by the Six, reinforced at regional and
international levels, in order to confront this grave
challenge to international peace and security.
34. However, any measures proposed for Afghanistan
must be seen in the wider context of arms control
measures targeted elsewhere. Recent international
initiatives to control the trade in illegal weapons,
including the achievements of the United Nations
expert committees on Angola, Rwanda and Sierra
Leone and the Wassenaar Arrangement, have resulted
in a number of recommendations intended to improve
arms control measures. Some of these measures require
to be directed towards the situation in Afghanistan
within the context of resolution 1333 (2000), in
particular the norms at the global, regional and national
levels already suggested in the draft programme of
action
(A/CONF.192/PC/L.4/Rev.1).
This
draft
programme is to be presented for finalization during
the United Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, to
be held in New York from 9 to 20 July 2001.
35. Legislation to enforce and strengthen controls on
the movement of illicit arms and to respect sanctions
regimes should be adopted at the national level. If the
necessary political will and institutions are in place,
eventual
measures
could
also
include
the
standardization of end-user certificates to make them
harder to forge and misuse, and a more effective

S/2001/511

system of marking and identifying weapons. Such
national efforts should then be coordinated with similar
measures at regional and international levels.
36. In particular, Member States should be
encouraged to incorporate United Nations sanctions
into their national legislation and to prosecute their
nationals and companies found guilty of violating the
sanctions.
37. The Committee took note of the progress made to
date by the States participating in the Wassenaar
Arrangement, but also noted that none of the Six were
members of the group. Those qualified to join should
be encouraged to become active members, and their
commitment to comply with the Wassenaar
Arrangement could be a positive signal, not only for
sanctions enforcement, but also for a general reduction
of the threats to security in the region as a whole.
38. The Committee is of the opinion that States
should, if not totally control, at least strictly regulate,
all arms transactions by “brokers or dealers”. Arms are
required primarily for the defence of a country from
external aggression or internally, to preserve law and
order, be the threat from criminals or terrorists.
Therefore it should be possible for sales of arms and
ammunition to be agreed between States or directly
between buying State and the manufacturer in another
State, with the latter’s approval of the export.
Countries must be encouraged to adopt legislation to
strictly control this nefarious trade. Consideration
should be given to registering all known arms brokers
and dealing severely with those acting in contravention
of national legislation or embargoes established by the
United Nations.
39. One important means of enforcing an arms
embargo is to publish information concerning
violations of end-user certificate provisions, including
names of companies, countries and individuals
involved, as well as cases of unauthorized re-transfer
of weapons to third parties. Annex I lists a series of
measures, by priority, which should be taken, in
conjunction with other international arms control
organizations and agencies, by a body established to
oversee the implementation of an arms embargo.
Besides the measures listed, the following key aspects
of an arms control regime would have to be set in train
internationally and addressed by the monitoring body:

• Addressing illicit supply
• Transparency of laws and regulations and ensuing
penalties
• Supporting existing legislation
• Standardization of legislation
• Extradition and related judicial procedures
• Transparency of production, licensing and export
regulations
• Creation of an international registry for small
arms and light weapons
40. As mentioned above (para. 28) the Committee is
concerned that no means of monitoring illegal flights in
and out of Taliban-controlled Afghanistan currently
exists. This concern was raised with the authorities of
the Islamic Republic of Iran and Pakistan, particularly
with respect to “gun-running” aircraft bringing in tank,
mortar and artillery ammunition for the Taliban. Both
confirmed that because of the nature of the terrain it is
almost impossible for them to spot aircraft on their air
traffic control radars, when they are flown low by
determined and experienced pilots. It would be
reasonable for those Member States that have the
capability to observe aircraft movements in and out of
the Taliban-controlled Afghanistan to assist with
providing such data to the monitoring mechanism
proposed later in this report by the Committee.

C. Closure of terrorist training camps
41. Ample reports exist to indicate the presence of
camps in the areas under the control of the Taliban in
which terrorists1 are trained. A large proportion of the
foreign “terrorists” fight on the side of the Taliban,
believing that they are involved in a Holy War or Jihad,
and in many instances this forms part of their
“military” training. There are indications that the
Taliban is having to rely more and more on so-called
“Arab-Afghan” and Pakistani recruits and mercenaries
in its efforts to defeat the United Front, as war-weary
__________________
1 For the purposes of the Committee’s task, “terrorists”, as

referred to in resolution 1333 (2000), are the clandestine
agents or sub-national groups, be they Afghans or from
other countries, that are preparing and training to
perpetrate premeditated, politically motivated violence
against non-combatant targets in countries other than
Afghanistan to achieve sectarian goals.

9

S/2001/511

indigenous Afghans demonstrate an increasing
reluctance to be recruited into the ranks of the forces.
42. An important source of recruits to the Taliban
cause, is the many madrassas (religious schools)
situated in Pakistan close to the Afghan border. The
curricula in these institutions include training in the use
of firearms. From these schools, young men and even
boys, both Afghan refugees and Pakistani nationals, are
encouraged in the name of Islam to go and fight on the
side of the Taliban. This “forced” recruitment, the
schools often being closed for the periods of the
summer offensives in Afghanistan, is performed quite
openly. Some Pakistani government officials have
admitted knowledge of the paramilitary activities of
these religious schools. Despite official expressions of
disquiet with these activities, and a once failed attempt
to standardize the curricula, they are apparently
allowed to continue unabated.
43. Pakistan must therefore be encouraged to regulate
the curricula at the madrassas, particularly those
situated near the border with Afghanistan, and to
actively control the movement into and out of
Afghanistan of their own nationals and those of other
countries.
44. As to the actual training camps, many of these are
simple, rudimentary affairs that can easily be struck
and the occupants rapidly dispersed to other locations.
In other cases it appears that the terrorists receive some
or part of their training in “regular” Taliban military
facilities, compounding the overall situation and thus
making solutions to the problem difficult to achieve.
45. In resolution 1333 (2000), paragraph 15 (a), the
Security Council called for the inclusion in the
recommendations
of
the
Committee
of
recommendations on the use of information obtained
by Member States through their national means. It is
well known that very detailed information exists that
could be made available, particularly concerning
terrorist training camps, which will be a crucial
ingredient in an effective monitoring mechanism. This
information, together with that from all the other
countries involved, should be submitted to a central
point where it can be collated, cross-referenced and
analysed. Such an operation will require a customized
database and have to be managed by a staff of
professionals, with expertise in the appropriate
disciplines.

10

46. Any move on the part of the Taliban “authorities”
towards the closure of terrorist training camps in
Afghanistan would have to be accompanied by an onsite verification process and supported by imaging data
supplied by Member States.
47. However, the view of the Committee is that
closure of the camps is not sufficient if the aim is to
stop the Taliban from providing sanctuary for
international terrorists and a base from which they can
operate with impunity. Although the Council in
paragraph 3 of resolution 1333 (2000) demanded that
the Taliban close all camps where terrorists are trained
within the territory under its control, this demand is
only a reiteration of the insistence contained in
paragraph 1 of resolution 1267 (1999), which goes into
greater detail concerning the cessation of sanctuary,
training and support for terrorist activities.
48. If the demands of the international community are
to be met by the Taliban, then it will be necessary for
the Taliban to expel or repatriate the “foreign”
terrorists; itself a problem as many of those concerned
would be subject to prosecution in their countries of
origin. However, those foreign recruits or mercenaries
who have fought with the Taliban only inside
Afghanistan, particularly the “summer offensive
reinforcements” who are trawled from the madrassas
in Pakistan (see para. 42 above) could perhaps be
repatriated, preferably under international supervision
(by the International Committee of the Red Cross, for
example).
49. The Committee therefore concluded that, on the
assumption that the Taliban agrees to any such process
of closures and “repatriations”, these requirements of
the international community must be an integral part of
any negotiations leading to a comprehensive peace plan
for Afghanistan.
50. During its visits the Committee was unable to
ascertain any specific patterns of movement or
particular routes taken by the terrorists when departing
for operations outside Afghanistan. If anything, the
Committee received quite contradictory reports about
which countries’ borders the terrorists crossed. Some
countries made strong allegations that members of the
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) cross through
Turkmenistan when heading for Uzbekistan, while
others alleged that IMU crossed through Tajikistan
unhindered, en route to Uzbekistan. Officials in
Pakistan made it clear that, for a host of reasons, it was

S/2001/511

virtually impossible to control movement across their
border with Afghanistan.
51. Another area of concern is how the “terrorists”
can be identified. The Committee was told that many of
them operate under aliases. Besides the multiplicity of
origins of the foreign terrorists, officials in Pakistan
stated that it is almost impossible to tell the difference
between a Pashtun from eastern Afghanistan and a
Pashtun from Pakistan’s North West Frontier Province
who might cross to Afghanistan. It is the same with the
other ethnic groups which straddle the border between
Afghanistan and Pakistan.
52. Thus the Committee came to an understanding
that a two-pronged approach was necessary. With
regard to the closure of the camps, initially a
monitoring organization would have to concentrate on
building up a very comprehensive picture, using
information supplied to the Secretary-General by
Member States, with which to publicize extensively
and regularly the whereabouts and use of terrorist
training
facilities
inside
Taliban-controlled
Afghanistan. Meanwhile the Pakistan authorities
should be urged to exercise greater control over the
madrassas on their territory and the movement of
people across their common border with Afghanistan.
53. The Committee fully appreciates all aspects of
the situation along this long stretch of the border,
including the background to the Durand Line, the
problems of inaccessibility to the “Tribal Areas”, the
porosity of the borders, the difficult terrain and other
ethnic rivalries. However, the Committee firmly
believes that there are a number of measures and
techniques that Pakistan could employ, with the full
support of the international community, which would
enhance the efforts of the Government of Pakistan in
the difficult and challenging task of controlling
movements across their border.
54. The Committee also considers that an overall
improvement in controls, particularly on the border
between Afghanistan and Pakistan, will also assist in
combating the movement of arms and ammunition, in
either direction, and curb the flow of narcotics.

D. Drug trafficking
55. While its mandate is limited to making
recommendations on how the arms embargo and the
closure of terrorist training camps can be monitored,

the Committee nonetheless considered it essential also
to look into the illicit drugs trade by the Taliban. Funds
raised from the production and trading of opium and
heroin are used by the Taliban to buy arms and other
war materiel, and to finance the training of terrorists
and support the operations of extremists in
neighbouring countries and beyond.
56. Afghanistan became the largest producer of illicit
opium in the 1990s, supplying as much as 79 per cent
of world demand in 1999. Officials of the countries
bordering Afghanistan that the Committee visited
confirm that Afghan opiates are smuggled across the
country’s borders in all directions, that is, through
Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Pakistan, to destinations in
Western Europe, the Russian Federation and even
North America. Officials of the countries also
confirmed that drug abuse is on the increase in their
own countries. Only 10 to 20 per cent of these drugs
are interdicted
57. On 27 July 2000, Mullah Muhammad Omar, the
Taliban supreme leader, issued an edict totally banning
opium poppy cultivation.2 This move was received
with scepticism in numerous circles, however. It was
branded as a ploy to portray the Taliban as conforming
with the universal drive to reduce, if not eradicate, the
production of illicit drugs. That the ban coincided with
the worst drought in Afghanistan in 30 years and that
2001 the price of opium and heroin has increased
tenfold has only added to such cynical impressions.
58. The Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention has reported that in 1998 total opium
production in Afghanistan was about 2,500 tons. This
nearly doubled, to 4,600 tons, in 1999. These figures,
plus the 3,100 tons produced in 2000, appear to
confirm the view that the Taliban has accumulated a
sizeable stock of opium and heroin and wanted to stop
production to prevent prices from further spiralling
downward. This situation also puts into question the
sincerity of Mullah Omar’s fatwah. If Taliban officials
were sincere in stopping the production of opium and
heroin, then one would expect them to order the
__________________
2 An assessment by the Office for Drug Control and Crime

Prevention revealed that, since the edict was issued, the
total number of hectares under poppy cultivation has
been dramatically reduced from a high of 91,000
hectares in 1999 to some 12,000 hectares in 2001.

11

S/2001/511

destruction of all stocks existing in areas under their
control.
59. Heroin seizures in Europe during the fourth
quarter of 2000 amounted to about 3,900 kilograms;
during the first quarter of 2001, to 2,000 kilograms.
The majority of these “shipments” originated in
Afghanistan, indicating that the Taliban still has large
quantities of the drugs in stock.
60. Preliminary findings of the Office for Drug
Control and Crime Prevention reveal that opium prices
in Afghanistan increased more than tenfold in the first
quarter of 2001 compared with those of the previous
year. On average, prices rose from $28 per kilogram in
2000 to $280 per kilogram in February 2001. In the
Islamic Republic of Iran, opium prices went up from
$400 in 2000 to $1,300 in February 2001 and $2,750 in
March of 2001. Estimates of the income derived by the
Taliban from taxes levied on opium production range
from $15 to $27 million per annum. These estimates
are based on the assumption that the Taliban leadership
are not themselves involved in the production and
trading of drugs. Some reports, however, say that
Taliban officials actually control some 35 narcotics
groups in the country. If this is correct, the income of
the Taliban from the illicit drugs trade must be much
greater.
61. In the light of the foregoing, the Committee
deems it prudent on the part of the international
community to redouble its efforts to interdict smuggled
drugs from Afghanistan. For this purpose, the
Committee feels that the flow of drugs from
Afghanistan should be monitored as an integral
component of the arms embargo.
62. In the past, the production of heroin and
morphine has been done mostly outside Afghanistan,
notably in Pakistan and Turkey. In recent years,
however, it has been noted from seizure statistics that
actual manufacture of heroin is now being done in
Afghanistan itself. This means that acetic anhydride, a
controlled substance under the 1988 Convention
against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances, has been finding its way
illegally into Afghanistan.
63. According to the International Narcotics Control
Board, it takes between one and four litres of acetic
anhydride to produce one kilogram of heroin. No
substitute has as yet been identified to replace it in the
chemical process. Given that Afghanistan has no other

12

industry to speak of where acetic anhydride may be
used, it may safely be assumed that the substance is
brought into the country for the sole purpose of
manufacturing heroin.
64. Therefore, the Committee is of the opinion that
the movement of acetic anhydride should also be
monitored along with the inflow of arms and war
materiel and the production and outflow of illegal
drugs from Afghanistan.
65. The Committee further believes that the system of
licensing exports of acetic anhydride should be subject
to stricter control and scrutiny.

E. Financing the Taliban
66. It is reported that, in addition to the funds
realized from opiates, considerable financial support
has been provided to the Taliban by individuals, private
and semi-private agencies in Pakistan, including
political parties, religious institutions and business
cartels, much of it with the full knowledge of
government officials.
67. Pakistani officials stated that, despite increased
customs controls, their country was still suffering
formidable losses of revenue because of the abuse of
the Afghan Transit Trade Agreement. This agreement
allows containers to be brought into the port of Karachi
and then moved by truck through Pakistan to
Afghanistan without payment of customs duty and, it
has been suggested, with very cursory inspections.
Consequently the Committee considers that this
agreement also provides opportunities for the arms
embargo to be circumvented.
68. Over the years, this transit trade has created an
expanding “black” economy in Afghanistan of
immense proportions, involving well-established
criminal gangs. A recent World Bank study valued the
illegal border trade between Afghanistan and Pakistan
at US$ 2.5 billion annually. To a lesser degree, this
type of cross-border smuggling also exists between
Afghanistan and its other neighbours. The total value
of this criminal trade through Afghanistan has been
estimated at between $3 billion and $4 billion per year
(Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention,
February 2001), which, if correct, would indicate that
the Taliban receive more funding from this source than
from drugs.

S/2001/511

69. In view of the sanctions imposed against the
Taliban the Committee considers that Pakistan has
every right to inspect thoroughly, before sealing, every
shipment of goods destined for Afghanistan that enters
and transits Pakistan territory. The Committee also
considers that all shipments, under the Afghan Transit
Trade Agreement, should be subject to control and
inspection on entry into, and exit from, Pakistani
territory. The magnitude of this “duty-free trade” is
such that Pakistan could benefit from specialist
technical assistance from the international community.
70. In addition, Pakistan should formulate a list of
high value goods that are banned by the Taliban, such
as televisions and video cassette recorders, and those
for which there is virtually no private use, such as air
conditioners and refrigerators, because of the lack of
electricity. These items should not be permitted under
the terms of the Afghan Transit Trade Agreement. Such
controls should be implemented firmly and diligently
and the ensuing checks would also enhance Pakistan’s
commitment towards an effective arms embargo, as
well as reducing losses of revenue.
71. There are allegations that Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates have provided financial support
to the Taliban. At least until 1998, Saudi Arabia is
alleged to have provided funds and heavily subsidized
fuel to the Taliban through Pakistan. Through their
relationship with traders in the United Arab Emirates
and in the Pakistani Province of Baluchistan and the
North West Frontier Province, the Taliban are alleged
to be linked with local and provincial administrators
and with officials in the United Arab Emirates who
benefit from the vast smuggling networks that link the
three countries.
72. The Committee considers that all those countries
that are not parties to the International Convention for
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, adopted
by the General Assembly in its resolution 54/109,
should be urged to sign, ratify and fully comply with
the Convention.
73. Further funds for financing the military capability
of the Taliban are believed to come from other
countries, and from contributions of individuals,
religious groups and organizations sympathizing with
the objectives of the Taliban that are based in the Gulf
States and beyond. The method of sending funds to the
Taliban is not through normal banking operations but
through direct deliveries of cash and an informal

money exchange system, neither of which is currently
susceptible to control or monitoring.

F. Monitoring mechanisms
74. As a result of its findings, the Committee looked
at how best to monitor the arms embargo and the
closure of the terrorist training camps. Ideas suggested
ranged from a large physical presence, under United
Nations auspices, which would complement and
augment the present border control forces of
Afghanistan’s neighbours, to the latter’s forces being
left to enforce the embargoes to the best of their
abilities.
75. A large physical presence operating on the
borders between the Six and Afghanistan would be
very expensive and, even if sufficient police and/or
troops could be found from contributing countries,
difficult to sustain for what could be a considerable
period. The effectiveness of such a force is, in itself,
questionable, bearing in mind the number of border
control personnel already deployed by the Six. Finally,
it is unlikely that any of the Six would countenance the
presence of an external force to control their borders;
border control is after all a key facet of national
sovereignty. Even if one of the Six were to agree, it
could prove to be a two-edged sword, enabling the
“host” to wash its hands of any responsibility, the
blame falling squarely on the shoulders of the United
Nations. This idea was thus deemed financially
prohibitive and neither realistic nor effective.
76. At the other end of the spectrum, the Committee
looked at relying solely on the national border services,
as currently deployed, reporting through their
Governments to a small coordinating body, which in
turn would report to the sanctions Committee.
77. The Committee came to the conclusion that the
demands of the Security Council could best be served,
from the aspects of speedy implementation,
affordability and effectiveness, if the monitoring
mechanisms which the Six currently have in place
could be strengthened and supported. In order to best
achieve this approach, an Office for Sanctions
Monitoring and Coordination — Afghanistan requires
to be established.
78. The proposed office, which would be headed by a
Director, should consist of two parts. The first of these
is made up of small teams of experts, working closely

13

S/2001/511

alongside the various border control and counterterrorist services in each of the countries bordering
Afghanistan. These Sanctions Enforcement Support
Teams will initially assess capability gaps and then
assist with the modernization of all aspects of border
legislation, customs procedures and border control
techniques, as well as making recommendations for
improvements in equipment and arrange for the various
types of training which the countries visited have
indicated to the Committee they would like to receive
to better enforce the sanction.
79. At its headquarters, the Office for Sanctions
Monitoring and Coordination shall have, besides the
Director, a chief of operations and specialist officers,
preferably seconded by contributing States, in the
fields of:
• Illegal arms trafficking;
• Drugs, financing and money-laundering;
• Legislation and legal support;
• Counter-terrorism.
80. The Committee considers that this is likely to be
an evolutionary process. Once the Office for Sanctions
Monitoring and Coordination settles into a productive
rhythm it may be necessary to increase or decrease the
representation in each discipline, as circumstances
demand.
81. An outline organization is given in annex II. The
Office headquarters and the Sanctions Enforcement
Support Teams will require support staff, information
technology equipment and, in the case of the support
teams, also language assistants, vehicles and radio
equipment. In the interest of safety and security of
personnel and speed of implementation of the proposed
mechanism, the support teams should be based with the
existing UNDP offices in the countries neighbouring
Afghanistan.
82. It will be the function of the counter-terrorism
component in the Office for Sanctions Monitoring and
Coordination to manage the monitoring of the terrorist
training camps, by collating and analysing all the
information made available to the Secretary-General
and then regularly publishing on a wide distribution
details about the camps. In this way the international
community will be kept apprised of this threat to peace
and security, at least until such time as realistic and
productive negotiations are held, leading to a lasting

14

political settlement within which must be incorporated
a verifiable mechanism for the closure of all terrorist
training facilities and a plan to repatriate non-Afghan
terrorists.
83. In addition to specific reports to the sanctions
Committee concerning the verification of sanctionsbusting, leading, where appropriate, to those concerned
being “named and shamed”, the Office for Sanctions
Monitoring and Coordination will also submit, on a
regular basis, reports on the progress being achieved by
the border service units in each country as a result of
the support they are receiving through the support
teams. Every country bordering Afghanistan should
also be requested to periodically submit a report
concerning its enforcement of sanctions.
84. The Sanctions Enforcement Support Teams will
be responsible, in conjunction with their hosts, for
verifying any allegations of sanctions-busting brought
to their attention in the country where they are
operating or as a result of a mandate from the
headquarters of the Office for Sanctions Monitoring
and Coordination. The Office will be responsible for
advising and briefing the sanctions Committee, through
the Director, on breaches of the arms embargo and
other related matters, concerning drug trafficking and
finances to the Taliban.
85. The Office for Sanctions Monitoring and
Coordination will need to coordinate closely with the
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention, at both
headquarters and field levels, and with other
organizations engaged in activities relevant to its work.
This approach is intended to avoid duplication and to
ensure that the Office can draw on the strengths of
those organizations and maximize their joint efforts.
86. It will also be useful for the Office for Sanctions
Monitoring and Coordination to ensure that it is kept
informed of the progress being made under the
auspices of the Wassenaar Arrangement in the field of
arms control. The Committee considers that with this
approach — providing support for the border control
services of the countries neighbouring Afghanistan and
encouraging the development of those law enforcement
agencies — the Office could provide a vehicle for
greater coordination of the collective efforts of these
countries at the technical level in the fields under
discussion.
87. One of the first tasks that will have to be
undertaken when the Office for Sanctions Monitoring

S/2001/511

and Coordination is established is a detailed
assessment of the requirements for each individual
country, including a survey of each country’s border
with Afghanistan.

G. Location for the proposed monitoring
support organization
88. The Security Council and the Secretary-General,
based as they are in New York, may consider that the
Office for Sanctions Monitoring and CoordinationAfghanistan ought to be located at United Nations
Headquarters for certain perceived advantages which
the Committee appreciates. However, after careful
review of all the advantages and disadvantages, the
Committee is of the view that careful consideration
should be given to locating the Office for Sanctions
Monitoring and Coordination-Afghanistan in Europe,
for the following reasons:
• Europe is much closer to the time zones of the
regional capitals in the area of operational
responsibility, simplifying daily telephone contact
between the headquarters of the Office for
Sanctions
Monitoring
and
Coordination
headquarters and the Sanctions Enforcement
Support Teams. For the headquarters staff to be
able to speak by telephone with the support team
during normal working hours will be crucial to
the success of this very small organization,
particularly during the first few months of
operation while the Office becomes established.
• Working space at the United Nations in New York
is now clearly at a premium and finding suitable
accommodation for the headquarters of the Office
for Sanctions Monitoring and Coordination and
the proposed staff is likely to be a major problem,
especially if it is to be launched quickly.
• The United Nations Office at Vienna could be
considered as a suitable site because it is well
established with all the necessary administrative
and logistic support systems in place.
• The site provides immediate access to the United
Nations global communication system.
• Vienna airport provides quick and easy
connections to the regional capitals in the area of
operational responsibility.

• Vienna is already home to the Office for Drug
Control and Crime Prevention, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the
Wassenaar Arrangement secretariat, with which
the Office for Sanctions Monitoring and
Coordination will need to liaise and cooperate.
• The overheads, particularly for personnel costs,
are likely to be less in a European city, even
Vienna, than in New York.

IV. Conclusions
89. The sanctions imposed on the Taliban must be
seen and implemented as part of an overall package
pursued by the United Nations to ensure peace and
stability in Afghanistan. Thus, the sanctions, the search
for a political solution, and the humanitarian and
economic efforts all need to be taken as a whole and
pursued as parts of an integrated strategy leading to a
broad based and responsible government in
Afghanistan.
90. No sanctions monitoring will be effective unless
there is total commitment of the Member States
involved with its implementation. This statement refers
particularly to the six countries that border
Afghanistan, namely, China, the Islamic Republic of
Iran,
Pakistan,
Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan
and
Uzbekistan. Indeed enforcing sanctions must rely on
the will and initiative, primarily, of the countries
bordering Afghanistan. However, the capacities of
most of these countries are inadequate and a hands-on
engagement with them is absolutely essential to
strengthen and develop their monitoring mechanisms,
at the same time permitting continuous assessment of
capacity and follow-up of sanctions enforcement.
91. The Six have all stated to the Committee that they
will abide by resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1333 (2000)
and that they are implementing the requirements of the
resolutions with their border control services. The
composition of these services varies from country to
country, but in the main they are made up of customs,
border guards or police and security service personnel.
92. The effectiveness of the border services varies,
depending on their training, the equipment they possess
and other local parameters, for example, supporting
legislation. All have stated that they would welcome
the assistance of the international community in
improving the capability of their services in the fight

15

S/2001/511

against organized crime, drugs and arms smuggling and
illegal immigration.
93. In view of the sanctions imposed against the
Taliban, the Committee considers that Pakistan has
every right to inspect thoroughly, before sealing, every
shipment of goods destined for Afghanistan that enters
and transits through Pakistan territory. The Committee
also considers that all shipments, under the Afghan
Transit Trade Agreement, should be subject to control
and inspection on entry into, and exit from, Pakistani
territory. The magnitude of this “duty-free trade” is
such that Pakistan could benefit from specialist
technical assistance from the international community.
94. The Committee has concluded that the arms
embargo and the closure of terrorist training camps can
best be monitored by making use of the existing
mechanisms which are in place in each of
Afghanistan’s neighbours, enhancing these mechanisms
with a Sanctions Enforcement Support Team in each
country. These teams, made up of customs, border
security and counter terrorism experts, should form the
field arm of the Office for Sanctions Monitoring and
Coordination.
95. The work of the teams will be coordinated by a
headquarters of the Office for Sanctions Monitoring
and Coordination staffed with specialist officers who
can support the work of the teams in the field and task
the teams to verify and report on allegations of
sanctions-busting. The proposed organization could
serve as the nucleus for future sanctions monitoring
requirements.

V. Recommendations
96. The Committee recommends the establishment of
a United Nations Office for Sanctions Monitoring and
Coordination-Afghanistan as detailed above, consisting
of a Headquarters and Sanctions Enforcement Support
Teams working alongside the border control services in
the countries neighbouring Afghanistan.
97. Consideration should be given, for sound
operational reasons, to the Office for Sanctions
Monitoring and Coordination-Afghanistan being
located in Europe, possibly at the United Nations
Office at Vienna.
98. In the interest of safety and security and speed of
implementation the Committee recommends that the

16

proposed Sanctions Enforcement Support Teams be
based with the existing United Nations offices in the
countries neighbouring Afghanistan.
99. The Committee recommends that urgent
consideration should be given to aircraft turbine fuel,
and special fluids and lubricants needed for use in
armoured vehicles, being specified in the embargo.
100. The Committee recommends that the movement
of acetic anhydride should be monitored along with the
inflow of arms and war materiel and the outflow of
illegal drugs from Afghanistan.
101. The
Committee
recommends
that
due
consideration be given to the proposed Office for
Sanctions Monitoring and Coordination serving as the
nucleus for future sanctions monitoring requirements.
102. The Committee recommends that all those
countries that are not parties to the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, adopted by the General Assembly in its
resolution 54/109, should be urged to sign, ratify and
fully comply with the Convention.

S/2001/511

Annex I
Arms control measures to be considered by the Office
for Sanctions Monitoring and Coordination in the
overall context of international arms controls
Priority 1
1.

Measures to control arms brokers and shipping agents.

2.

Measures to register air cargo companies and certify their shipments.

3.

Submission of flight plans of arms transport firms.

4.

Legislation against the use of false end-user certificates, shipping documents,
cargo manifests and flight plans as a crime under national law.

5.

Early warning system and satellite surveillance.

Priority 2
6.

Publishing information on violations of end-user certificate provisions,
including names of companies, countries and individuals involved in
unauthorized transfers of weapons to third parties.

7.

Monitoring the implementation of an arms embargo by assessing the status of
its regime periodically in order to sound an early warning. Hence, dispatch of
teams of experts to investigate violations of specific cases and analysis of their
findings.

Priority 3
8.

Marking newly produced weapons.

9.

Weapons purchase security deposits.

10.

Establishing an international centre to collect and share information on arms
transfers. The creation of an international mechanism of some kind is of great
importance whereby there would be a regular reporting of sales, purchases and
production.

Priority 4
11.

A more serious approach to the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms.

12.

Negotiating an internationally binding agreement regulating the activities of
arms brokers. (Brokers are individuals and companies engaged in the buying,
selling, negotiating, advertising, marketing and transport of all military and
para-military services and equipment.)

13.

Arms embargo unit. This unit should be staffed with experts on the weapons
trade, financial flows, customs controls and dual-use technologies, as well as
with legal advisers. This could be the repository of a databank on violations
and violators.

14.

Measures against mercenaries/private security companies.

17

S/2001/511

Annex II
Outline organization for a sanctions monitoring mechanism
for Afghanistan
United Nations
Security Council

Information
from
Member States

Sanctions
Committee

Office for Sanctions Monitoring and Coordination — Afghanistan

Director
Chief of Operations
Liaison, information
exchange, coordination
and cooperation with
other agencies and
organizations, e.g. Office
for Drug Control and
Crime Prevention, OSCE,
Wassenaar Arrangement,
Interpol

Specialist Officers
• Arms embargo
• Counter-terrorism
• Drugs, financing and moneylaundering issues
• Legislation and legal support

Sanctions
Enforcement
Support Team

Sanctions
Enforcement
Support Team

Sanctions
Enforcement
Support Team

Sanctions
Enforcement
Support Team

Sanctions
Enforcement
Support Team

Sanctions
Enforcement
Support Team

Iran (Islamic
Republic of)

Turkmenistan

Uzbekistan

Tajikistan

China

Pakistan

Customs

Customs

Customs

Customs

Border security

Border security

Border security

Border security

Counterterrorism

Counterterrorism

Counterterrorism

Counterterrorism

18

Border security
Counterterrorism

Customs
Border security
Counterterrorism

S/2001/511

19
