S/PRST/2000/32

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 November 2000
English
Original: English/French/Russian

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4221st meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 November 2000, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Georgia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council has considered the report of the Secretary-General
concerning the situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, of 25 October 2000
(S/2000/1023).
“The Security Council welcomes the efforts by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to enhance contacts at all levels
between the Georgian and Abkhaz sides, in close cooperation with the Russian
Federation, in its capacity as facilitator, the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe. It notes with appreciation the expansion of such contacts, which
resulted recently in a series of meetings and steps towards the implementation
of concrete cooperation projects between the two sides. It notes the holding of
the 11th session of the Coordinating Council and urges further reinvigoration
of this mechanism. It welcomes the readiness of the Government of Ukraine to
host the third meeting on confidence-building measures in Yalta at the end of
November and notes the important contribution a successful conference held in
a timely fashion would make to the peace process.
“The Security Council notes with deep concern, however, the continued
failure of the parties to achieve a comprehensive political settlement, which
includes a settlement of the political status of Abkhazia within the State of
Georgia. It calls upon the parties, in particular the Abkhaz side, to undertake
immediate efforts to move beyond the impasse and urges them to spare no
efforts in order to achieve substantive progress without further delay. In this
regard, it strongly supports the efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, undertaken with the support of the Group of Friends of the
Secretary-General, to address the issue of the future constitutional status of
Abkhazia and, in particular, his intention to submit, in the near future, a draft
paper containing proposals to the parties on the question of the distribution of
competencies between Tbilisi and Sukhumi as a basis for meaningful
negotiations on that issue.
“The Security Council calls upon the parties to agree upon and to take, in
the nearest future, concrete steps towards implementing effective measures to

00-74656 (E) 141100
`````````

S/PRST/2000/32

guarantee the security of the refugees and internally displaced persons who
exercise their unconditional right to return to their homes. In particular, the
undefined and insecure status of spontaneous returnees to the Gali district is a
matter that must be addressed urgently. The Council therefore urges the parties
to engage in genuine negotiations to resolve concrete aspects of the matter and
not to link this issue to political matters. In this regard, it joins the
Secretary-General in encouraging the Abkhaz side to muster the requisite
political will to resolve the problem of Georgian language education in the
schools of the district, as well as to find the resources that those schools need,
which the Secretary-General notes may affect directly the magnitude of the
seasonal migration in the area.
“The Security Council welcomes the achievements reached within the
framework of the policy implemented by the Government of Georgia, the
United Nations Development Programme, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the World Bank, aimed at ensuring that the internally
displaced persons enjoy their right to be treated in the same manner as all other
Georgian citizens.
“The Security Council notes that the situation on the ground in the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) area of responsibility
has remained generally calm although unstable during the reporting period. It
welcomes all efforts which have been undertaken, in particular by the Special
Representative, with a view to alleviating tensions and increasing confidence
between the parties. It urges the parties to cooperate closely in combating
crime and improving the work of their respective law enforcement agencies.
“The Security Council strongly condemns the murder of Mr. Zurab
Achba, legal assistant to the United Nations Human Rights Office in Sukhumi,
recalls the commitment of the Abkhaz side to keep UNOMIG fully informed
on the course of the investigation into this crime, and urges the Abkhaz side to
shed light on this matter. It also deplores abductions of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. In this context, the Council recalls the relevant
principles contained in the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel adopted on 9 December 1994 and the statement of its
President of 10 February 2000 (S/PRST/2000/4). It calls on the parties to
refrain from any actions which could increase tensions on the ground and to
ensure the safety of UNOMIG personnel.
“The Security Council welcomes the contribution that UNOMIG and the
Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(CIS Peacekeeping Force) continue to make in stabilizing the situation in the
zone of conflict, notes that the working relationship between UNOMIG and the
CIS Peacekeeping Force has remained close, and stresses the importance of
continuing and increasingly active cooperation and coordination between them
in the performance of their respective mandates. It calls on the parties to
observe their obligations to prevent acts that violate the Moscow Agreement
on a Ceasefire and Separation of Forces of May 1994 (S/1994/583, annex 1)
and could pose a threat to the life and security of UNOMIG, CIS Peacekeeping
Force and other international personnel.”

2
