S/2012/28

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 January 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 9 January 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I refer to my letter dated 7 December 2010 (S/2010/637) informing the
President of the Security Council of the progress made by the Cameroon-Nigeria
Mixed Commission, and her reply dated 10 December 2010 (S/2010/638), in which
she took note of my intention to continue the activities of the United Nations
support team to the Mixed Commission with funding from the regular budget. In the
same spirit, by the present letter, I would like to inform you of the latest
achievements and activities undertaken by the Mixed Commission.
As you know, the United Nations established the Mixed Commission to
facilitate the implementation of the 10 October 2002 ruling of the International
Court of Justice on the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary and territorial disputes.
Through my good offices, and with the support of the United Nations Secretariat, I
have continued to facilitate the implementation of the ruling of the International
Court of Justice.
The mandate of the Mixed Commission includes supporting the demarcation of
the land boundary and delineation of the maritime boundary, facilitating the
withdrawal and transfer of authority as appropriate, addressing the situation of
affected populations and making recommendations on confidence-building
measures. Achievements to date in the implementation of the ruling of the Court
include the withdrawal and transfer of authority in the Lake Chad area (December
2003), along the land boundary (July 2004) and in the Bakassi Peninsula (initial
withdrawal and transfer of authority in June 2006 and completion of the process in
August 2008), as well as delineation of the maritime boundary (May 2007).
In the course of 2011, the Mixed Commission continued to facilitate the
process peacefully, including by helping to maintain open dialogue and
communication between the two countries. Following are some of the activities for
which the United Nations support team to the Mixed Commission has provided
substantive, technical and logistical support.
To date, out of the estimated 2,000 km, more than 1,700 km of the land
boundary between the two countries have been demarcated, including 99.4 km of
inaccessible areas in the Alantika Mountains through satellite imagery. In November
2011, the United Nations assisted an independent expert team in determining the
boundary in the Mount Tosso area, which will be examined during the twenty-ninth
session of the Mixed Commission, tentatively scheduled to take place in Yaoundé,
on 1 and 2 March 2012.
12-20518 (E) 130112

*1220518*

S/2012/28

During the twenty-seventh session of the Mixed Commission, which took
place in Yaoundé on 10 and 11 March 2011, the Mixed Commission concluded that
the Working Group on the Maritime Boundary had fully accomplished its mandate.
The Mixed Commission approved all of the recommendations of the Working
Group, including the provisions for cross-border cooperation on hydrocarbon
deposits straddling the maritime boundary.
During the twenty-eighth session of the Mixed Commission, which took place
in Abuja, on 23 July 2011, the Mixed Commission reiterated its determination to
complete the cartographic demarcation work by the end of 2012 and stressed the
need for comprehensive planning of the completion of the remaining tasks,
including the assessment of all boundary lines, the extraction of coordinates and the
drawing of the final maps. For this purpose, it agreed that the demarcation work will
formally be concluded with a boundary statement, to which a series of maps,
elevated to the status of “legally-agreed maps”, depicting the boundary line, will be
appended. The statement, which will include an index of geographic and boundary
coordinates resulting from the field assessment, will be the “binding source” for the
demarcation of the Cameroon-Nigeria boundary.
Reports by United Nations civilian observers monitoring the situation along
the land boundary and in the Bakassi Peninsula have concluded that the prevailing
situation continues to be peaceful.
Meanwhile, the follow-up committee established by the 12 June 2006
Greentree Agreement continued its work following the final transfer of authority in
the “zone” in the Bakassi Peninsula from Nigeria to Cameroon on 14 August 2008.
In 2011, three meetings of the follow-up committee were preceded by observer
visits in the above-mentioned “zone”. The Committee noted considerable
improvement of the situation in the peninsula, as evidenced by the significant
increase of the population and the good relations between the community and
authorities. The United Nations is encouraging the parties to conclude a framework
agreement, currently under discussion, to enhance security cooperation between the
parties in a common effort to combat the growing threat of piracy and terrorism in
the subregion.
Throughout 2011, the Mixed Commission continued to support the formulation
of confidence-building measures for the welfare of affected populations and to
promote initiatives aimed at enhancing trust between the two Governments and their
peoples.
The United Nations country team in Cameroon, along with representatives of
the Government of Cameroon, have identified four new confidence-building
projects directly aimed at supporting border communities affected by the
demarcation process. A similar needs assessment on the Nigerian side of the
boundary line is scheduled to take place form 5 to 13 December 2012.
Completion of the bulk of the demarcation work will depend on the ability of
the parties to reach agreement on the remaining areas of disagreement in a timely
manner. Cameroon and Nigeria have agreed in particular that pillar emplacement
work will continue beyond 2012.
After 2012, the following activities will conclude the work of the Mixed
Commission:

2

12-20518

S/2012/28

(a) In line with the June 2006 Greentree Agreement and through the followup committee, monitoring the situation in the “zone” of the Bakassi Peninsula for
the remainder of the five-year transitional period (August 2008-August 2013),
during which special protection shall be granted to Nigerian residents;
(b) Facilitating the boundary pillar emplacement, financed by the trust fund,
and promoting the replenishment of the trust fund through voluntary contributions;
(c) Implementing the exit strategy by handing over the activities of the
Mixed Commission to the Joint Bilateral Commission and other subregional
structures.
I would like to recall that, until 2003, the Mixed Commission was funded
entirely from extrabudgetary funds. During the period from 2004 to 2011, the
activities of the Mixed Commission were funded through the United Nations regular
budget. The Governments of Austria, Brazil, Canada, Italy, Norway, Pakistan,
Sweden and Uruguay have provided in kind contributions for the substantive and
technical work of the Commission (military and legal experts), in addition to the
logistical support provided by the Governments of Cameroon and Nigeria, and the
voluntary contributions of both countries, as well as those of Canada, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the European Union, to the trust
fund for the demarcation activities.
Given the cost-effectiveness of the mission and the important tasks remaining
at this juncture to help advance the peaceful implementation of the ruling of the
International Court of Justice, it is my intention to ask for resources from the regular
budget for the Mixed Commission for the period from 1 January to 31 December
2012.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-20518

3
