S/PV.7932

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7932nd meeting

Friday, 28 April 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Tillerson. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wang Yi
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Gebeyehu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Della Vedova
Mr. Kishida
Mr. Abdrakhmanov
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Ndiaye
Ms. Söder
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Rosselli

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
Letter dated 18 April 2017 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
(S/2017/337)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-11396 (E)
*1711396*

S/PV.7932

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
Letter dated 18 April 2017 from the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2017/337)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, ministers and other representatives
present in the Security Council Chamber. Their
presence underscores the importance of the subject
matter we will discuss today.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative
of the Republic of Korea to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Yun Byung-se, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Korea.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2017/337, which contains a letter dated
18 April 2017 from the Permanent Representative
of United States of America to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept paper on the item under consideration.
I give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: Allow me to first thank
the United States and you personally, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting.
The situation on the Korean peninsula is one of
the longest-standing and most serious issues before the
United Nations. The Security Council first adopted a
resolution (resolution 825 (1993)) on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea nuclear issue in 1993, when
it urged the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea not
to withdraw from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. Twenty-four years later, and despite
extensive efforts, the challenge is still unresolved.
In response to the accelerated nuclear and ballistic
missile activities of the Democratic People’s Republic
2/22

28/04/2017

of Korea, the Security Council has adopted two
sanctions resolutions (resolutions 2270 (2016) and 2321
(2016)) and met 11 times in emergency consultations
since January 2016. During that period, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea conducted two nuclear
tests, more than 30 launches using ballistic missile
technology and various other activities relating to its
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. Its launches
using ballistic missile technology have included
tests of short-, medium-, intermediate-range and
submarine-launched ballistic missiles, as well as the
placement of a satellite in orbit.
Those tests and launches are clear violations
of Security Council resolutions. The absence of
coordination and notification in advance of these
launches, other than the space launch on 7 February
2016, is contrary to internationally accepted regulations
and standards adopted by the International Maritime
Organization and the International Civil Aviation
Organization. Aircraft and ships have been prevented
from planning their routes in order to steer clear of those
hazardous activities. And adjacent States have been
prevented from promulgating dangerous, restricted or
prohibited areas in their areas of responsibility.
The International Atomic Energy Agency
remains unable to access the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to verify the status of its nuclear
programme. The Agency continues to monitor
developments through satellite imagery and has
observed “signatures” consistent with the operation
of the plutonium-production reactor and the reported
centrifuge enrichment facility. Commercial satellite
imagery analysis has also indicated continued activity
at the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s nuclear
test site, which is believed to be maintained in a state of
readiness to conduct additional nuclear-test explosions.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
has increasingly stressed the importance of nuclear
deterrence in its military doctrine. At the seventh
Congress of the Workers Party of Korea, held in March
2016, the country’s leader, Mr. Kim Jong Un, described
the country as a responsible nuclear-weapon State.
More recently, in a statement to the United Nations
Disarmament Commission on 3 April 2017, while
reaffirming its support for comprehensive and complete
nuclear disarmament, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea stated that “going nuclear-armed is the policy
of our State” (see A/CN.10/PV.363).
17-11396

28/04/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is the
only country to have conducted nuclear tests in this
century. We must assume that, with each test or launch,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
make technological advances in its pursuit of a military
nuclear capability.
I condemn in the strongest terms the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s repeated violations of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s continued pursuit of its
nuclear-weapon and ballistic-missile programmes, in
defiance of repeated demands by the Security Council
to cease such activities, threatens to destabilize regional
and international security and seriously undermines
international disarmament and non-proliferation efforts.
I am alarmed by the risk of a military escalation
in the region, including by miscalculation or
misunderstanding. I am particularly concerned by
the possibility that efforts to offset the destabilizing
activities of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea could also result in increased arms competition
and tensions, further impeding the ability of the
international community to maintain unity and achieve
a peaceful solution.
The onus is on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea to comply with its international obligations. At
the same time, the international community must also
step up its efforts to manage and reduce tensions.
The absence of communication channels with
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea could be
dangerous. Armed conflict in North-East Asia, which
is home to one fifth of the world’s people and gross
domestic product, would have global ramifications.
We need to avoid miscalculation and misunderstanding.
We need to act now to prevent conflict and achieve
sustainable peace. That means the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea refraining from further testing,
complying with the relevant Security Council resolutions
and exploring the resumption of dialogue. It also means
reopening and strengthening communication channels,
particularly military-to-military, to lower the risk of
miscalculation or misunderstanding. And it means all
Member States implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
I have taken note of the Security Council’s
commitment to a peaceful diplomatic and political
solution to the situation; of efforts by Council members,

S/PV.7932

as well as other States, to facilitate a peaceful and
comprehensive solution through dialogue; and of the
importance the Council has placed on working to
reduce tensions. The Council has important tools at its
disposal, from targeted sanctions to communication
channels. As Secretary-General, I am committed to
seeking peaceful and political solutions. I stand ready
to assist in any way possible, but I would welcome
guidance and assistance from the Security Council in
this regard.
I welcome the Council’s understanding of the
importance of the humanitarian imperatives from
the political situation. On 21 March, we released the
latest Democratic People’s Republic of Korea needs
and priorities document. For this year, 13 United
Nations agencies and international non-governmental
organizations operating in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are calling for $114 million to meet
the urgent needs of 13 million especially vulnerable
people — half of the country’s population. The people
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea need our
generosity and help.
1 also call on the authorities of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to engage with United
Nations human rights mechanisms and with the
international community to address the grave human
rights situation and improve the living conditions of
its people. I therefore welcome the visit next week by
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the rights
of persons with disabilities to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. As we discussed in this Chamber
on 18 April (see S/PV.7926), improvement on human
rights will not only protect the livelihoods and dignity
of people in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
but also promote long-term security and stability in the
region and beyond.
I would like to conclude by underlining our
collective priority for conflict prevention. We must
remain committed to pursuing peaceful and diplomatic
paths forward for a peaceful and denuclearized
Korean peninsula.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
that most helpful briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Secretary of State of the United States.
I am grateful for this opportunity to address the
Security Council

17-113963/22

S/PV.7932

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

According to resolution 2321 (2016), the stated
objective of the Council is North Korea’s abandonment
of its nuclear weapons and ballistic-missile programmes.
For the past 20 years, well-intentioned diplomatic efforts
to halt those programmes have failed. It is only by first
dismantling them that there can be peace, stability and
economic prosperity for all of North-East Asia.
With each successive detonation and missile test,
North Korea pushes North-East Asia and the world
closer to instability and broader conflict. The threat
of a North Korean nuclear attack on Seoul or Tokyo
is real. It is likely only a matter of time before North
Korea develops the capability to strike the United
States mainland. Indeed, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has repeatedly claimed that it plans
to conduct such a strike. Given that rhetoric, the United
States cannot idly stand by, nor can other members of
the Council that are within striking distance of North
Korean missiles.
Having for years displayed a pattern of behaviour
that defies multiple Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 2321 (2016) and 2270 (2016), and
erodes global progress on nuclear non-proliferation,
there is no reason to think that North Korea will change
its behaviour under the current multilateral sanctions
framework. For too long, the international community
has been reactive in addressing North Korea. Those
days must come to an end. Failing to act now on the
most pressing security issue in the world may bring
catastrophic consequences. We have said this before,
and it bears repeating: the policy of strategic patience
is over. Additional patience will mean only acceptance
of a nuclear North Korea. The longer we bide our time,
the sooner we will run out of it.

28/04/2017

our own nuclear weapons from South Korea and offered
aid in North Korea as proof of our intent to de-escalate
the situation and normalize relations. Since 1995, the
United States has provided more than $1.3 billion in
aid to North Korea. We look forward to resuming our
contributions once the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea begins to dismantle its nuclear weapons and
missile-technology programmes.
For its own sake, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea must dismantle its nuclear-missile programmes
if it wants to achieve the security, economic development
and international recognition that it seeks. North
Korea must understand that respect will never follow
recklessness. North Korea must take concrete steps to
reduce the threat that its illegal weapons programmes
pose to the United States and our allies before we can
even consider talks.
I propose that all nations take the following three
actions beginning today.
First, we call on States Members of the United
Nations fully to implement the commitments that they
have made regarding North Korea. This includes all
measures required and resolutions 2321 (2016) and
2270 (2016). Those nations that have not fully enforced
those resolutions discredit this body.
Secondly, we call on countries to suspend or
downgrade diplomatic relations with North Korea.
North Korea exploits its diplomatic privileges to fund
its illicit nuclear-missile technology programmes, and
constraining its diplomatic activity will cut off a flow
of needed resources. In the light of North Korea’s recent
actions, normal relations with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are simply not acceptable.

In the light of this growing threat, the time has
come for all of us to put new pressure on North Korea
to abandon its dangerous path. I urge the Council to
act before North Korea does. We must work together to
adopt a new approach and impose increased diplomatic
and economic pressure on the North Korean regime. The
new campaign that the United States is embarking upon
is driven by our own national security considerations
and is welcomed by many nations that are concerned for
their own security and that question why North Korea
claims nuclear capabilities for which it has no need.

Thirdly, we must increase North Korea’s financial
isolation. We must levy new sanctions on Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea entities and individuals
supporting its weapons and missile programmes and
tighten those that are already in place. The United
States also would much prefer the countries and
peoples in question to own up to their lapses and correct
their behaviour themselves, but we will not hesitate
to sanction third-country entities and individuals
supporting the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
illegal activities.

Our goal is not regime change, nor do we desire
to threaten the North Korean people or destabilize the
Asia-Pacific region. Over the years, we have withdrawn

We must bring maximum economic pressure to
bear on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea by
severing the trade relationships that directly fund its

4/22

17-11396

28/04/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

nuclear-missile programme. I call on the international
community to suspend the flow of North Korean guest
workers and to impose bans on North Korean imports,
especially coal.
We must all do our share, but China alone, which
accounts for 90 per cent of North Korean trade, has
economic leverage over Pyongyang Yang that is
unique, and its role is therefore particularly important.
The United States and China have held very productive
exchanges on this issue, and we look forward to further
actions that build on what China has already done.
Lastly, as we have said before, all options for
responding to future provocation must remain on the
table. Diplomatic and financial levers of power will be
backed up by willingness to counteract North Korean
aggression with military action, if necessary. We would
much prefer a negotiated solution to this problem, but
we are committed to defending ourselves and our allies
against North Korean aggression.
This new pressure campaign will be swiftly
implemented and painful to North Korean interests. I
realize that some nations for which a relationship with
North Korea has been in some ways a net-positive may
be disinclined to implement the measures of pressure
on North Korea. But the catastrophic effects of a North
Korean nuclear strike outweigh any economic benefits.
We must be willing to face the hard truths and make
hard choices right now so as to prevent disastrous
outcomes in future. Business as usual is not an option.
There is also a moral dimension to this problem.
Countries must know by now that helping the North
Korean regime means enabling cruelty and suffering.
North Korea feeds billions of dollars into a nuclear
programme it does not need while its own people starve.
The regime’s pursuit of nuclear weapons does not serve
its own national security or the well-being of a people
trapped in tyranny. I ask the community of nations to
help us preserve security and protect human dignity.
In one of my first trips as America’s Secretary
of State, I looked across the demilitarized zone at the
haunted land of North Korea. Beyond the border is a
nation of sorrow, frozen in time. While the world sees
the gleaming buildings of Pyongyang, the blight of
oppression and starvation has swept this land for more
than 60 years.
But even though the present condition of that country
is bleak, the United States believes in a future for North

S/PV.7932

Korea. These first steps towards a more hopeful future
will happen most quickly if other stakeholders in the
region and the global community join us.
For years, North Korea has been dictating the terms
of its dangerous course of action. It is time for us to
retake control of the situation. We ask the members of
the Council and all other partners to implement a new
strategy to denuclearize North Korea.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Kishida (Japan): I would like to begin
by expressing my sincere appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this timely
meeting on the denuclearization of North Korea. I
wish also to thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
informative briefing.
The threat posed by North Korea’s nuclear and
ballistic-missile development has reached a new level.
Since January 2016, it has conducted two nuclear tests
and at least 30 ballistic-missile launches. This threat
is not just hypothetical. For ordinary citizens, it is
only too real. On 6 March, North Korea launched four
ballistic missiles, three of which landed within Japan’s
exclusive economic zone. There was no advance notice,
and the consequences of these reckless launches could
have been catastrophic for innocent fishing boats, sea
vessels and aircraft.
These launches are an intentional provocation, as
evidenced by North Korean media reports stating that
the North Korean units responsible for striking United
States bases in Japan in contingencies were involved.
It is therefore increasingly important for the countries
in the region to strengthen deterrence so as to ensure
peace and security.
Now is a good time to recall the commitments that
North Korea has made on denuclearization in the past.
In 2005, North Korea, together with China, Japan, the
Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the
United States,
“unanimously reaffirmed that the goal of the sixparty talks is the verifiable denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula in a peaceful manner”
in a Six-Party Talks joint statement. All parties expect
North Korea to remain committed to this position.
There is no doubt that dialogue is necessary to
achieve the peaceful denuclearization of the Korean

17-113965/22

S/PV.7932

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

peninsula. However, in the current situation, in which
North Korea continues to advance its nuclear and
ballistic-missile programmes, a meaningful dialogue is
clearly not possible. In order to bring North Korea back
to the negotiating table, the international community
must send a strong message that provocation comes at a
high price and that no bright future awaits North Korea
without its denuclearization.
With this in mind, Japan calls on all Member
States to increase pressure on North Korea through
the vigorous and thorough implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Japan has been
implementing additional measures against North Korea
that go beyond its obligations under Security Council
resolutions aimed at severely restricting the flow of
people, goods and funds, including a total ban on exports
and imports. Japan has also actively assisted with
capacity-building in the countries of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations in order to enhance the
effectiveness of Security Council resolutions. No
State should allow itself to become a loophole in the
Democratic Republic’s of Korea’s sanctions regime.
Japan calls on all States Members of the United Nations
that have not already done so to submit national
implementation reports to the sanctions committees
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea as
required by Security Council resolutions. Any further
provocations, including nuclear tests should be met
promptly by even more stringent Council resolutions.
The Democratic Republic of Korea has defiantly
dismissed Security Council resolutions as illegal and
refused to be bound by such obligations. That has real
humanitarian consequences. The regime’s pursuit of
nuclear weapons and ballistic missile development
comes at the expense of the welfare and basic needs
of the people in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Those people include international abductees.
In the past, agents of the Democratic Republic of Korea
infiltrated Japan and abducted a number of Japanese
citizens, including a girl as young as 13 years old.
Abductees’ futures have been stolen, and their families
torn apart. Japan attaches the utmost importance to the
abductions issue, which undermines the sovereignty of
Japan and casts fear over the lives of our citizens. Victims
of abduction are not limited to Japanese citizens. It is a
universal issue facing the international community and
a violation of fundamental human rights. In urging the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to take concrete
6/22

28/04/2017

action on that issue, Japan asks for the international
community’s support and understanding.
Regrettably, the possibility of further provocations
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is high.
The Council must send a clear message that such
actions will lead only to more rigorous responses
from the international community. Japan strongly
urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
demonstrate its seriousness, as well as concrete actions
on denuclearization. Japan looks forward to continuing
to work closely with all of our colleagues here today on
this matter.
Mr. Ndiaye (Senegal) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for taking the initiative to
convene today’s debate on the important issue of
nuclear non-proliferation. I also thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, whose briefing enriches our
discussion and allows us to make our efforts clear.
The issue of nuclear non-proliferation is one of
the world’s priorities, as illustrated by resolution 1(1),
the first resolution adopted by the General Assembly,
in January 1946. The goal of that resolution was to
eliminate all atomic weapons. Because it is convinced
about the risk that such weapons pose to the survival
of humankind, my country is in favour of the complete
elimination of military nuclear activities, and not their
mere reduction. Complete elimination is the only way
to save the world from the devastation that would ensue
from the use of nuclear weapons. That alone can ensure
the survival of our world and the future of present and
future generations, by allowing them to live without the
fear of atomic bombs being detonated and in a world
freed from the terror of nuclear disaster.
In addition to such clearly identified threats, there
is also the increased risk of proliferation by non-State
actors, because of the rising incidence of terrorism and
new risks emerging from the ill-advised use of rapid
advances in science, technology and international
trade. In the light of such challenges, my country has
firmly denounced the nuclear test carried out by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on 6 January
2016 and several ballistic missile launches, which are
all serious violations of the country’s international
obligations, pursuant to resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874
(2009), 2087 (2013), 2094 (2013), 2270 (2016), 2321
(2016). Such actions are a clear illustration that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is moving
ahead with its nuclear weapons and ballistic missile
17-11396

28/04/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

programme and is determined to increase its nuclear
power. This not only poses a threat to the people living
on the Korean peninsula and the region; it is also a
serious breach of the non-proliferation regime. Senegal
therefore calls on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to respect its international commitments
and obligations.
In 2016, the Security Council unanimously adopted
two resolutions — resolution 2270 (2016), on 2 March
2016, and 2321 (2016), on 30 November 2016 — which
considerably strengthened previous sanctions against
Pyongyang. Nonetheless, it must be pointed out that
such measures, in addition to the unilateral sanctions
imposed by some countries, have been unsuccessful
in encouraging the country to abandon its military
nuclear ambitions. In truth, none of those sanctions
have prevented the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea from continuing to gradually expand its
nuclear capacity and increase its ballistic missiles
arsenal, which is a flagrant violation of the Security
Council’s resolutions and its repeated requests. Senegal
has ratified the main instruments underpinning
international non-proliferation and nuclear security
regime. It also respects States’ obligations under
resolution 1540 (2004), whose thirteenth anniversary is
being celebrated today.
Similarly, Senegal has submitted its report on the
implementation of the provisions of resolutions 1718
(2006), 1874 (2009), 2094 (2013) and 2270 (2016).
My county is in the process of finalizing its report on
resolution 2321 (2016), with a view to submitting it to
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006).
It is important that we urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to honour its obligations. Once
again, before concluding, I would like to sincerely
thank you, Sir, for your commitment and that of your
country, through dialogue and diplomacy, to seek
political negotiated solutions to the crises that disrupt
the world’s operations. My country’s President lauds
your efforts and commitment to find an unprecedented
consensus required to put an end to the serious threats
posed by the actions of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Wang Yi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
continued escalation of tensions on the Korean peninsula
in recent times has cause widespread concerns in
the international community. If the tensions on the

S/PV.7932

peninsula are not kept under control, in particular in
the case of unexpected events, it is highly likely that
the situation will take a drastic turn for the worse and
spiral out of control. There is no lack of such painful
lessons in history; we must remain on high alert.
To that end, China believes that today’s Security
Council meeting is necessary. We thank SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his briefing to the Council. We
hope that the parties can reach consensus in order to
fully implement Security Council resolutions related
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, thereby
intensifying efforts to promote peace talks to bring
the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula back on
the path towards a negotiated solution. With regard
to the nuclear issue on the peninsula, China’s position
is clear: no matter how the situation may develop, we
must adhere to the following two basic paths.
First, we must remain committed to the goal of
denuclearization, which is the basic precondition
necessary for long-term peace and stability on the
peninsula that we must achieve in order to safeguard the
international nuclear non-proliferation regime. Come
what may, we should never waver in our commitment
to achieving that goal. To that end, China’s position of
opposing the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
research, development and possession of nuclear
weapons remains rock solid. We are firmly committed
to the implementation of all relevant Security Council
resolutions. We urge the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to stop its nuclear- and missile-development
activities, return to its commitment to denuclearization
and honour its denuclearization obligations. At the
same time, we also call on other parties concerned
to demonstrate political wisdom, take political
steps and work constructively together towards the
denuclearization of the peninsula.
Secondly, we must remain committed to taking
the path of resolving issues through dialogue and
negotiations. The use of force does not solve differences
and leads only to bigger disasters. As the only solution,
dialogue and negotiations also represent the sensible
choice for all parties. Our past experience with regard
to resolving the nuclear issue on the peninsula has
shown that whenever there is recourse to dialogue
and negotiations, basic stability on the peninsula is
maintained, and efforts towards denulcearization can
yield results. During the five-year period from 2003 to
2007, when the parties were engaged in dialogue and
negotiations, three joint documents were adopted. In

17-113967/22

S/PV.7932

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

particular, the 19 September joint statement in 2005 set
out the road map for the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s abandonment of all nuclear programmes
and the realization of peace on the peninsula. Even
today, the joint statement still carries major positive
significance and has been reaffirmed and acknowledged
by all Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-related
resolutions adopted by the Security Council.
Since dialogue and negotiations came to a halt
in 2008, the situation on the peninsula has gradually
spiralled out of control. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has accelerated its nuclear-missile
development process and conducted four nuclear tests
and dozens of missile launches. We therefore hope
that all parties will devote greater efforts to seeking a
political settlement through dialogue and consultations,
as required by the relevant Security Council resolutions.
China is not a focal point for resolving the problem on
the peninsula. The key to solving the nuclear issue
on the peninsula does not rest in the hands of China.
However, as a close neighbouring country to the
peninsula, with a responsible attitude with regard to
peace and stability there and in the region, China has
made unrelenting efforts and played a unique role in
promoting a negotiated solution of the issue over the
years. Through China’s efforts and the support of all
parties, the three-party talks on the nuclear issue on the
peninsula was expanded to include six parties.
In the current circumstances, China remains
prepared to work with all parties to contribute anew to
the settlement of the nuclear issue on the peninsula. In
view of recent developments on the peninsula, China
has put forward a double suspension proposal that builds
on the dual-track approach, which we proposed earlier.
The dual-track approach aims to promote parallel
progress in the denuclearization of the peninsula and the
establishment of a peace mechanism on the peninsula
in a synchronized and reciprocal manner, thereby
ultimately achieving both goals together. The double
suspension proposal, which calls for the suspension
of nuclear and missile activities by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the suspension of
large-scale military exercises by the United States and
the Republic of Korea, seeks to bring both sides back
to the negotiating table, thereby initiating the first step
of that approach.
China’s proposals have taken into consideration
both the short- and long-term goals, while making them
complementary to one another. While they are designed
8/22

28/04/2017

to address the most pressing concerns of the parties,
they also pave the way towards denuclearization. They
are consistent with the requirements of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and the fundamental
interests of all parties, including those of the United
States and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The proposals are objective, impartial, reasonable
and practical, and are gaining the understanding and
support of an increasing number of countries. We, of
course, also know that some countries might continue
to have certain doubts.
I would like to point out that the most urgent task
now is to stop the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s nuclear and missile development. To achieve
that goal, it is necessary to put aside the debate over
who should take the first step and stop arguing over
who is right and wrong. Rather, we should start from
the low-hanging fruits and remove flash points so
as to engender peace on the peninsula and establish
conditions conducive to stability in the region. In that
regard, I also want to stress that the state of affairs of
the peninsula issue is not caused by any one single
party, and it is not realistic to ask one party alone to
assume all the responsibilities in connection with
resolving the issue. As President Xi Jinping said, only
with all relevant parties shouldering their respective
responsibilities and meeting one another half-way
will there be a timely solution to the nuclear issue on
the peninsula.
We call upon all parties, especially those directly
concerned by the issue, namely, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the United States, to show a
sincere desire for dialogue and restart the dialogue
process. Furthermore, we look to the Council to build
further consensus and speak with a more unified voice.
At the same time, China will remain open to all useful
proposals from the parties. All ideas conducive to
resuming dialogue and negotiations aimed at achieving
denuclearization and maintaining peace and stability
on the peninsula are welcomed for consideration in
our discussions.
As we meet for this special ministerial meeting of
the Security Council, China calls on all parties to make
concerted efforts to address two urgent tasks.
First, we call for a de-escalation of the situation on
the peninsula as rapidly as possible. Given the gravity
of the situation on the peninsula, China strongly urges
all parties to remain calm, exercise restraint and avoid
17-11396

28/04/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.7932

provocative rhetoric or actions that could lead to a
miscalculation. I want to stress that there is, and should
be, no double standard with regard to this issue. While
we demand that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea observe the relevant Security Council resolutions
and stop advancing its nuclear and missile development,
we also demand that the United States, the Republic
of Korea and other parties refrain from conducting, or
even expanding, military exercises directed against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

Mr. Johnson (United Kingdom): The Charter of the
United Nations defines the supreme task of the Security
Council as the maintenance of international peace and
security. There could hardly be a clearer threat to world
peace more demanding of a unified response than the
activities of one Member of the United Nations, and
that is North Korea breaking its treaty obligations,
ignoring the will of the Council and making bloodcurdling threats to inflict grievous harm on peoples of
other countries.

Secondly, all parties should comprehensively
respect and fully implement the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea-related Security Council resolutions.
In addition to introducing sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, the resolutions that have
been adopted to date also call for resuming the SixParty Talks, avoiding an escalation of tensions and
committing to dialogue. In another words, imposing
sanctions and resuming talks are both efforts to
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We cannot choose one over the other, or implement
only what we see fit. As a response to the accelerated
progress of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear and missile development, the international
community needs to step up non-proliferation efforts.
In response to the progressive escalation of tensions on
the peninsula, it is also necessary for the parties to step
up efforts to promote peace talks. Those two steppingup actions can help promote the peaceful settlement of
the nuclear issue on the peninsula. The Chinese word for
crisis contains two characters, which respectively mean
danger and opportunity. Danger embodies opportunity
and engenders opportunity. In China’s view, now is the
time to seriously consider resuming talks.

For decades North Korea has doggedly pursued the
means to act on those threats. In a nation where the
entire gross domestic product is about $25 billion, and
where its people have over recent decades been exposed
to terrible suffering and been reduced to eating the
leaves and the bark of trees, the Pyongyang regime has
devoted its energy to developing nuclear weapons and
the missiles to convey them.

Before concluding, I would like to reiterate China’s
firm opposition against the United States deployment
of the Terminal High Altitude Area Defense system
in the Republic of Korea. It is a move that seriously
undermines the strategic security of China and
other countries in the region and damages trust and
cooperation among the parties in connection with
the peninsula issue. It is detrimental to achieving
denuclearization and maintaining long-term stability
on the peninsula. China once again urges the relevant
parties to immediately stop the deployment process.
Let us make joint efforts to promote denuclearization
and uphold stability on the peninsula based on mutual
respect and trust.

Last year alone, North Korea tested two nuclear
devices and more than 24 ballistic missiles. This year
we witnessed more missile tests, and I remind the
Council that every one of those tests breaks seven
United Nations resolutions stretching back to resolution
1695 (2006), which was adopted unanimously.
Therefore we should reject, I am afraid, any claims
of moral equivalence between the actions of North
Korea and the defensive and precautionary measures
of other nations. The latter are legitimate; the former
are not. In spite of the strenuous efforts of some to
obscure that distinction, it cannot be ignored or elided.
The United Kingdom therefore believes it is vital for
the Council to stand ready to take further significant
measures to bring about a peaceful resolution. Sooner
or later the North Korean leadership must realize that
their isolation not only holds back their own people — if
the regime really cares about its own people — but also
weakens their own grip on power. The Council must
be united in its demand that the present course not
continue. Today, Great Britain is proud to have joined
its allies to lead the enforcement of sanctions and seek
a peaceful solution.
We urge other partners with direct influence on
North Korea to use that leverage to the full, with the
aim of easing tensions and ensuring compliance with
the expressed will of the United Nations. There is a vital
role for China and Russia, both of whom are neighbours
of North Korea with influence on Pyongyang and
are permanent members of the Council. They have a

17-113969/22

S/PV.7932

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

special responsibility to preserve international peace
and security. The United Kingdom calls on Russia
and China and other Member States to use whatever
influence they possess to restrain North Korea and
guide its leaders toward a peaceful settlement.
Last year the Council decided to toughen sanctions
on North Korea, including by restricting the regime’s
access to foreign currency. However, the United
Nations Panel of Experts has shown that not every
Member State is fully enforcing those resolutions.
Most Members of the United Nations have yet to obey
the requirement in resolution 2270 (2016) to submit a
national report on their implementation of sanctions.
The United Kingdom believes that all Member States
should reaffirm their commitment to enforcing United
Nations sanctions against North Korea.
We also have no doubt that negotiations must
at some point form part of the solution; but first it is
reasonable to expect North Korea to make verifiable
progress toward meeting its obligations to denuclearize
the Korean peninsula. For, as long as Pyongyang
continues to defy the Council, the conditions will not
be helpful for the resumption of the Six-Party Talks or
negotiations in any other format.
While the most pressing threat is North Korea’s
ballistic-missile and nuclear ambitions, we must never
forget the horrifying abuse the regime metes out to
its own people, as documented by the Commission of
Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in 2014. The Council has discussed
human rights in North Korea on previous occasions,
and there should be no reticence about doing so. The
United Kingdom fully supports the work of the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, both of
which perform the crucial task of investigating and
recording these violations.
Britain stands alongside our allies in making clear
that North Korea must obey the United Nations and halt
its nuclear-weapon and ballistic-missile programmes,
disarming in a complete, verifiable and irreversible
manner. Only then can the Council be assured of the
peace and security of the region, and only then can the
people of North Korea have the chance of a better future.
Mr. Gebeyehu (Ethiopia): We thank the United
States presidency for organizing this high-level briefing
meeting on an issue that has serious implications for
10/22

28/04/2017

regional and international peace and security. We
express our appreciation to the United States Secretary
of State for presiding over this important meeting. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his useful briefing.
We are indeed deeply concerned by the extremely
tense situation prevailing in the Korean peninsula.
No stone should be left unturned to de-escalate the
situation. There is a real danger that it could get out
of hand. That should never be allowed to happen; nor
should the situation be allowed to spiral out of control.
The activities of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea are no doubt extremely dangerous. Ethiopia
joins other members in once again reiterating its strong
condemnation of the latest launches of ballistic missiles
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, in
violation of the numerous resolutions adopted by the
Council. The need to find a lasting and comprehensive
political and diplomatic solution to this long-standing
issue through dialogue has never been more urgent than
today. In that regard, compliance by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea with its international
commitments on denuclearization, including full
compliance with the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council, is indeed indispensable. That would no
doubt pave the way for a peaceful and comprehensive
solution through dialogue. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea has the responsibility to do that. In
the meantime, it is important to reduce the tension in
the Korean peninsula in order to ensure that matters
do not get out of hand by accident. But the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has to use the opportunity
to avert what otherwise could be a slide into war from
which no one would benefit.
The full implementation by Member States of the
relevant Security Council resolutions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is also necessary. We
believe there is an outreach activity by the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) with different regional groups,
which will contribute to the implementation of the
sanctions regime against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
For our part, we have taken all the necessary
measures to ensure that Ethiopia is in full compliance
with all that is called for by the relevant Council
resolutions imposing sanctions on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. We will continue with
resolve to meet our obligations in that regard.
17-11396

28/04/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

I wish to conclude by reaffirming our commitment
to fulfilling our obligations and to continuing to
engage constructively with the Panel charged with the
responsibility of monitoring the implementation of the
sanctions regime imposed on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We look forward to the restoration
of a trustworthy peace and security on the Korean
peninsula. We all need that.
Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): I would like
to thank His Excellency Secretary of State Tillerson
for convening today’s debate on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which is a topic that has
unfortunately become highly relevant in the light of
recent events.
For the people and the Government of Kazakhstan,
nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and nuclear
security have been essential priorities in our national
policy since independence. From the time we joined the
United Nations, in March 1992, my country has worked
with steadfast determination to promote disarmament
and non-proliferation globally. That is why I hope
today’s meeting will help the Security Council to come
up with collective multilateral action to bring peace to
the Korean peninsula and find ways to its achieve its
denuclearization.
My country strongly believes that the Security
Council, as the single body entrusted with maintaining
international peace and security, should preserve its
unity at this critical stage. In that regard, we welcome
the Council’s recent statement stressing the importance
of working to reduce tensions on the Korean peninsula
and beyond. We are all pained to see how the situation
in and around the Korean peninsula has worsened with
the passage of time, resulting in a complete impasse. It
is worrisome that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea continues to lunch ballistic missiles and conduct
nuclear tests in flagrant violation of all relevant Security
Council resolutions.
As one of the Chairs of the ninth Conference on
Facilitating the Entry into Force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) and as the Chairman
of The Hague Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile
Proliferation, my country makes every effort to promote
the nuclear non-proliferation process. Five nuclear
tests have been conducted so far, and a sixth could be
around the corner, if we do not take real action aimed
at defusing tensions. We therefore urge the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to refrain from actions that

S/PV.7932

have a negative impact on the nuclear-disarmament
and non-proliferation process and pose a threat to both
regional and global security.
We call on all Member States to strictly observe
the sanctions regime put in place under all the
relevant Security Council resolutions aimed at the
denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, as well as under the CTBT, which calls upon
all States to refrain from conducting any nuclearweapon-test explosions or any other type of nuclear
explosion and to maintain the moratoriums. In taht
regard, Kazakhstan co-sponsored resolutions 2270
(2016), 2310 (2016) and 2321 (2016).
The denuclearization of the Korean peninsula is a
key element in preserving broader security across Asia
and Central Asia. Possession of nuclear arms by the
North Korean regime will create a precedent that will
undoubtedly lead to an escalation of the regional arms
race, given that parties might be tempted to engage in
further proliferation in order to balance out the nuclear
threat posed by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
We would like to remind the Council that the
principal position of Kazakhstan is based not only on
the most severe condemnation of the use of weapons of
mass destruction by any party but also on the resolution
of conflicts through dialogue and negotiations. I would
like to inform the Council that Kazakhstan is still
struggling with the devastating legacy of the Cold War,
which is why the closure of the second-largest nucleartest site and the renunciation of the world’s fourthlargest nuclear arsenal remain among the proudest
achievements of my country.
Soon, together with other sponsors, we are going
to launch in Kazakhstan the first-ever International
Atomic Energy Agency Low-Enriched Uranium
Bank. As a non-permanent member of this organ, we
bring the same passion and commitment to nuclear
non-proliferation as one of the firm principles, goals
and priorities underlying our work, as envisioned by my
President, Mr. Nursultan A. Nazarbayev, in his address
at the general debate of the General Assembly at its
seventieth session (see A/70/PV.13) and in his manifesto
entitled “The World. The Twenty-First Century”.
I believe that all of the foregoing gives Kazakhstan
the strong moral right to call upon all Member
States — and first and foremost the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea — to make every effort

17-1139611/22

S/PV.7932

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to resolve this troublesome situation. Achieving this
goal requires, above all, intensified dialogue among
all stakeholders in regional and global security, and my
country is ready to contribute to that end. My country’s
non-nuclear status is the most convincing example of
how the non-nuclear approach to State development
is the only promising one. We call on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to opt for the same choice.
It has been proved that there is no situation for which
there is no peaceful solution, and North Korea is no
exception.
As an example, in 2013, Kazakhstan’s status as a
trusted mediator allowed it to facilitate the talks on
the Iranian nuclear programme, which consequently
contributed to the resumption of negotiations between
the P5+1 and Iran. We are convinced that there is no other
option available to us but the collective commitment
to international obligations taken in accordance with
Security Council resolutions.
Kazakhstan believes that now is the right time and
is ready to work with all Member States to eliminate
the nuclear threat for the sake of our world. Complete
nuclear disarmament and the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s giving up of its nuclear ambitions
could be ensured by a truce backed by the permanent
members of the Security Council, guaranteeing political
and military stability on the peninsula. If it chooses the
path of peaceful coexistence, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea will receive significant benefits
resulting from closer engagement with the Asia-Pacific
community.
Such an approach, combined with a comprehensive
and holistic regional strategy, will ensure stability for
the country, the peninsula and the wider subregion. We
call upon all parties, all relevant stakeholders and all
Member States to take balanced and thoughtful actions
that do not lead to irreversible consequences. We call on
all parties concerned to refrain from actions that could
increase the risk of a military escalation and further
tensions in the region.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): There is no doubt that what we are living
through at present is one of the most acute and
dramatic phases of developments on the Korean
peninsula. Without exaggeration, peace in the region
recently underwent a serious test, and the threat of
this confrontation moving into a hot phase was higher
as than ever, and it remains so today. The belligerent
12/22

28/04/2017

rhetoric coupled with reckless muscle-flexing has led
to a situation where the whole world is now seriously
wondering whether there is going to be a war or not.
As is well known, under the conditions of such tension,
one ill-thought-out or misinterpreted step could lead to
the most terrible and lamentable consequences.
In Russia, we are watching the dangerous
development of the situation in the region with alarm,
as we ourselves are part of the region. Of course, we
are united in condemning the provocative nuclearmissile activity by Pyongyang, which over the past 18
months, it has taken on a very dangerous dynamic. We
do understand very well the feelings of our neighbours
when another missile is launched from North Korean
territory without a notification, thereby subjecting the
lives of people and maritime and aviation transport
to disproportionate risks. We reject such activity by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which is
confirmed by our support of the sanctions resolutions
adopted by the Security Council, namely, resolutions
2270 (2016) and 2321 (2016).
We call upon the North Korean authorities to end their
proscribed programmes, return to the non-proliferation
regime and join once again the International Atomic
Energy Agency verification regime. At the same time,
it should be clear for everyone that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will probably not give up its
nuclear weapons as long as it sense that the existence
of a direct threat to their security, which is exactly
how the North Koreans view the regular large-scale
manoeuvres and exercises by the United States and its
alliesin the region. That is how they view the dispatch
of the American naval armada to the region that we
have witnessed this month.
An additional destabilizing factor in the region is
the decision — taken by Washington and Seoul last
year in line with the wrong logic of creating a global
missile defence system — to place on the territory of the
Republic of Korea elements of the United States missile
defence system known as the Terminal High Altitude
Area Defense. We have said on many occasions that this
step woul not only, to put it mildly, not be viewed with
enthusiasm by Pyongyang, but it would also undermine
the existing military balance in the region, thereby
jeopardizes the security of neighbouring States. We
are not the only ones who view this in a negative way.
Once again, we call upon the United States and the
Republic of Korea to review the desirability of such
a step, and we call upon other members in the region
17-11396

28/04/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to resist the temptation to become involved in such
destabilizing efforts.
As for international sanctions against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, we would
like once again to reaffirm our commitment to their
implementation. However, such measures should not
be a goal in themselves, but rather an instrument to
involve this country in constructive negotiations on
existing issues. Resolving the nuclear issue of the
Korean peninsula solely by imposing sanctions and
placing pressure on Pyongyang is impossible.
Sanctions should not be used either economically
to suffocate the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
nor to worsen the humanitarian situation. This applies
in particular to the illegitimate unilateral restrictions
targeting civilian areas not associated with the
country’s nuclear missile programmes. Such sanctions
are the reason for the serious deterioration in the
living conditions of the North Korean people, which,
incidentally, was identified as a cause for alarm in the
most recent report of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. They are justifiably very almed
about that. We must acknowledge that the humanitarian
exemptions provided for by the Security Council’s
sanctions regime essentially do not work. Because of
the ban on correspondent relations with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, it is impossible to purchase
abroad the goods and food stuffs necessary for the
economy. Because of the way the financial and banking
system works, it is very difficult to obtain funding
for the United Nations humanitarian agencies that are
still working in the country. Since Pyongyang cannot
replenish its foreign currency reserves owing to the
existing restrictions, it could find itself in a situation
where it is impossible for it to give the United Nations
the funds that are to be channelled to it, as permitted by
the Committee.
A separate issue is the situation with regard to
foreign diplomatic missions in Pyongyang. We should
not allow a situation in which diplomatic missions
continue to experience difficulties in carrying out their
work because of the restrictions imposed on the country.
We have repeatedly raised this issue at meetings of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006), but as a result of the
obstructionist position taken by its individual members,
the situation has not changed at all.

S/PV.7932

Undoubtedly, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is conducting itself inappropriately. It refuses to
abide by the laws of the international community, which
are established in relevant Security Council resolutions.
At the same time, the options for using force are
completely unacceptable and can lead to catastrophic
consequences for both the Korean peninsula and
the region of North-East Asia as a whole. We should
choose to use our diplomatic tools to the greatest extent
possible. Under the current conditions, all parties
involved should demonstrate calm and restraint and not
take steps that could increase the tension.
We need to view the settlement of the situation
in the context of the whole range of issues among
the parties and thereby create the conditions for the
denuclearization of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. This is impossible without normalizing the
overall military and political situation, putting an end
to the build-up of military infrastructure, scaling down
the manoeuvring and building trust among States in the
region. We are convinced that there is no alternative to
a political settlement of the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula, on the basis of the joint statement issued
on 19 September 2005 by the participants in the SixParty Talks.
The Chinese proposals are in the same vein when
they talk about suspension for suspension and parallel
moves. These ideas deserve serious attention, as they
could be a starting point for us to overcome the current
impasse and renew the negotiating process. We need to
seek channels of communication with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea authorities and lead them
to a substantive dialogue on nuclear and missile issues.
As recent events have shown, under no
circumstances can we allow the situation in the region
to develop on its own. As the saying goes, even bad
peace is better than a good quarrel. In that connection,
we are ready for closer interaction with all partners
in order to settle the nuclear and other issues on the
Korean peninsula as soon as possible through the only
means possible — namely, political and diplomatic
means — through mutually respectful dialogue and
mutual consideration of interests and concerns.
Ms. Söder (Sweden): First, let me express my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, and to the United
States presidency of the Security Council for convening
this timely and important meeting. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

17-1139613/22

S/PV.7932

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The situation on the Korean peninsula, particularly
the pursuit of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, is of great
concern for the region and for our world more broadly.
Tensions have risen in recent months and the potential
for mistakes, misunderstandings and miscalculations is
high. For this reason, it is important that the Security
Council seize this opportunity to reflect on how tensions
can be reduced and how the Council can facilitate a
comprehensive solution to the situation.
Despite repeated unanimous condemnations by
the Security Council and the adoption of a number of
Security Council resolutions — which have lead to
the most rigorous sanctions regime under the United
Nations system — the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea persists in accelerating its nuclear weapons
and ballistic missile programme. In doing so, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea continues to
show blatant disregard for its international obligations
and to threaten international peace and security.
Its actions are also incompatible with the existing
global norm against nuclear testing embodied in the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, and they go
against non-proliferation efforts. Therefore, we call
on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to take
immediate steps towards a complete, verifiable and
irreversible dismantlement of its nuclear weapons and
missile programme. This will help pave the way for
peaceful and prosperous development on the Korean
peninsula. In addition, it is clear that there is a need for
a regional security arrangement in the medium term to
be able to realize this goal in full.
Meanwhile sanctions must be duly implemented
to have the desired effect. This is also a matter of
credibility for the entire United Nations system. Yet the
implementation of the sanctions against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea remains insufficient
and highly inconsistent, as highlighted in the latest
report of the Panel of Experts to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006). The recommendations provided by the Panel
must be followed up, and there is a need for a stronger
political commitment by all United Nations Members
in that regard. We need additional capacity at all levels
to ensure better compliance with the letter and spirit of
the resolutions adopted by the Council.
However, sanctions alone will not solve the
situation on the Korean peninsula. Now diplomacy is
crucial. Intensified and creative diplomatic efforts are
14/22

28/04/2017

urgently needed to prepare for a peaceful, diplomatic
and comprehensive solution. The press statement in
response to the latest ballistic missile launch (SC/12801)
confirms the continued commitment of the Council
to dialogue.
The situation must be approached without prejudice
and we must be prepared to consider both new and
previous proposals and agreements. Sweden is ready to
do its part to fulfil that goal.
Sweden, with its Embassy in Pyongyang, is the
Power protecting the interests of the United States,
Canada and Australia in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. We are also a member of the Neutral
Nations Supervisory Commission, and in that context we
strongly encourage the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to resume contact and cooperation with the
Commission at the border station in Panmunjom, which
would also help to reduce tensions and increase trust
and transparency.
Like other speakers, I would also like to take this
opportunity to draw attention to the extremely worrying
human rights situation and precarious humanitarian
conditions in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. It is the duty of all of us to continue to highlight
the atrocities being committed by the regime against
its own people, and the international community
should continue to pursue accountability for those
crimes, but we should also take into consideration the
humanitarian situation of the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea so as to avoid increasing
their suffering as we implement the sanctions.
The pursuit of the development and use of weapons
of mass destruction represents one of the world’s gravest
threats to international peace and security. Preventing
that is a crucial responsibility of the Security Council.
There can be no military solution to the situation on
the Korean peninsula, and we once again urge the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to re-engage in a
credible and meaningful dialogue with the international
community. We also urge ourselves, the international
community, to be ready. In the meantime, Sweden
will stand united with the members of the Council in
condemning any action that jeopardizes international
peace and security.
Mr. Della Vedova (Italy): I would first like to thank
the presidency for convening this timely meeting on
such a key and pressing issue for the Security Council.
I believe that the Council should make every possible
17-11396

28/04/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV.7932

effort to resolve the worsening crisis created by the
persistent ambitions of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to pursue a military nuclear programme.

held on 1 May, while those with the Groups of Western
European and other and Asia-Pacific States will take
place by the end of May.

Italy condemns in the strongest terms all the
nuclear tests and ballistic-missile launches that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has carried
out. Its nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes pose
a grave and increasing threat not only to regional and
international peace and security but also to the global
non-proliferation regime. We all share a common
sense of urgency about the issue, since we assume,
rightly in my view, that with its tests and launches the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is advancing
its military nuclear technology and capability. Such
progress represents an exceptionally high threat to
the international community. For that reason, Italy
will continue to fully support the implementation
of an effective sanctions regime as a tool aimed at
producing a change of behaviour in the leadership of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We are also
ready to strengthen the sanctions regime if there should
be additional nuclear tests or it should prove necessary
in order to enable us reach the objective of a peaceful
and comprehensive solution to the issue.

As Secretary Tillerson said, our collective actions
are not aimed at the people of North Korea but rather at
a regime that should put the interests and well-being of
its people above any considerations of military power.
The Council’s resolutions are clear in that regard, and
as Chair of the Sanctions Committee, we take great care
to avoid any unintended consequences for the civilian
population of the country.

We firmly believe that the consistent and full
implementation of the sanctions is the only way to make
them effective in the framework of a comprehensive
strategy for long-term peace and security. In that regard,
I would like to recall the words of the Panel of Experts
in February when they stated that the implementation
of the sanctions regime is still insufficient and highly
inconsistent, while “[a]ll Member States should
reaffirm their commitment to rigorous enforcement of
United Nations sanctions” (S/2017/150, annex). But the
sanctions must continue to be part of a broader strategy,
not an end in themselves. Such a regime requires
Member States’ good-faith awareness and dedication.
As Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006), Italy is committed to helping all
States Members of the United Nations fully implement
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolutions 2270 (2016) and 2321 (2016). To that end,
we held an open briefing in February, and beginning
in March, in cooperation with the Panel of Experts,
we have been holding a set of outreach meetings with
United Nations regional groups, two of which — with
the Groups of Latin American and Caribbean and
Eastern European States — have already taken place.
The meeting with the Group of African States will be

Italy reaffirms the goal of achieving a diplomatic
solution to North Korea’s threats involving weapons
of mass destruction. We firmly believe that while
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea blatantly
disregards its international obligations with its nuclear
and missile programmes, they do not serve its own
security goals. On the contrary, we believe it could meet
its security needs much more effectively by abiding by
its international obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions and its commitments under the
Joint Statement of the Six-Party Talks of September
2005. Furthermore, at this time, a few weeks from
the commencement of the next review cycle of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT), Italy reiterates its demand that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea return to compliance
with the NPT and the International Atomic Energy
Agency safeguards.
Lastly, I would like to underline that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s illegal nuclear and missile
programmes represent a deplorable diversion of crucial
resources that should be devoted to the primary needs
of its people. By immediately ending its nuclear and
ballistic-missile programmes, we believe that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea would create
the conditions for its reintegration into the international
community and opportunities to improve its economy
and its people’s standard of living.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): North Korea’s advancing
nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes represent the
most urgent nuclear-proliferation challenge of our time,
and I therefore thank the United States presidency and
you personally, Sir, for convening today’s ministerial
meeting on a very topical issue. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for his useful update.
Ukraine continues to condemn in the strongest
terms Pyongyang’s persistent illegal activities in its

17-1139615/22

S/PV.7932

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

efforts to develop nuclear-missile capabilities, in gross
violation of its international obligations. They have
already seriously undermined the non-proliferation
regime as a whole. Despite immense political and
diplomatic efforts, the nuclear threat to the region is
growing. Regrettably, we have seen no signs that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea intends to
change its behaviour. What we have seen is the alarming
persistence, not to say ever-growing obsessiveness, of
the North Korean leadership. As a result, the whole
world faces the gloomy prospect of a large-scale military
confrontation, with unpredictable consequences.
We all agree that the existing challenges related to
the nuclear and missile ambitions of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea should be addressed
collectively, decisively and without any further delay.
Apparently, the existing sanctions regime is not
effective enough to prevent the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea from acquiring technologies,
materials, equipment and financial resources for
the further development of its nuclear and missile
programmes. Sadly, we are witnessing a steady
evolution of North Korean tricks to evade sanctions.
It has been proven many times, most recently by the
pictures of a military parade in Pyongyang, with
a whole range of new weaponry that had never been
seen before. We all know that the North Korean regime
continues to build up its military arsenal at the expense
of its own people. The impact of diverting resources
has already produced a downward spiral in the steady
deterioration of the quality of life for ordinary citizens.
But does the regime care? Absolutely not.
Ukraine’s stance in this regard has been consistent.
The Council should find ways to increase international
pressure on the North Korean regime to respond to
its reckless, unabated behaviour. We believe that
only robust steps by the Council can put an end to the
systematic and brutal violations of international law and
eradicate the growing nuclear threat in South-East Asia.
We must not allow Pyongyang to continue discrediting
the role of the Security Council in the context of global
non-proliferation efforts. What could be the ways to
effectively curb the North Korean nuclear threat? You
clearly outlined them, Sir, in your own statement.
First, undoubtedly, unconditional and faithful
compliance with the Security Council’s resolutions is
a key prerequisite to lowering the level of the threat in
the region and to preventing new provocations. Yet, the
16/22

28/04/2017

Council may have to take additional, robust measures
with a view to compelling the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to abandon its prohibited activities.
That includies the development of nuclear weapons,
ballistic missiles and other types of weapons of mass
destruction. We need to use every tool and avenue
at the disposal of Council members to contribute to
de-escalating the current highly volatile situation.
Secondly, we fully recognize the necessity
of further fostering neighbouring States’ defence
capabilities against this threat. In this regard, I wish
to reiterate that Ukraine stands firmly by the side of
Japan, the Republic of Korea and other countries that
are facing the growing nuclear threat.
Thirdly, it is high time to consider what we can do
to prevent any nuclear threat in the future in any part
of the globe. Are we able to assess the whole range of
real challenges to the non-proliferation regime in order
to avoid disaster in the future? The forthcoming review
cycle of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons will be a suitable platform to that end. In this
regard, I need to underscore the following.
Disrespect for international law and attempts to
undermine or change the established world order are
becoming more systematic nowadays. North Korean
actions are a testament to this trend, but not the only
one. The erosion of the existing system of international
security, continuous breaches and unaddressed
violations of international law pose a significant
threat to all humankind. It is therefore the ultimate
responsibility of the Security Council to spare no effort
to restore respect for those norms, ensure the fulfillment
of international commitments and obligations, and
prevent further violations.
As a country that voluntarily renounced its
own nuclear arsenal and has strictly abided by its
obligations related to the non-proliferation of nuclear
materials, technologies and their means of delivery, we
are convinced that a world without nuclear weapons
should remain a real policy goal for all concerned
parties and not a theoretical concept that is sneered
at by some. If nuclear Powers are serious about
nuclear non-proliferation and eventual disarmament,
they could strengthen the global non-proliferation
regime immensely by making nuclear disarmament a
success story.
Based on Ukraine’s experience of confronting
aggression from a nuclear State, this aspect is of
17-11396

28/04/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

particular importance to my country. The brutal
violation of international obligations, including under
the 1994 Budapest Memorandum, by a permanent
member of the Council that put its signature to the
assurances of sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Ukraine, contravenes the whole United Nationsbased security system created after the Second World
War. The international community has a collective
responsibility to restore respect for international law
and to find lasting solutions to the most urgent threats
to global peace and security.
The North Korea issue is a test case for all of us
today. Our success in resolving it may open ways to
address other pressing problems on the world stage.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to first thank Mr. Rex Tillerson, Secretary
of State of the United States, for presiding over this
briefing and to Secretary-General António Guterres for
his comments.
We are thankful to the presidency of the Security
Council for having organized this open briefing, which
is of particular importance at a moment when tensions
in the Korean peninsula have risen to unprecedented
levels. I recall that, last year, my delegation requested
on more than one occasion the convening of an open
meeting of the Security Council to address this
matter, on the understanding that such a meeting
could contribute in some way to enhance the way the
Organization deals with this particular item. I am
pleased to note that, several months later, the Council
is finally addressing the situation in an open meeting.
Uruguay is a non-nuclear-weapon State. It is
a member of the first nuclear weapon-free zone,
established by the Treaty of Tlatelolco, and an
adherent to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. It is therefore strongly committed
strengthening the ruling of disarmament and
non-proliferation regime and consistently advocates
for a world free of nuclear weapons. Uruguay’s
foreign policy hinges on the essential principles of
international law, including the prohibition of the use
of the force in international relations and recourse to
peaceful means to settle disputes. The use or threat
of use of nuclear weapons constitutes a crime against
humanity and a serious violation of international law,
including international humanitarian law, as well as of
the Charter of the United Nations. The only guarantee

S/PV.7932

against the use or threat of the use of these weapons is
their explicit prohibition and total elimination.
Uruguay has expressed its firm condemnation of
the nuclear tests and ballistic missile launches carried
out by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and will continue to do so if the North Korean regime
continues to challenge and ignore the prescriptions of
the Security Council by persisting in its nuclear and
ballistic missiles programme. The actions of that country
not only heighten tensions in the Korean peninsula, but
also constitute a violation of international law and the
resolutions of the Security Council and a serious threat
to international peace and security. Uruguay therefore
urges the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
abandon its existing nuclear programmes completely,
verifiably and irreversibly and immediately to end all
related activities, including launches using ballistic
missile technoloy and other acts of provocation. We
also urge that country to return to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty and the safeguards regime of the International
Atomic Energy Agency.
Uruguay has maintained a position on this issue that
supports all initiatives favouring dialogue. It therefore
believes that efforts to relaunch talks in the Korean
peninsula should be intensified, generating confidence
between the parties so as to return the North Korean
Government to the negotiation table and undertake
serious denuclearization negotiations. In times of high
tension, it is necessary to remain calm, avoid unilateral
actions and focus on the solution of the problem. In that
connection, I recall paragraphs 47 and 48 of resolution
2321 (2016), adopted by the Security Council in
November, wherein the Council reaffirms its support
for the Six-Party Talks, calls for their resumption, and
refers to the objective of the verifiable denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula in a peaceful manner. We
also reiterate the importance of maintaining peace and
stability in the Korean peninsula and in North-East
Asia as a whole, and of reducing tensions in the Korean
peninsula and outside of it.
Uruguay has insisted on the urgent need to break
the vicious cycle of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea violating resolutions of the Security Council,
which in turn imposes sanctions, issues communiqués
and reiterates that it is the responsibility of powerful
States to open avenues for negotiation to resolve the
situation. Uruguay is of the view that only dialogue,
negotiation and political engagement can resolve
the North Korean matter. In that regard, my country

17-1139617/22

S/PV.7932

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

reaffirms its readiness to continue working within
the Security Council in order to reach a peaceful,
diplomatic and political solution that will result in the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the United States presidency of the
Security Council for having taken the initiative of
convening this important meeting. I extend a warm
welcome to the Secretary of State of the United States,
Mr. Rex Tillerson, and to the Secretary-General.
I have the honour of delivering a statement from the
French Minister of Foreign Affairs and International
Development, Mr. Jean-Marc Ayrault, who was held up
at a conference in Europe and could not be here with us
today in New York.
“France is particularly concerned over North
Korea’s nuclear and ballistic missile programme,
which fuels the greatly heightened tensions in the
Korean peninsula and constitutes one of the primary
threats to international peace and security today.
Methodically pursuing that path — initiated at
highest level of power — over the course of several
years with a view to obtaining an operational
nuclear arsenal, North Korea has flouted all of the
Council’s prohibitions and ignored the repeated
demands of the entire international community to
desist from doing so.
“We are seeing the constant and rapid
advancement of North Korea’s proliferation
programmes, which is bringing it ever closer to
reaching operational capacity. That situation is
unacceptable. France has systematically and firmly
condemned each act carried out and has called on
North Korea to abandon its attempts to develop a
nuclear weapon. We once again make that appeal.
This headlong rush forward cannot continue. It feeds
a dangerous and provocative downward spiral and
is an ongoing threat to the non-proliferation regime.
That is why we must react to all such activities and
recall the norm of the non-proliferation regime in
order to avoid sending a message of impunity to
States that would be tempted to follow the same
irresponsible and provocative strategy.
“We are also concerned about the re-emergence
of chemical weapons in the region, the 13 February
attack in Malaysia should alert us to a global context
of chemical weapons resurfacing and to Syria’s
continuous and repeated violations of the ban on
18/22

28/04/2017

the use of such weapons. Let us be clear — the
goal of North Korea is to become a nuclear-weapon
State and to shake up strategic balances in the Far
East and the entire world by directly threatening
the security of all. Tomorrow, all countries could
be in range of North Korean missiles. We must all
be cognizant of the urgency of the situation. We
must meet our responsibilities as members of the
Security Council and show our determination to
combatting those unjustifiable acts.
“We also recall that the development of nuclear
and ballistic programmes is being carried out at
the expense of the people of North Korea, who are
victims of grave violations of human rights and 70 per
cent of whom suffer from food insecurity. Those
systematic and severe violations are the expression
of utter totalitarianism, where the arbitrary use of
power prevails systematically over the rule of law.
The world cannot remain complacent with regard to
that situation, which flies in the face of everything
we have patiently worked to build, especially
here at the United Nations. Confronted with such
a challenge, the commitment of the international
community and the Security Council must be firm,
clear and visible. Our objective must be the total
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
“The Council has taken bold action in response
to the irresponsible actions of Pyongyang by
condemning nuclear tests and ballistic missile
tests, and it has imposed an extensive and coherent
sanctions regime. Those measures have been
bolstered following each nuclear test and, on two
occasions in 2016, resulted in resolutions 2270
(2016) and 2321 (2016). France, which contributed
to their adoption, welcomed those resolutions. As
with the case of Iran, the sanctions are certainly not
a goal in and of themselves, but rather one of the
means to make North Korea see reason and accept
the denuclearization of the peninsula.
“However, we regret the uneven implementation
of those sanctions, which significantly undermines
the effectiveness of the actions of the international
community. France calls on all States without
exception to ensure the rigorous and unconditional
implementation of Council decisions by all actors,
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations. I am
well aware of the technical and practical obstacles
to their implementation, and it is up to the Council
17-11396

28/04/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to continue to provide assistance in that regard to
countries to countries that need it.
“In the face of North Korea’s persistent
proliferation efforts and the growing danger it
poses to peace and security, our position must
be resolute and clear. If Pyongyang continues its
provocations, the international community and
the Security Council must be ready to adopt new
measures. North Korea must be aware that the
pursuit of its nuclear programme and the carrying
out of additional tests will be met with strong
action, namely through the imposition of new
sanctions, while its citizens continue to be victims
of its leaders.
“But our action cannot be merely reactionary.
We must be proactive and act urgently before
North Korea obtains an operational nuclear
weapon. The international community must
jointly and immediately coordinate efforts to bring
greater diplomatic and economic pressure to bear
upon North Korea in order for it to abandon its
proliferation activities.The resumption of talks
in order to reach a negotiated solution is also
important, but requires that North Korea first make
a good will commitment to them and abandon its
nuclear objectives.
“France, as a permanent member of the
Security Council and the European Union, is fully
committed to ensuring that the United Nations and
Europe respond appropriately to this unacceptable
threat to international peace and security.”

S/PV.7932

In order to avoid armed confrontation, we think it
is essential to advance towards the priority objective
of global nuclear disarmament. Latin America and the
Caribbean, my region, became a nuclear-weapon-free
zone after the signing of the Treaty for the Prohibition of
Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean
50 years ago, thereby becoming the first nuclearweapon-free zone.
In that respect, and following the same line of
thought on non-proliferation, we reiterate our strongest
rejection and condemnation of the launching of ballistic
missiles and the carrying out of nuclear tests by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the most
recent of which took place on 15 April. This attitude
represents a threat to international peace and security,
and we therefore call for unity on the part of the Security
Council in addressing this situation. Compliance with
the resolutions of the Council is crucial in order to meet
this objective.
Likewise, we would recall that sanctions are not
an end in themselves but, rather, a means of achieving
an objective. As recalled at the recent meeting of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Group of 77,
Bolivia also rejects unilateral sanctions in this case,
as in others, and for that reason believes that the
Council, through multilateral mechanisms, must take
the necessary action.

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia thanks the presidency of the Security Council
for having convened this meeting. We also wish to thank
Secretary-General António Guterres for his briefing.

In recent weeks, the world has witnessed escalating
tensions owing both to the tests carried out by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and to the
military deployment of the United States. The current
situation can be considered as posing the greatest threat
of nuclear war in this century. We urge all parties
involved to avoid any escalation of rhetoric or actions
that would increase tensions and endanger international
peace and security, especially on the Korean peninsula.

Bolivia wishes to stress the primary purpose of
the Charter of the United Nations to act jointly and
effectively to prevent and eliminate threats or breaches
of peace, to suppress acts of aggression and to settle
disputes peacefully and in line with the principles of
justice and international law. The Plurinational State of
Bolivia, in keeping with its political constitution, affirms
its peaceful vocation and rejects all acts of aggression
as means to settle disputes and conflicts among peoples
and States. In that regard, the Government of President
Evo Morales has created a policy of rejecting all
confrontation, armed or otherwise.

In that respect, we support China’s proposal of a
simultaneous halt aimed at defusing the crisis in the
Korean peninsula. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea must abandon its nuclear-test and ballisticmissile programmes, and the United States must refrain
from carrying out military exercises in the region. The
parties involved must resume negotiations, keeping
in mind that the Six-Party Talks represent the most
appropriate forum to that end. It is also crucial that
the countries of the region take part in the negotiations
in a positive spirit that would make it possible to ease
current tensions.

17-1139619/22

S/PV.7932

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The only solution to this conflict is a political
solution. We must rule out once and for all any military
alternative. In the current high-tension situation, reason
must prevail, and we must refrain from taking any stance
that could lead to provocations or misunderstandings.
Priority must be attached to respect for the dignity
and equality of peoples as well as to the lives of the
inhabitants of our planet.
War is a failure of the Council. War is a failure
of policy. War is a failure of diplomacy. We have the
internationally recognized obligation to negotiate.
I reiterate: we have the internationally recognized
obligation to negotiate. We must eschew belligerent
lines of thought and approaches, because once we have
unleashed the demons of war, the only ones who benefit
are those who profit from it.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me at the outset to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, for his valuable briefing before
the Council today and especially for his vision, which
takes into consideration in a balanced manner all the
dimensions of the issue under discussion today.
The current situation on the Korean peninsula poses
a major challenge to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) regime. Egypt is deeply
concerned at the increasing tensions following recent
developments, which have become one of the gravest
threats to international peace and security.
Egypt reiterates its full support for all efforts
aimed at reaching a peaceful solution to the crisis
involving the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
nuclear programme and at achieving sustainable peace
on the Korean peninsula, including all reunification
efforts. Given the unique historical ties between Egypt
and the peoples of North-East Asia, Egypt calls once
again on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
comply fully with all of its international commitments,
under the relevant Security Council resolutions, to
abandon its nuclear-weapons programme and to rejoin
the Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear State,
without delays or preconditions.
Egypt is committed to taking every step necessary
at the national level to implement all Security Council
sanctions related to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. Egypt calls on the international community
and the Security Council to address all challenges to
the NPT comprehensively and without selectivity or
double standards. This is vital if we are to preserve the
20/22

28/04/2017

credibility and effectiveness of the non-proliferation
regime and the relevant Council resolutions, including
resolution 687 (1991), especially in the light of the
continued erosion of the credibility of the regime,
which is the cornerstone of the wider international
security architecture.
The continued erosion of the NPT’s credibility
and effectiveness became clear when a certain number
of States decided, with no clear justification, to
prevent the NPT review process from achieving any
objective results by breaking the consensus reached
by the majority of State parties. This was done in the
service of political agendas that run counter to State
party obligations under the NPT and to the unified
message that we should all send, namely, that the
international community is committed to achieving
the universality of the Treaty and to dealing with all
nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament challenges
in a comprehensive and balanced manner, without
any selectivity.
In closing, we encourage all parties to exercise
self-restraint and to resume talks to reach a peaceful
settlement as soon as possible. In this regard, we call on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respond
to the calls made for the resumption of the talks and to
cease any activities that might lead to further tension
or escalation. We also urge all other international
stakeholders to create the conditions necessary for
an agreed settlement that would ensure regional and
international peace and security in a manner consistent
with the goals and principles of the United Nations and
the NPT.
Egypt stands ready to make every possible effort to
support such a peaceful settlement to the crisis and to
maintain peace and security in the region and beyond.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Yun Byung-se (Republic of Korea): Let me
join others in thanking Secretary Tillerson for having
convened this very timely meeting and SecretaryGeneral Guterres for his comprehensive briefing.
This ministerial meeting of the Security Council, the
first ever on the denuclearization of North Korea,
demonstrates the sense of gravity and urgency shared
by all members of the international community.
North Korea is now at the final stage of nuclear
weaponization and claims to be a nuclear-weapon
17-11396

28/04/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

State, as it has declared in its amended Constitution.
Since the first North Korean nuclear crisis, a quartercentury ago, North Korea has made huge advances
in all areas of its nuclear-weapons and missile
programmes through five nuclear tests and numerous
missile launches. We have witnessed, first, exponential
growth in its nuclear stockpile — from what used to
be a few kilograms of plutonium, back in 1992, to a
significant nuclear arsenal now. Secondly, we have seen
rapid development of ballistic missiles of all types and
ranges, which now threaten to reach every corner of the
world. And, finally, we have witnessed its willingness
to actually use weapons of mass destruction (WMD),
as manifested in the assassination of the North Korean
leader’s half-brother with a chemical weapon. In brief,
North Korea’s WMD capability, coupled with the intent
to actually use them, bring us ever so closer to the
tipping point. It is no wonder that some experts say the
world is facing its greatest nuclear emergency since the
Cuban missile crisis.
A nuclear-armed North Korea will significantly
disrupt the security landscape in North-East Asia and
in the world. It will also deal a fatal blow to the global
regime based on the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons and increase the risk of North Korean
nuclear material or related technology falling into the
hands of terrorists. In order to avoid that nightmarish
scenario, we must act now. We are racing against time.
What should our response be? Extraordinary
circumstances require extraordinary responses. A
pundit once said, “Insanity is doing the same thing
over and over again and expecting different results”.
What we need is a new approach led by the Security
Council, not allowing North Korea to dictate the
agenda and timeline. Resolutions 2270 (2016) and 2321
(2016) are milestone measures that illustrate such a
new approach. Based on those most comprehensive
and robust resolutions, the international community
has built and solidified a united front against North
Korea over the past year. For its part, my Government
also took a series of unilateral measures in line with
the Council’s efforts. We are seeing evidence that
sanctions are biting, by cutting off North Korea’s hardcurrency income, deepening Pyongyang’s diplomatic
isolation and blocking its illicit activities on all fronts.
The international community must sustain efforts to
thoroughly implement those resolutions.
Moreover, the Security Council must discuss
additional punitive measures to take against future

S/PV.7932

provocations —proactively, not reactively, as was
the case up until now. The Council has repeatedly
warned that it will take further significant measures,
including sanctions, in the case of future provocations.
But Pyongyang may still harbour the illusion that the
Security Council will take only limited action and
that it can disregard and ridicule the authority of the
United Nations.
In order to change such strategic calculus by
Pyongyang and induce changes from within, we could
take potent measures such as halting the export and
supply of crude oil to North Korea; completely cutting
off North Korea’s hard-currency earnings by, for
instance, suspending all imports of coal from North
Korea; and seriously considering whether North Korea,
a serial offender, is qualified as a Member of the United
Nations, as well as downgrading diplomatic relations
with North Korea.
Let me be clear: our goal is not to bring North
Korea to its knees, but to bring it back to the negotiating
table for genuine denuclearization. We must be cleareyed about Pyongyang’s intent. It is not interested in
negotiating for denuclearization. Instead, its game plan
is to be recognized as a nuclear-weapon State and to
negotiate nuclear disarmament as such. Just last week,
the North Korean Deputy Permanent Representative
to the United Nations himself made clear that any
denuclearization talks were a non-starter.
Under those circumstances, dialogue for the sake
of dialogue cannot be an option. If history teaches us
anything, it is that we must not repeat the tried-andfailed approach. Over the past 20 or so years, we have
left no stone unturned. Yet countless negotiations
and agreements with this rule-breaker par excellence
have led us nowhere but back to square one due to
North Korea’s reneging and deception. They have
only bought time for the regime to advance its WMD
capabilities. We must once and for all break this vicious
cycle of provocations-negotiations-provocations and
rewarding North Korea’s bad behaviour. Our goal is
not to compromise on half-measures for a bogus peace.
Our goal is the complete, verifiable and irreversible
dismantlement of the North Korean nuclear weapons
and missile programmes.
Finally, in dealing with the North Korean nuclear
issue, we must not lose sight of another serious threat,
emanating from North Korea’s chemical and biological
weapons programmes. Resolution 2270 (2016) decided

17-1139621/22

S/PV.7932

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

that North Korea shall abandon all chemical and
biological weapons and weapons-related programmes.
In that regard, I welcome the joint letter by SecretaryGeneral Guterres and Director-General Üzümcü of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
calling upon North Korea to accede to the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
History tells us how in the first half of the twentieth
century the failure to counter Nazi ambitions led to the
outbreak of the Second World War. If we do not respond
to North Korea’s repeated provocations in a resolute
manner, we will only further fuel the appetite of the
trigger-happy regime in Pyongyang. In that regard,
should North Korea conduct a sixth nuclear test or
launch an intercontinental ballistic missile, it will be a
game-changer for all of us. That is why it is critical that
this time the entire international community continue
to maintain the unprecedented unified front against
North Korea. This is the last opportunity to break
and reverse the process. The heavy responsibility is
incumbent upon all of us.
With regard to the deployment of the Terminal
High Altitude Defense battery system in my country,
it is purely a defensive measure in the face of such a
threat from North Korea. It is not aimed at any third
country. Furthermore, the annual United States-South
Korea military exercise is a defensive and transparent
exercise. It cannot be on a par with North Korea’s
obligations under Security Council resolutions
As this is my last appearance in the Security
Council, I would like to take this opportunity to express
my deepest gratitude for the unflinching support that
members of the Security Council have rendered to
me and to my Government over the past four years
in confronting North Korea’s nuclear and missile
challenges. I assure members that the Republic of Korea
will continue to be a stalwart partner in the Council’s
efforts to safeguard international peace and security.
The President: I shall now make a further
statement in my capacity as Secretary of State of the
United States.

22/22

28/04/2017

First, I appreciate all of the statements that have
been made. I have received those statements in the
constructive spirit in which I know they were offered.
I also want to acknowledge the presence of a large
number of Ambassadors with us today. Their presence
gives strength to the importance of this issue and is a
visible demonstration of the importance of this issue to
the international community. I welcome their presence
and appreciate their being here.
As stressed repeatedly in many of the statements
today, North Korea has failed to honour its commitments
of the past. It has made promises that it has broken.
Had this body fully enforced and stood behind the
resolutions it enacted in the past, vigorously enforcing
sanctions with full compliance, perhaps we would not
have found ourselves confronted with the high level of
tension we face today.
We will not negotiate our way back to the
negotiating table with North Korea. We will not reward
their violations of past resolutions. We will not reward
their bad behaviour with talks. We will engage in talks
with North Korea only when they exhibit a good-faith
commitment to abiding by Security Council resolutions
and their past promises to end their nuclear programmes.
That is why we must have full and complete
compliance by every country with the resolutions
that have been enacted by this body in the past — no
relaxation in the vigorous implementation of sanctions.
And we have called for those sanctions to be extended
to other areas as well, on a voluntary basis, and we
are calling globally for all countries to participate in
exerting pressure on North Korea. That is the way you
make your voice heard, through action. Any failure to
take action diminishes your vote for these resolutions of
the past. It diminishes your vote for future resolutions.
And it devalues your seat at the Council. We must
have full, complete compliance by all members of
the Council.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

17-11396
