General Assembly-Thirty-fifth Session

l02

2. Welcomes the emphasis on, and urges the continuation of the concentration of the work of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research in the
sphere of, economic and social training and research
and the inclusion of specific projects on the problems in
the areas identified by the General Assembly at its sixth
and seventh special sessions and in the relevant decisions
adopted by the Assembly at its twenty-ninth and subsequent sessions.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December ! 980
B
FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR THE UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTE FOR TRAINING AND RESEARCH

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of the role of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research in providing training and research for the purpose of enhancing the effectiveness of the United Nations in achieving
the major objectives of the Organization, in particular
the maintenance of peace and security and the promotion of social and economic development,
Noting with regret that, despite persistent efforts to
secure greater and wider financia) support for the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research, the
income from voluntary contributions has not been sufficient to meet the mínimum requirements of the lnstitute to carry out its mandate effectively,
Noting a/so the recommendations contained in the
report of the Joint lnspection Unit on the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research,4
l. Decides that a grant-in-aid should be provided,
on an exceptional basis, from the budget of the United
Nations to meet the current deficits as reflected in the
budget estima tes approved by the Board of Trustees of
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research:
2. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research, in the light
of the recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit, to
take further steps with a view to enhancing the effectiveness of the Institute, reducing its costs and increasing
its resources;
3. Urges ali Sta tes which have not yet contributed to
the United Nations Institute for Training and Research
to do so, and calls upon ali donor countries, especially
those that are not contributing at a leve) commensurate
with their capacity, to in crease substantially their voluntary contributions in order to meet the needs of the
Institute;
4. Requests the Executive Director of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session on the
implementation of the provisions contained in paragraphs 2 and 3 above and on the financia! prospects of
the Institute for the near future.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980
'A/35/181, annex.

35/54.

lJnited Nations University

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2951 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972, 3081 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 3313
(XXIX) of 14 December 1974, 3439 (XXX) of9 December 1975, 31/117 and 31/118 of 16 December 1976,
32/54 of8 Decembcr 1977. 33/108 of 18 December 1978
and 34/112 of 14 December 1979.
Having considered the report of the Council of the
United Nations Univcrsity on the work of the University. ' 11
Noting decision 5.2.2. of 12 September 1980 adopted
by the Executive Board of the Unitcd Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural O~ganization at its
one hundred and tenth session. in which the Board, inter
afia. noted with satisfaction the progress achieved by the
United Nations University in the development of extensive international networks of research and advanced
training, and the greater collaboration established between the University and the specialized agencies and
programmes of the United N ations system, particularly
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, as well as other national and international
institutions concerned.
Noting the activities of the United Nations University
in studying the role of new theoretical concepts in
human and social development,
Welcoming the new Rector of the United Nations
University, a leading scholar of international affairs and
development. and expressing its appreciation to the first
Rector for the great competence and dedication with
which he discharged his responsibilities in carrying out
the activities of the University in accordance with its
Charter, thereby building a firm foundation for the
future development of the University,
1. Notes with satisfaction that the programmes ofthe
United Nations University have achieved substantial expansion in each area of concern and that tangible results
of the U niversity's research and advanced training activities are being produced;
2. A/so notes with satisfaction that the United
Nations University has intensified its collaborative
relationship with appropriate agencies and programmes
of the United Nations system. in particular the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. as well as with other international and national institutions concerned. and urges that these efforts should
be continued vigorously:
3. Recommends that the United Nations University,
in accordance with its Charter, should continue to
broaden its concern with pressing ~loba! problems and,
to this end, should further strengthen the intellectual
capahility of the University Centre in Tokyo;
4. Takes note with interest of the opinions expressed
by the Council of the United Nations University in its
report 11 regarding the report on fund-raising efforts for
the University, 12 in particular the specific recommendations and suggestions contained therein:
5. Stresses the nced to create a greater awareness of
the objectives of the United N ations University by
Governments. the international academic community
and other international and national institutions concerned through the programmatic means and the effec1" Ofjicial Record, o/ rhe General Assemhly, Thirry,fifíh Session,
Supplement No. 31 (A _1,,31 and CorLI)
11
Ihid., paras. 47-52.
· Sce A 1 34/654.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
---

-·

----~-----------~-

tive use of its growing international networks, thereby
stimulating greater financial support for the University;
6. Urges the Secretary-General of the United Nations
and the Director-General of the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization, as well as
the Rector of the United Nations University, to intensify their efforts to increase financia! support for the
University;
7. Appeals to ali Member States to take cognizance
of the achievements of the United Nations University in
the important areas of its three programmes and to contribute generously to the Endowment Fund of the
University and, additionally or alternatively, make
operating contributions to the University so that its
important work can continue to make substantive
progress.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980

-

-

-----

-

--------

- ----

-- ---

-----

----

103
-

.

4. Expresses its appreciation to the President and to
the Government of Costa Rica for the efforts undertaken to organize and finance the University for Peace
without burdening the budget of the United Nations or
the United Nations University, in accordance with
paragraph 2 (d) of General Assembly resolution 34 / 111;
5. Expresses the hope that the widest possible
adherence will be given to the International Agreement
for the Establishment of the University for Peace.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December / 980

ANNEX
lnternational Agreement for the Establishment oí the Unlvenlty
for Peace and Charter of the Unlverslty for Peace
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT
OFTHE UNIVERSITY FOR PEACE

35/55.

Establishment of the Unh·ersity for Peace

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 34 / 111 of 14 December 1979, it approved the idea of establishing a University for Peace-a specialized international institution for
post-graduate studies, research and dissemination of
knowledge specifically aimed at training for peace
within the system of the United Nations University-proposed by the President of the Republic of
Costa Rica in his address to the General Assembly at its
thirty-third session 13 and offe red by him to the international community through the United Nations,
Having considered the report of the Commission on
the University for Peace, 14 established by the General
Assembly in the same resolution and entrusted with
preparing the organization, structure and setting in motion of the University,
Reiterating its appreciation to the President and the
Government of Costa Rica for this generous contribution to international understanding,

Expressing its appreciation to the Commission on the
University for Peace for its work and detailed report on
the establishment of the University for Peace,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral 15 containing his personal comments,

l. Approves the establishment of the University for
Peace in conformity with the International Agreement
for the Establishment of the University for Peace and
with the Charter of the University for Peace, both of
which are set forth in the annex to the present resolution;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to open for
signature the lnternational Agreement for the Establishment of the University for Peace within ten days of its
approval by the General Assembly;
3. Decides to extend the mandate of the Commission
on the University for Peace, established by the General
Assembly in resolution 34 / 111, which shall act as the
preparatory body of the University for Peace pending
the establishment of the Council of the University;
1., O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third Session,
Plenary Meetings, 11th meeting, paras. 106-122.
"A/35/468 and Corr. l, annex l.
" A/35/468 and Corr. l.

The States parties to the present Agreement.
Recalling that, by its resolution 34/111 of 14 December 1979, the
General Assembly of the United Nations cstablished an intcrnational
commission which, in collaboration with the Government of Costa
Rica, was requested to prepare the organization, structure and setting
in motion of the University for Peace,

Desirous of giving effect to the recommendations ofthe Commission
on the University for Peace endorsed by the General Assembly al its
thirty-fifth session,
Have agreed, in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 35/55 of
5 Decernber 1980, as follows:
Artic/e 1
Establishment of the University for Peace
The University for Peace (hereinafter referred to as the Univcrsity)
is hereby established, to function in accordance with the Chartcr of the
University for Peace, the text of which is reproduced in the annex to
the present Agreement.

Article 2
Headquarters of the University
1. The headquarters of the University shall be established in Costa
Rica on land donated for this purpose by the Government of Costa
Rica.
2. The University shall conclude a headquarters agreement with
the Government of the host country.

Article 3
Legal capacity. privi/eges and immunities
The University shall have in the host country such legal capacity
and facilities and shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as are
necessary for the exercise of its functions and the fulfilment of its purposes.

Article 4
Financing of the University
1. The expenses of the University shall be met from voluntary contributions made by Governments, by intergovernmental organizations
and by foundations and other non-governmental sources, and from
revenue derived from tuition and related charges.
2. The financing of the University shall not have any financia( implications for the budget of the United Nations or that of the United
Nations University. The budget of the University shall not impose any
obligatory assessments on the States parties to the present Agreemcnt
unless they agree otherwise.
