A /75/PV.84

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

84th plenary meeting

Tuesday, 22 June 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 127 (continued)
Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council
The President: In the Declaration on the
Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of
the United Nations (resolution 75/1), Member States
committed to instil new life in the discussions on the
reform of the Security Council. As the President of the
General Assembly, I therefore focused my efforts on
ensuring that the necessary conditions for the proper
functioning of the intergovernmental negotiations were
in place despite pandemic-related limitations.
With that perspective in mind, I announced the
appointment of co-Chairs on 30 October 2020, much
earlier than such appointments were announced in
previous sessions, in order to provide Member States
the opportunity to start their consultations in a timely
manner. I also encouraged delegations to explore
the possibility of starting the intergovernmental
negotiations early in 2021 and to increase the number
of meetings to be held during this session.
My objective was to provide the intergovernmental
negotiations sufficient time to advance the dialogue
and compensate for the reduction of meetings in the
seventy-fourth session due to the coronavirus disease
pandemic. The co-Chairs, Ambassadors Al-Thani and
Wronecka, have ably led the process during this session
and presented the elements paper on convergences and

divergences on the question of equitable representation
on and increase in the membership of the Security
Council and related matters, which I circulated to
Member States on 12 May.
My Office and I have been in constant dialogue
with all delegation and groups throughout the year.
Following another intensive round of consultations with
all major groups, a draft rollover decision was circulated
on 11 June in order to continue the intergovernmental
negotiations in the seventy-sixth session of the
General Assembly. Considering that this is a technical
rollover, the draft decision and timing are consistent
with rollover decisions from previous sessions. Two
groups of countries subsequently submitted proposed
amendments, which have also been circulated to
Member States.
I convened the General Assembly on 16 June to
consider this agenda item. More than 35 delegations
took the floor on behalf of various groups and countries.
It was one of the liveliest debates of the seventy-fifth
session, at which Member States expressed a range of
positions. After carefully listening to all delegations, it
appeared to me that more time was needed to consider
certain issues and for further consultation among
Member States. I therefore suspended the consideration
of this agenda item until today.
The General Assembly is the only competent organ
to take a decision on this issue. Rollover decisions have
always been adopted by consensus in previous years. It
is my hope that the Member States will find consensus
on the issues raised in the General Assembly on 16 June

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-16108 (E)

*2116108*

A/75/PV.84

so that this year’s draft rollover decision can also be
adopted without a vote, as in previous years.
Before proceeding further, I see that the Permanent
Representative of Qatar, who is also the co-Chair of the
intergovernmental negotiations process, is asking for
the floor.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar): Let me begin by saying
that it has been a great honour and privilege to serve
as co-Chair — together with Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka, former Permanent Representative of Poland
to the United Nations — of the intergovernmental
negotiations on Security Council reform during this
seventy-fifth session.
I would like to refer to the letter of 12 May, in
which Ambassador Wronecka and I, in our capacity
as co-Chairs of the intergovernmental negotiations
process during this session, recommended the rollover
of the work of the intergovernmental negotiations to the
seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly based on
the “Co-Chairs’ elements paper on convergences and
divergences on the question of equitable representation
on and increase in the membership of the Security
Council and related matters”. Based upon our
recommendation, on 11 June, the President presented
to the Member States a draft oral decision that seeks to
roll over the work of the intergovernmental negotiations
to the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly.
With regard to the discussion to date on the draft
oral decision, in order for us to reach consensus to move
this process forward to the next session of the General
Assembly, I would like to make the following proposal
for the consideration of the Assembly — to include, at
the end of the first paragraph of the draft oral decision,
“and the commitment of Heads of State and
Government representing the peoples of the world
to instil new life in the discussions on the reform of
the Security Council”.
Paragraph 1 of the draft oral decision would then
read as follows:
“Decides to reaffirm the central role of the General
Assembly concerning the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership
of the Security Council and other matters related to
the Security Council and the commitment of Heads
of State and Government representing the peoples
of the world to instil new life in the discussions on
the reform of the Security Council”.
2/23

22/06/2021

I hope this proposed amendment to the draft
oral decision is agreeable to the membership of the
General Assembly.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank you,
Mr. President, for your leadership and for entrusting
Ambassador Wronecka and myself with this important
task. I would also like to express my appreciation to
Member States for the rich and active engagement that
helped us deliver the co-Chairs’ elements paper, the
outcome of this process.
The President: I thank the Permanent
Representative of Qatar for her statement and her
reflections on the draft oral decision, as well as her
proposed amendment thereto.
I would like to hear from the proposer of the oral
amendment, the Permanent Representative of Brazil,
who will speak on behalf of the Group of Four. I would
like to hear his views on the statement of the Permanent
Representative of Qatar that we have just heard.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of Four (G-4) — Germany,
India, Japan and my own country, Brazil — in order to
say a few words to explain our position after hearing the
statement of Ambassador Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani.
First of all, allow us to express our sincere
gratitude for the valuable work of Ambassador
Al-Thani in facilitating the consultations with Member
States with a view to finding an acceptable text for
the draft oral decision that we are considering today.
In those consultations, she showed the same skills that
allowed her to successfully lead the negotiations on the
Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth
Anniversary of the United Nations (resolution 75/1) and
the intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform held this year. I thank Ambassador Al-Thani for
all her efforts.
The G-4 is willing to accept the proposal made by
Ambassador Al-Thani to incorporate into the draft oral
decision the reference to the commitment of Heads of
State and Government representing the peoples of the
world to instil new life in Security Council reform. That
would give us confidence that there is wide agreement
among Member States on at least one point — that we
must heed this important call recently made by our
leaders in the Declaration on the Commemoration of
the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations.
21-16108

22/06/2021

We also fully agree with you, Mr. President, that
the plenary meeting held on Wednesday (A/75/PV.80)
was — as you said in your letter dated 17 June 2021:
“one of the liveliest debates of the seventy-fifth session,
where Member States expressed a range of positions”.
Last week, Member States were given the
opportunity to present their different views on how
the intergovernmental negotiations should go forward.
That meeting and the discussion we are having today
remind us that the true essence of the United Nations
is the possibility of freely expressing divergences
so that solutions can be found through dialogue and
confidence-building.
We are also grateful that the amendment we
proposed in our letter dated 14 June 2021 could
be considered by Member States in an open and
transparent setting. That itself was an achievement
since it allowed our views and the perspectives of other
Member States to go on record, which would not have
happened had the discussion taken place within the
intergovernmental negotiations.
Indeed, the debate has helped us to more fully capture
the positions of Member States — much more so than
in the repetitive discussions at the intergovernmental
negotiations. It has also demonstrated the need to better
reflect in our work the Common African Position, as
enshrined in the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte
Declaration, which the G-4 fully supports.
Allow me to underscore that in our view, the
rollover of the intergovernmental negotiations never
was and never should have been considered a technical
rollover, since that understanding would undermine our
capacity to improve and streamline the process in the
light of the work done at the previous session. Technical
rollovers are also a very negative sign to the people we
represent, implying that no new substantive work was
done in the previous session, which is not the case for
the agenda item we are considering today. It would also
not do justice to the considerable efforts undertaken by
the two co-Chairs.
Security Council reform is a key issue for all
Member States and any matters related to this topic
must be carefully and thoroughly considered. Divergent
views will come into play, but they are an inherent
part of the discussions held on a day-to-day basis in
the General Assembly. Security Council reform is
no exception.

A/75/PV.84

In presenting our amendment, we never intended to
win or to lose but to sit down and negotiate. Dialogue
and the willingness to cooperate are always the most
adequate way to find acceptable solutions. We hope
that all Member States can agree to adopt the draft oral
decision, as orally amended by Ambassador Al-Thani,
with a reference to the commitment to instil new life into
Security Council reform. If that happens, we also hope
that during the seventy-sixth session we will deliver
on those words of our Heads of State and Government
and finally make the intergovernmental negotiations an
effective and results-oriented process.
We assure all Member States of our commitment
to continue working together with them in order to
achieve an early reform of the Security Council.
The President: In order for me to understand if
there is consensus behind the proposal made by the
representative of Qatar, I would like to give the floor
to several delegations, starting with the representative
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, who will speak on
behalf of the L.69 group.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I thank you, Mr. President, for allowing me to take the
floor once more on behalf of the L.69 group, a diverse
pro-reform group of developing countries in favour
of justice, sovereignty and equity in the reform of the
Security Council — both in process and outcome.
We are pleased that delegations were able to work
together to arrive at a compromise. I wish to commend
Ambassador Al-Thani for her leadership and outstanding
work in facilitating an acceptable outcome for all
involved. As we indicated in our statement of 16 June
2021 (see A/75/PV.80), we believe that the call made
by the world leaders at the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations, through the Declaration on the
Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of
the United Nations (resolution 75/1), to instil new life in
the discussions on the reform of the Security Council,
which has been integral in guiding our work, is worthy
of inclusion in the draft oral decision. For us, instilling
new life means taking action to position the process
in a way that allows for tangible progress towards our
end goal.
For that reason, we support the oral amendment
proposed to the draft oral decision. Although we
believe that the proposed amendment would be useful
in helping to set the stage for the seventy-sixth session,
we have listened to the various opinions expressed and

21-161083/23

A/75/PV.84

22/06/2021

understand that is not the case for others. We appreciate
the flexibility shown by the Group of Four in that regard.

in order to advance negotiations on the desired
comprehensive reform of the Security Council.

The L.69 group therefore offers our support for
the draft oral decision as amended, in the proposal
presented by Ambassador Al-Thani, to include a
reference to the commitment of Heads of State and
Government representing the peoples of the world to
instil new life in the discussions on the reform of the
Security Council.

In that regard, I would like to reiterate the support
of the Arab Group for the adoption of the draft oral
decision, as amended by the proposal of Ambassador
Al-Thani, in order to ensure a smooth transition that
allows Member States to continue to work together
at the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly
and reach a common understanding leading to a
compromise on a genuine and comprehensive reform of
the Security Council.

We will continue our advocacy for the Common
African Position — as set out in the Ezulwini Consensus
and the Sirte Declaration — to be properly reflected
in the co-Chairs’ elements paper on convergences and
divergences on the question of equitable representation
on and increase in the membership of the Security
Council and related matters. We hope that call will
be taken on board at the next intergovernmental
negotiations session. We look forward to the opportunity
to further fine-tune the co-Chairs’ elements paper in
order to better reflect the full position of all Member
States and capture the reality of the discussions.
The draft rollover decision is an important step
in ensuring that we can have a more accountable and
results-oriented process. We believe the engagement
of this session has helped us come closer to an
understanding of what is needed for us to progress to
the next step. This is a process driven by the Member
States and it is necessary that the Member States be
able to engage in open dialogue and determine the best
way to shape the various aspects of the process.
In conclusion, the L.69 group reiterates our
commitment to the achievement of Security Council
reform and to continue to work constructively with all
Member States for concrete progress.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I have
the honour of speaking on behalf of the Group of
Arab States. It is my pleasure to begin my statement
by expressing the sincere appreciation and support
of the Arab Group for you, Mr. President, as well as
for the co-Chairs, Ambassador Al-Thani, Permanent
Representative of Qatar, and Ambassador Wronecka,
Permanent Representative of Poland, for their efforts
to lead the intergovernmental negotiation process
effectively during the current session.
We also appreciate your efforts, Sir, to reach a
compromise acceptable to all on the draft oral decision
4/23

The position of the Arab Group is based on
committing to the intergovernmental negotiations
process as the only forum in which to reach an
agreement on enlarging and reforming the Security
Council pursuant to decision 62/557, which calls, inter
alia, for reaching a compromise that enjoys the broadest
possible political acceptance among Member States.
In conclusion, the Arab Group reiterates its
determination to participate positively and effectively
in the next round of intergovernmental negotiations
at the seventy-sixth session with a view to realizing
genuine and comprehensive Security Council reform.
We also emphasize the importance of the general
membership demonstrating cooperation and flexibility
in order to achieve consensus among Member States.
We once again thank you, Mr. President, and we thank
the co-Chairs for their valuable leadership and efforts
in managing our discussions at the current session.
Mr. Kabba (Sierra Leone): I have the honour to
take the floor once again on behalf of the member
States of the African Union.
At the outset, let me begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening yet another plenary
meeting of the General Assembly dedicated to adopting
a draft oral decision on Security Council reform.
I would like to reiterate Africa’s strong commitment
to advance the important issue of reforming the
Security Council in order to for it to better reflect
the current geopolitical realities, including correcting
the acknowledged injustice that Africa continues
to suffer. We therefore remain steadfastly devoted
to a comprehensive and meaningful reform of the
Security Council.
In that regard, we commend the stewardship and
dedication of the co-Chairs — Ambassadors Joanna
Wronecka and Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani — in
21-16108

22/06/2021

A/75/PV.84

facilitating the reform process and we thank them for
providing us with the elements paper on convergences
and divergences on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and related matters.

is that Africa should be represented in the permanent
category, especially since the African region is not
represented in that category. the underrepresentation of
the African region in the non-permanent category must
also be addressed.

We wish to reiterate our sincere gratitude to
the co-Chairs for reflecting — in the section on the
elements of general convergence and divergence of
their elements paper — the wide recognition and broad
support of Member States with regard to the legitimate
aspiration for Africa to play its rightful role on the
global stage, including through an increased presence
in the Security Council as reflected in the Ezulwini
Consensus, adopted by the African Union. We also
thank the co-Chairs for accurately reflecting the view
that redressing the historical injustice against Africa is
considered a priority.

Africa will therefore continue to underline the need
for an expansion in both the current permanent and
non-permanent categories of the Council in order to
make the Council more broadly representative, efficient
and transparent — thereby enhancing its effectiveness
and legitimacy in implementing its decisions.

At this point, we would also like to register our
profound thanks and appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for the wide consultations that you have engaged in.
We reaffirm that the Ezulwini Consensus and the
Sirte Declaration are fundamental pillars of the
Common African Position and the decisions reached
by the African Heads of State and Government,
representing the voice of the African people. These
decisions champion our common aspirations for the full
representation of Africa in all decision-making organs
of the United Nations — particularly the Security
Council, which is the principal decision-making organ
on matters relating to international peace and security.
The Group of African States looks forward
to building on the gains made during the seventyfifth session of the intergovernmental negotiations;
constructively engaging with all Member States and
interest groups; having comprehensive discussions
on the co-Chairs’ elements paper with a view to
building on convergences and reducing divergences;
and ensuring that the full tenor of the discussions of
the intergovernmental negotiations at the seventyfifth session and the next session is reflected in the
co-Chairs’ elements paper going forward.
We acknowledge with appreciation that the
co-Chairs indicated in their paper the broad support of
a significant number of Member States for expansion
in both the permanent and non-permanent categories
of the Security Council. We would also like to reiterate
that one issue that enjoys the widest possible consensus
of from the intergovernmental negotiations process

Let me also seize this opportunity to commend you,
Mr. President, for indicating in the draft oral decision
that the positions and proposals of Member States, as
reflected in the framework document and its annex
circulated by the President of the sixty-ninth session of
the General Assembly, as well as the co-Chairs’ elements
paper on convergences and divergences, be rolled over
to the seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly.
The African Group remains committed to a
comprehensive reform of the Security Council, on the
basis of all five clusters outlined in decision 62/557, and
we will continue to engage in the intergovernmental
negotiations process in order to build a consensus that
is in accordance with decision 62/557 and favourable
to the Common African Position as enshrined in the
Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration. We
hope that the document rollover to the seventy-sixth
session of the General Assembly will be built upon
in good faith and in a transparent manner through a
membership-driven process.
At this juncture, we would like to express our
gratitude to all Member States and interest groups that
have continued to unequivocally support the Common
African Position, as espoused in the Ezulwini Consensus
and the Sirte Declaration. We look forward to working
with one and all to collectively and cooperatively build
on the gains made in favour of the Common African
Position and we hope that Member States and interest
groups will join in support of redressing the historical
injustice done to the African continent and its people.
We urge one and all to join us in operationalizing our
just cause for Africa to be equitably represented in the
Security Council, in line with the Ezulwini Consensus
and the Sirte Declaration.
Let me end by acknowledging with deep
appreciation the efforts of all Member States for our
collective commitment to an inclusive and transparent

21-161085/23

A/75/PV.84

process, leading to a draft rollover decision to be
adopted by consensus. The African Union Committee
of Ten Heads of State and Government on the Reform
of the United Nations Security Council and the Group
of African States have joined the consensus in the
spirit of safeguarding unity and mutual trust among
the membership and to move forward the reform of
the Security Council, in conformity with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
as well as the intention of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1) and the principles outlined in
decision 62/557.
We look forward to moving this process in the right
direction. We are here today to listen and make sure
that we make concrete progress and adopt the draft
rollover decision.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We listened attentively to the
statements made today. First of all, on behalf of Uniting
for Consensus (UFC), we would like to express our
appreciation for the initiative of Ambassador Al-Thani,
Permanent Representative of Qatar. We recognize her
strong dedication to the intergovernmental negotiations
process and commend her efforts to restore a
consensual approach.
As I recalled in my intervention on Wednesday (see
A/75/PV.80), Uniting for Consensus has always been a
responsible and constructive actor, constantly open to
dialogue and inclusivity. We have always favoured and
actively contributed to a consensus-based methodology,
as we are firmly convinced that is the most appropriate
and effective way to advance on such a complex and
important issue as the reform of the Security Council.
In line with that consolidated spirit, we will avoid
engaging on this occasion in any difference of opinion.
In order to overcome altogether the situation in which
we find ourselves, we will limit ourselves to saying that
we are ready, in the overall interest of the process, to
support the proposal of the Permanent Representative
of Qatar. We are ready to support you, Mr. President,
should you wish to have such a proposal reflected in
the new version of your own draft oral decision to be
submitted to the General Assembly.
We look forward to resuming the discussions on
the reform of the Security Council in the context of
the intergovernmental negotiations at the seventy-sixth
session of the General Assembly. Rest assured that the
UFC group will continue to be a positive, constructive
and fully engaged actor.
6/23

22/06/2021

The President: I see that there is consensus among
the groups with regard to the proposal made by the
representative of Qatar. I would also like to say that I
am pleased to see in the intergovernmental negotiations
process this year the wide recognition and broad
support of States Members for the legitimate call by
African countries for the historical injustice done to the
continent to be corrected.
In that regard, I refer to the Common African
Position as presented by the representative of Eritrea on
behalf of the Group of African States (see A/75/PV.80),
which reflects the decisions of African Heads of State
and Government on the reform of the Security Council.
Before we proceed to take action on the draft oral
decision and the proposed oral amendment thereto, we
will first hear the remaining speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting. In that regard, may I remind
delegations that statements in explanation of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Qatar, Ambassador Alya
Al-Thani, for her dedicated efforts as the co-Chair of
the intergovernmental negotiations process. We fully
support the way forward that she just outlined. It is
important that the draft oral decision presented to us
for the rollover of the intergovernmental negotiations
to the seventy-sixth session be adopted by consensus.
On an issue such significance for the entire
membership, the consensus of the General Assembly
is a must. In order to achieve that, we all need to be
constructive, forward-looking and consensus-seeking.
To that end, we greatly appreciate the intensive efforts
that have been carried out since our previous meeting
(see A/75/PV.80). That has showed us once again that
we can indeed find convergences around issues that
unite us. It is only with the spirit of consensus-seeking
as our modus operandi that the reform of the Security
Council can move forward. We should not forget that.
By accepting the proposal by Ambassador Al-Thani
today, we agree to amend the rollover draft oral
decision by adding a reference to the Declaration on
the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary
of the United Nations (resolution A/75/1), adopted by
consensus by our Heads of State and Government.
That is what underlines the importance of consensus
solutions once again.
21-16108

22/06/2021

Lastly, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the leadership that you have shown throughout the
process. Your wisdom and openness to dialogue led the
way to today’s successful outcome. We will continue to
actively engage with the membership at the next session
of the General Assembly to further forge consensus on
issues that unite us. We firmly believe in the virtue of
the membership-driven nature of the reform process
within the intergovernmental negotiations. We invite
all Member States to support the draft oral decision as
amended by the proposal of the co-Chair.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to express our sincere
gratitude to the co-Chair of the intergovernmental
negotiations — the Permanent Representative of
Qatar, Ambassador Al-Thani — and you, Sir, for your
efforts and commitment to preserving the consensus
on the draft oral decision to roll over discussions on
the reform of the Security Council to the seventy-sixth
session of the General Assembly, in accordance with
established practice.
Morocco views the reform of the Security Council
as part of the United Nations comprehensive reform
aimed at revitalizing the Organization, strengthening
its role and increasing confidence in multilateralism
in order to surmount the challenges of the twenty-first
century. That is why we are firmly committed to the
intergovernmental negotiations as the legitimate and
appropriate platform for discussing reform, redressing
the injustice done to Africa and delivering a more
representative Security Council that takes into account
the current realities of the world and lives up to our
peoples’ expectations for ensuring peace and security,
the pacific settlement of disputes and upholding the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
We therefore welcome the spirit of compromise and
flexibility that has prevailed and has been demonstrated
by groups and delegations present today in order to
safeguard this process and pursue negotiations on this
subject at the next session of the General Assembly.
Rest assured of the commitment and constructive
contribution of Morocco in the framework of the
African Common Position and the position of the Group
of Arab States.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I would like to add my
delegation’s voice of support to the proposal presented by
the Permanent Representative of Qatar and co-Chair of
the intergovernmental negotiations, Ambassador Alya

A/75/PV.84

Al-Thani. I would also like to extend our sincere thanks
to Ambassador Al-Thani for her extremely constructive
and fruitful efforts in facilitating consultations among
Member States in order to find an acceptable text for
the draft oral decision before us today.
By agreeing to include in the draft rollover
decision our leaders’ promise to instil new life in the
discussions on the reform of the Security Council, we
are reaffirming once again that what we are engaged
in the intergovernmental negotiations is not simply a
series of academic debates. Our mandate is to deliver
on Security Council reform, not just to discuss it at
infinitum. We are pleased that the proposal by Qatar
is able to bring that important aspect into the draft oral
decision on the rollover.
As we have stressed over the past few months,
we view the draft oral decision on the rollover of the
intergovernmental negotiations not as a technical
formality but as an important means to capture the
progress made during previous sessions and to give
direction for the way forward. We have engaged in
wide-ranging consultations with Member States and
groupings over the past few days in order to arrive at a
suitable outcome today.
In all our engagements, we found that there is
an overwhelming desire to move forward in the next
round of intergovernmental negotiations in a focused
and substantive manner. In that context, we appreciate
the efforts of the co-Chairs in presenting their elements
paper on convergences and divergences on the
question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters, which includes an improved structure and
the introduction of some attributions. That gives us a
useful basis on which to commence our discussion at
the next session.
We express once again our support for the Common
African Position — as enshrined in the Ezulwini
Consensus and the Sirte Declaration — being fully
elaborated in the convergence section of the elements
paper so as to accurately reflect the views of the
membership. We will continue to support its accurate
depiction at the next session.
I have said on several previous occasions that the
intergovernmental negotiations can no longer be used as
a smokescreen Today, with the adoption of the amended
draft oral decision on the rollover, we will move ahead
to the next session with the hope that we will finally be

21-161087/23

A/75/PV.84

able to come together to make decisive progress towards
the long-overdue reform of the Security Council.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I take the floor on
behalf of the Group of Nordic Countries — Finland,
Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country,
Denmark. At the outset, let me say that we may not be
big countries. We may not even be a major group in the
eyes of many, but we would nevertheless like our views
and considerations to be heard.
Let me begin by expressing our sincere gratitude to
Ambassadors Wronecka of Poland and Al-Thani of Qatar
for co-chairing this year’s session of intergovernmental
negotiations on the reform of the Security Council
and by thanking Ambassador Al-Thani for her efforts
here over the past couple of days to lead consultations
among Member States and groups to try to find a way
towards consensus.
This year’s intergovernmental negotiations process
is being convened following the strong emphasis of the
Declaration on the Commemoration of the Seventyfifth Anniversary of the United Nations (resolution
75/1) on the need to usher in and consolidate reforms
of the United Nations system. They should not be
empty words.
Let us not forget that the recent reform of the
United Nations development system made the United
Nations more effective and resilient in responding to
the coronavirus disease pandemic and demonstrated to
all of us that it is possible to reform the United Nations
system and strengthen its effectiveness and resilience.
It is important that we maintain the momentum of
reforming the United Nations to include the reform of
the Security Council as well.
In the Declaration, our Heads of State and
Government made a clear and united call to instil new
life into the discussions on the reform of the Security
Council. Many groups and delegations echoed that
message during the intergovernmental negotiations.
That was our task at the current session of the General
Assembly, and it should continue to be at the next. The
Declaration does not expire at the end of the seventyfifth session. We need a United Nations that is rooted
in delivering for “we the peoples”, as reflected in the
Charter of United Nations, now and beyond the United
Nations seventy-fifth anniversary.
In our view, it is vital that the progress and results
of the current session be carried forward to the next
8/23

22/06/2021

session of the intergovernmental negotiations to allow
for the further narrowing of remaining differences and to
continue to build on convergences and the Declaration.
We must honour the instructions of our Heads
of State and Governments to instil new life in our
negotiations. We must roll forward, not backwards. We
must move forward not in order to restart, but to work
towards realizing the objective — a reformed Security
Council that is better able to shoulder its responsibilities
and more representative of the world it serves.
The Nordic countries stand in full support of the
amendment proposed by Ambassador Al-Thani to
the draft oral decision. We are ready to contribute to
constructive dialogue to achieve tangible progress as
we move ahead and continue the negotiations at the
seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly, building
on our work at the current session.
Mr. Mimouni (Algeria): At the outset, let me
thank you, Sir, for convening this plenary meeting
to adopt the draft oral decision on the rollover of the
intergovernmental negotiations on the reform of the
Security Council.
My delegation aligns with itself with the statements
delivered by the Permanent Representatives of Sierra
Leone and Kuwait on behalf of the Committee of Ten
and the Group of Arab States, respectively (see A/75/
PV.80).
I take this opportunity to express my appreciation
for your unwavering commitment, Sir, to the process of
the reform of the Security Council at the current session.
I also thank the co-Chairs of the intergovernmental
negotiations, Ambassadors Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
of Qatar and Joanna Wronecka of Poland, for their
leadership and laudable efforts in steering this
important process.
Despite
the
challenges
related
to
the
intergovernmental negotiations process, we believe
that we must continue to engage collectively towards
achieving comprehensive reform likely to garner the
widest political acceptance. We appreciate that this
year’s draft oral decision on the rollover includes — in
addition to co-Chairs’ elements paper on convergences
and divergences on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and related matters — the 2015
framework document and its annex, which we continue
to fully support and remains of particular relevance for
21-16108

22/06/2021

Africa, as it accurately captures the Common African
Position in its entirety on all the five clusters.
We also remain true to decision 62/557 and reaffirm
the relevance of the intergovernmental negotiations as
being the sole legitimate forum in which to advance our
collective endeavour on the issue of Security Council
reform. Algeria is committed to the comprehensive and
meaningful reform of the Security Council and remains
fully committed to the Common African Position on
the reform of the Security Council, as set out in the
Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration. It
is time to ensure Africa’s full representation in the
Security Council.
In that regard, we welcome the continued and
increased support for the Common African Position
and express our appreciation that such support was
reflected in the co-Chairs’ elements paper. My
delegation would also like to echo the concerns raised
by the Group of African States about the omission of
any reference to the Sirte Declaration in the co-Chairs’
outcome document.
Both the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte
Declaration were decided by the African Heads of
State and Government and constitute the pillars of the
Common African Position. They must therefore be
referenced together in any outcome document, as they
equally reflect the legitimate aspirations of Africa to
redress the historical injustice done to the continent.
We fully support your wise call for consensus,
Sir. As you rightly said, this process has always been
guided by consensus. It therefore remains critical
for us to preserve the consensual nature of the
intergovernmental negotiations process, which must
continue to underpin our work. We strongly believe
that, by putting the draft oral decision to the vote, we
would have not only run the risk of further deepening
our differences and divergences but also jeopardized
that important process.
I therefore express my delegation’s support for
the draft oral decision as submitted, as well as the
amendment thereto proposed by the Permanent
Representative of Qatar to include a reference to the
commitment of our Heads of State and Government
to instil new life in the discussions on the reform of
the Security Council, as set out in the Declaration on
the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary
of the United Nations (resolution 75/1). We are pleased
that the proposed amendment and compromise have

A/75/PV.84

been accepted by all Member States and groups
concerned, and we welcome the fact that the General
Assembly is now moving towards an acceptable and
consensual outcome.
In conclusion, let me thank you once again, Sir,
for your laudable efforts and inclusive approach
towards ensuring a consensual conclusion of the
intergovernmental negotiations process at the
current session.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation
aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Italy on behalf of the Uniting for
Consensus group.
I would also like to express our appreciation to the
Permanent Representative of Qatar for promoting a
proposal that could lead us towards a consensus in the
General Assembly on the rollover to the next session of
the work of the intergovernmental negotiations at the
seventy-fifth session. That contribution by Ambassador
Al-Thani is further testimony to her superb leadership,
together with that of Ambassador Wronecka of Poland,
of the intergovernmental negotiations process this year.
I would also like to add that we are happy that
the draft oral amendments proposed by certain
delegations will not be put to the vote, which would
have disastrous results.
I would once again like to express the Pakistan
delegation’s deep appreciation to you, Sir, for your
firm, efficient, transparent and sagacious leadership
of the General Assembly this year, including in the
intergovernmental negotiations process. You have set
a high standard and an outstanding example for the
leadership of the General Assembly. As I stated last
Wednesday (see A/75/PV.80), we regretted some of the
interventions that were made then, and we are hopeful
that the expected adoption by consensus of the draft
oral decision will restore the dignity and sanctity of the
work of the General Assembly and the Office of the
President, which was assailed unfairly and unjustly in
those interventions.
Throughout the intergovernmental negotiations
process this year, the proceedings were repeatedly marred
by the aggressive demands of certain delegations, which
inflexibly and repeatedly pressed for the acceptance of
their unequal and inequitable goals. But, as has been
demonstrated in the General Assembly today and last
week, the membership of the General Assembly does

21-161089/23

A/75/PV.84

not endorse their sense of entitlement. Our exchanges
over the past few days have also reaffirmed that the
only way that progress can be made towards agreement
on Security Council reform is through consensus.
The Council’s reform involves the vital security
interests of each and every Member State. It cannot
be steamrolled by bullying tactics and procedural
manoeuvres. It is precisely due to its significant
implications for national interests, the security of
Member States and the United Nations system as a
whole that the General Assembly adopted, by consensus,
resolution 53/30, which provides that any resolution or
decision on the issue of Security Council reform can
be adopted only by a two-thirds majority of the entire
membership of the General Assembly. Procedural
manoeuvres cannot circumvent the application of that
fundamental resolution of the General Assembly on the
issue of Security Council reform.
In setting up the intergovernmental negotiations
process, the General Assembly further established that
its decisions would be taken by “the widest possible
agreement among Member States” — in other words, by
consensus. The Uniting for Consensus group — which,
by its very name, stands for consensus — is gratified
that the rule of consensus has prevailed again today.
It is my hope and expectation that the lesson learned
today about the need to work by consensus will not
be forgotten tomorrow, when we resume our work in
the intergovernmental negotiations at the next General
Assembly session. We hope we have seen the last of the
pressure tactics and manoeuvres.
The Uniting for Consensus group looks forward
to adopting, by consensus, the proposal that has
been put forward by the Permanent Representative of
Qatar and we look forward to advancing the work of
the intergovernmental negotiations next year on the
same basis.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We regret the fact that you, Mr. President,
are forced to conduct another meeting on an issue that
should have been resolved a week ago. It is a miracle
that the efforts of the Permanent Representative of
Qatar, Ms. Al-Thani, helped us thwart the plans of
some groups in the General Assembly to make radical
amendments to the draft decision, which could deprive
it of consensus. Its consensus-based nature is the
cornerstone of the intergovernmental negotiations
process and guarantor of any progress.
10/23

22/06/2021

As we warned at the previous meeting on this issue
(see A/75/PV.80), the discussion became confrontational,
which could imperil the entire intergovernmental
negotiations process. We said last time, and I will
repeat it today, that that is irresponsible. The adoption
of the draft oral decision was on the verge of failure due
to the ambitions of certain countries, which were not
supported by all Member States. That was very clear
for all to see at the most recent meeting. I hope that
everyone will draw on the lessons learned. That is the
only way to preserve consensus in this process, which
is so important for all of us.
Not only was the preservation of this year’s
progress at stake; so, too, was that of previous years.
Let us ensure that disagreements on the path towards
reform no longer lead to the loss of more important
elements, such as our negotiating format.
We would like to express our sincere gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for your leadership, able and
effective stewardship, which is beyond reproach, in
this process. That pertains to the intergovernmental
negotiations, last week’s meeting and today’s meeting.
We know that you sincerely attempted to adopt a
consensus-based decision. We trust that such a decision
will be taken today.
Once again, we extend our gratitude to the
Permanent Representative of Qatar, Ms. Al-Thani,
for the fact that in the end, as we hoped, a mutually
acceptable solution has been found to the situation.
We hope that a consensus-based oral decision will
be adopted today on the rollover to next year of the
intergovernmental negotiations.
Mr. Reyes Hernández (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela appreciates the
convening of today’s meeting.
Like other delegations, Venezuela attaches
considerable importance to the intergovernmental
negotiations process on the question of equitable
representation on the Security Council because we
believe that the Security Council is the right forum in
which we can strike a balance and guarantee consensus
on Security Council reform.
Our delegation believes that inclusive and
transparent dialogue, based on the consensus of all
parties, can facilitate a holistic solution that enjoys the
support of Member States. That was indeed the spirit
21-16108

22/06/2021

that drove the last round of negotiations and that we
hope will drive future negotiations. It was also the
spirit that judiciously guided the chairmanship when it
granted greater time for consultations among the parties
before adopting measures on the draft oral decision.
Venezuela lauds the efforts of the co-facilitators to
guide the negotiations process and has taken note of the
Elements Paper on Convergences and Divergences on
the question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters. As we stated in May, we believe that the
document is a point of reference, which, as a personal
summary issued by the co-facilitators, should not be
considered as a basis for future negotiations.
Since the start of this debate, Venezuela has
supported the draft oral decision circulated by the
presidency in its original version, because, in our view,
it offered a balanced reflection of the discussions in
and outcomes of the intergovernmental negotiations.
However, Venezuela also understands the need
to harness the full potential of multilateralism.
Consequently, we appreciate and approve of Qatar’s
initiative to find consensus as the best way to implement
Security Council reform.
Mr. Kinna (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
is grateful for all your efforts this year, Mr. President,
in encouraging progress on this important issue. We
are particularly grateful for your efforts in encouraging
Member States towards a mutually acceptable decision
today on what is clearly, from our discussions last
week, a very sensitive subject. Let me also express
the gratitude of the United Kingdom to Ambassador
Al-Thani of Qatar and Ambassador Wronecka of
Poland for their stewardship of the intergovernmental
negotiations process this year, including their work in
producing the revised elements of commonality paper,
transmitted via letter on 29 April.
We are also grateful for Ambassador Al-Thani’s
intervention today, which appears, from the statements
we have heard so far, to be a wise and constructive
proposal with broad support.
The United Kingdom has consistently reaffirmed
through this year’s intergovernmental negotiations
process that we remain steadfast supporters of
comprehensive Security Council reform. We
also remain committed to the intergovernmental
negotiations process itself and to engaging fully.
However, we have also said on a number of occasions,

A/75/PV.84

throughout this year’s intergovernmental negotiations
process, that we sympathize with those who believe
the current discussions are moving us too slowly
towards a substantive outcome. For our own part, we
have consistently expressed willingness to engage in
all avenues that could move the process forward at
an accelerated pace, including by engaging in textbased negotiations.
In that light, the United Kingdom is supportive
of the proposal made today by Ambassador Al-Thani
to include in the draft oral decision a reference to the
commitments made by our leaders in the Declaration
on the Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth
Anniversary of the United Nations to instil new life
in the Security Council reform process. Furthermore,
since I did not have the opportunity to say this at our
last meeting, let me take this opportunity to say that the
United Kingdom would have been able to support the
proposals made by the Group of Four and L.69 group
to base next year’s intergovernmental negotiations
process primarily on the co-Chairs’ revised Elements
Paper on Convergences and Divergences on the
question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters. That is indeed in line with what we proposed
at the last intergovernmental negotiations meeting on
4 May.
In our view, those proposals do not disregard the
2015 Framework Document, which would remain clearly
established as a valuable reference document. Neither
does the proposal insist upon moving the membership
directly into text-based negotiations, about which we
know some delegations clearly have reservations. Still,
that formulation would have been, we believe, a signal
of intent that the membership is committed not to
recycling the discussions we have already had, but to
finding a concrete and productive way forward.
Still, while it appears that that proposal does not
enjoy consensual support at this time, we welcome
the flexibility shown by the Group of Four and L.69
groups in acknowledging it. Nevertheless, we hope that
our discussions at the intergovernmental negotiations
meetings of the seventy-sixth session live up to the
intent of this proposal, which we understand to aim
at making substantive progress on this issue of great
importance to us all.
Finally, I would again like to express the United
Kingdom’s gratitude to you, Mr. President, Ambassador

21-1610811/23

A/75/PV.84

Al-Thani and to all delegations that have worked
strenuously in order to show flexibility and achieve a
consensual outcome today.
Mr. Song Kim (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): My delegation highly appreciates the
sincere efforts of and the leadership by the Permanent
Representatives of Poland and Qatar. My delegation
fully supports the proposal made by Ms. Al-Thani,
Permanent Representative of Qatar, aimed at
achieving consensus.
Adopting a draft decision by consensus is a longestablished practice. Any attempt to insert unacceptable
language into a draft oral decision could jeopardize or,
even, terminate the intergovernmental negotiations
process. The issue of reform of the Security Council
should be dealt with in a responsible and professional
manner, based on the consensus agreement of all
Member States.
According to decision 62/557, the intergovernmental
negotiations process is based on the positions of and
proposals made by Member States, regional groups and
other groupings of Member states, which makes it clear
that the process is member-driven. There is no mandate
for co-Chairs to draft negotiations texts without
the consensus of Member States. In that context,
we understand that the co-Chairs’ Elements Paper
on Convergences and Divergences on the question
of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and related matters
remains their personal observation. Therefore, it cannot
be used as a basis for further negotiations. Any attempt
to use the co-Chairs’ Elements Paper as the basis for
future intergovernmental negotiations is inappropriate
and against the real and general understanding of the
majority of Member States on moving forward with the
intergovernmental negotiations process.
The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea again emphasizes that any initiative
to put pressure on Member States by setting artificial
timelines or insisting on text-based negotiations, which
make the process more complicated, should be avoided.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China highly appreciates the leading role of, and
outstanding contributions made by the President of the
General Assembly in advancing the intergovernmental
negotiations on reform of the Security Council. The draft
oral decision on the rollover of the intergovernmental
negotiations, proposed by the President of the General
12/23

22/06/2021

Assembly on 11 June, is in line with established
practice and meets the expectations of Member
States and the requirements for a technical rollover of
intergovernmental negotiations. It has the support of
the majority of Member States.
Blocking at the last minute the General Assembly’s
adoption of the draft rollover decision of the President
of the General Assembly and attempting to insert
controversial elements into the draft will give rise
only to differences and confrontation, undermine
the unity of Member States and interfere with the
intergovernmental negotiations process. It is obvious
that that is not a constructive approach, to which
the majority of Member States have already clearly
expressed their opposition.
Following past practice and actively promoting the
consensus adoption of the decision by Member States,
over the past few days, Ambassador Al-Thani, co-Chair
of the intergovernmental negotiations mechanism and
Permanent Representative of Qatar, has responded to
the call of the President of the General Assembly in his
letter, dated 7 June, to roll over the intergovernmental
negotiations to the next session. We have expressed our
appreciation for those efforts.
Based on consensus among Member States,
Ambassador Al-Thani proposed amendments to
the draft rollover decision of the President of the
General Assembly on amendments. In the interest of
maintaining the unity of Member States and advancing
the intergovernmental negotiations process on Security
Council reform, China welcomes those amendments.
We support their incorporation by the President of the
General Assembly into the draft rollover decision, for
adoption by consensus at today’s meeting. That will
ensure that the intergovernmental negotiations process
remains on the right track.
Security Council reform is a process of continuous
consensus-building. China has consistently believed
that the core goal of the reform is to enhance the
representation and voice of developing countries, in
particular of African countries in the Security Council;
redress the historical injustices borne by African
countries, on the basis of consensus, and achieve a
solution package that takes into account the interests
and concerns of all parties. That is a reform that should
benefit all Member States, reflect their unity and
help ensure the long term-development of the United
Nations, rather than serve the interests of a minority
21-16108

22/06/2021

of countries. China stands ready to work with other
countries in that direction.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt): Egypt associates itself with
the interventions made by the Ambassador of Sierra
Leone, on behalf of the Committee of Ten and the
Ambassador of Kuwait on behalf of the Group of Arab
States (see A/75/PV.80), with their clear and detailed
expressions of positions, which I will not reiterate.
We appreciate the efforts exerted by all parties,
especially the Permanent Representative of Qatar,
Her Excellency Ambassador Alya Al-Thani, towards
reaching today’s consensus. We appreciate the guidance
of the President of the General Assembly and the
efforts exerted by Ambassador Wronecka of Poland, as
co-Chair.
The consensual nature of the intergovernmental
negotiations was not created to complicate the process.
On the contrary, the collective wisdom established the
principle of the widest possible political acceptance
because we knew very well that reform cannot be
forced or imposed. We cannot vote to have a new
reformed Security Council. That wisdom prevailed
today. Indeed, regardless of our different speeds and
approaches, we all share a common endeavour towards
a reformed, more representative, effective and efficient
Security Council.
My delegation reiterated more than once that the
current time, in which the world is recovering from a
devastating pandemic, is the time to be constructive,
build on what is common and avoid issues that could
divide the general membership and the consensual
nature of the intergovernmental negotiations.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): Ecuador joins the consensus on the adoption
of today’s draft oral decision, as proposed earlier. We
were ready to support the draft as you, Mr. President,
presented it on 11 June, but I stress that today an
element much more important than wording is being
preserved — that is, consensus.
I would like to congratulate Ambassador
Alya Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of
Qatar and co-facilitator of the process, and you,
Mr. President, for your effective management of the
process in order to preserve consensus within the
intergovernmental negotiations.
When I explained my position on the proposed
amendments on 11 June, I explained that Ecuador

A/75/PV.84

would continue to support the Declaration on the
Commemoration of the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the
United Nations (resolution 75/1) and its implementation.
Today, we are also protecting an important part of
that Declaration — the call to instil new life into the
Security Council reform process. Had it been put to the
vote, the result of the voting would have contradicted
our objective — that is, making progress on Security
Council reform to ensure that the Council is more
effective and more representative.
My delegation encourages all other delegations to
commit themselves to ensuring that the next session
continues discussions of substance in a constructive
manner. We will therefore need to avoid measures that
separate delegations and exacerbate the differences
among them.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): My delegation
thanks you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting and for providing leadership to move
the process forward. I personally commend you,
Mr. President, for your wisdom in giving more time for
people to narrow their differences because that is a very
difficult decision. However, it is a decision that only
wisdom will guide. I thank you for that.
I thank our sisters Her Excellency Ms. Joanna
Wronecka of the Republic Poland and Her Excellency
Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani of Qatar for
their dedication to the important work of the
intergovernmental negotiations. I am very pleased that
Qatar has also taken the lead in pushing us to become
closer in the process.
My delegation aligns itself with the positions
of the Group of African States as presented by the
representative of Sierra Leone on behalf of the
Committee of Ten and of the L.69 group led by the
delegation of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (see
A/75/PV.80).
In meeting after meeting, support for the African
position has been expressed. It is therefore important
for that support not to be weakened. Any effort to
weaken it must be considered worrisome.
In my national capacity, I would like to say that
my delegation recognizes the co-Chairs’ elements
paper on convergences and divergences on the
question of equitable representation on and increase
in the membership of the Security Council and related
matters, as revised. In relation to that matter, the

21-1610813/23

A/75/PV.84

reference to the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte
Declaration is important. Some 54 Member States have
held that position for a long time. It is not something
we can lightly ignore. We must also agree — and I am
very glad that many delegations that have spoken about
it — on the importance of consensus.
We would all want to join consensus and should
strive as you, Mr. President, have led us to do to get
to consensus. Nonetheless, it is also important to
appreciate that consensus should not be the only goal.
Justice is, at times, even more important. We should
avoid a situation in which we ignore what is happening
on the outside, in relation to how the United Nations
is seen. That is a very important matter and we should
try to work harder to achieve consensus that is also
substantive so that progress can be made. That is where
Nigeria stands.
We want to join the consensus. We would also
urge colleagues to appreciate the fact that consensus
cannot be the end in itself; there must be substantive
movement. If not, we will come to a point where the
citizens of the world will see us as not doing what they
have asked us to do, especially those led by African
Heads of State and the Common African Position and
guided by the Declaration on the Commemoration of
the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations.
I would like to conclude by thanking all delegations
for their work, which continues to demonstrate that the
process is a positive one. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for the space you have created for us to
continue to narrow our differences. It is obvious that
there are differences, but let us continue to narrow
them. Let us also believe that there is an end to the
process. There has to be a time when it must end. If
not, we lose the world. I thank you, Mr. President, for
your leadership.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): First of all, may I
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the great character
you have shown today in your search for consensus. I
must also congratulate Ambassador Al-Thani for the
magic formula — that is how I will describe it — she
has come up with to instil new life.
It is not good enough to engage in an exercise of
semantics. We have got to take it beyond rhetoric. We
have got to take it beyond merely instilling life because
instilling life would intrinsically mean that we are
instilling life into something that, perhaps, was losing
life. It is therefore important that we remember that, as
14/23

22/06/2021

we move towards the seventy-sixth year of this noble
institution, founded by “we the peoples of the United
Nations”, the urgent call of the day is for us to use this
time to look at issues of equity, fairness and justice
and commit to looking at how we forge consensus on
a common purpose to protect humankind and achieve
global peace for our human family.
We therefore urge our brothers and sisters in the
Assembly representing the universal community to
strive to work together with dedication and commitment
to multilateralism, dialogue and diplomacy. That will
enable us to create a more conducive environment for
international peace and security, in which all States
are equal and treated as most-favoured nations. It is
not enough, as I said, to pay lip service to the issues
raised — we must move without delay to exclude
tensions and distrust with a view to ensuring that we
make real progress, in tangible terms, in furtherance of
our commitment to ensuring global peace and security.
After decades of discussion and stalemate,
including in the past few days, and in today’s uncertain
times, it is our earnest hope that as we go into the next
session, we can work together with the same flexibility,
compromise and magnanimity to ensure that we can
create peace and equities, establish justice and remove
the imbalance of yesterday. At the same time, we must
maintain the foundation and structures for a truly
lasting peace and representation that meets our dreams
and aspirations, whereby we the peoples of the United
Nations can truly work together to find solutions to
the common challenges that humankind faces on this
planet, which is our only home.
Mr. Tōnē (Tonga): I commend you, Sir, for your
continuing stewardship of the presidency of the General
Assembly at its seventy-fifth session. The delegation of
the Kingdom of Tonga continues to support your able
leadership, especially in the challenging times of the
current coronavirus disease pandemic.
I also commend the leadership and hard work of
Her Excellency Ms. Joanna Wronecka, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Poland, and Her
Excellency Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani, Permanent
Representative of the State of Qatar, co-Chairs of
the intergovernmental negotiations on the question
of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and other matters
related to the Security Council.
21-16108

22/06/2021

My delegation and I are supportive of the President
of the General Assembly’s draft oral decision on
Security Council reform, as circulated in his letter
dated 11 June 2021. The Kingdom of Tonga agrees
with the recommendation of the co-Chairs to roll over
the work of the intergovernmental negotiations to the
seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly based
on the document entitled “Co-Chairs’ elements paper
on convergences and divergences on the question
of equitable representation on and in increase in
the membership of the Security Council and related
matters”, which was attached to their letter of
29 April 2021.
The Kingdom of Tonga supports building consensus
through continuous dialogue and consultations to seek
a package solution to serve the interests of all United
Nations Member States, in particular small island
developing States like my own and developing countries
in general.
To that end and to conclude, the Kingdom of Tonga
prefers that the draft oral decision on Security Council
reform that you presented, Sir, in your letter of 11 June
2021, following consultations with Member States and
groups of States, be adopted by consensus.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): Allow me to begin
by thanking Ambassador Al-Thani of Qatar and
Ambassador Wronecka of Poland for their leadership
of this year’s round of intergovernmental negotiations.
With regard to the draft oral decision before us
today, let me start by reiterating our principle in our
deliberations on the reform of the Security Council.
All efforts must be exhausted to reach consensus.
That principle continues to guide us, including during
today’s deliberations.
Indonesia is able to support references that have
already garnered consensus, hence we can support the
reference to the Declaration on the Commemoration
of the Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of the United
Nations (resolution 75/1), as agreed by our leaders. At
the same time, we would like to underscore that the
intergovernmental negotiations process is memberdriven. It is entirely up to the Member States to move
the intergovernmental negotiations forward.
Therefore, while firmly supporting the right of
every Member State to submit any proposals at this
meeting, Member States should submit proposals that
are aimed at constructively bridging our differences

A/75/PV.84

instead of dividing us further. We observe that this
Hall has consistently seen a generous number of ideas
and proposals. However, regardless of how good
those proposals are, they will remain abstractions if
there is no willingness to compromise or approach
differences constructively.
Without that willingness or efforts to reach
consensus, the discussion on this issue will go nowhere.
In that regard, we commend Ambassador Al-Thani on
her proposal, which is aimed at achieving consensus, as
well as all groups for their willingness to approach their
differences constructively by working together with the
President of the General Assembly to reach consensus.
We believe that Indonesia is not alone in feeling
exhausted with the deadlock and repetitive nature of our
discussions in the intergovernmental negotiations. My
delegation would like to call for all like-minded countries
to speak up, so that together we may demonstrate the
collective urge to enhance inter-group dialogue and
explore our commonalities. The engagement of Member
States that are not affiliated with any group also needs to
be increased. Indonesia calls on all groups to intensify
their engagement with countries from outside their
group. We look forward to seeing that spirit prevail in
the next round of intergovernmental negotiations, along
with improved working methods to explore uncharted
areas of our discussion.
We look forward to hearing more interactive
discussions from all groups in the next round of
intergovernmental negotiations. Indonesia will remain
active in promoting constructive approaches towards
meaningful and actionable reform. We will enhance our
efforts to bridge differences with a view to achieving a
democratic, effective and efficient Security Council.
Mr. Kpatamango (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): At the outset, I wish to thank you,
Sir, for convening this meeting on Security Council
reform and related matters.
My delegation aligns itself with the statements made
last week by the representative of Eritrea on behalf of
the Group of African States and the representative of
Sierra Leone on behalf of the Committee of Ten (see
A/75/PV.80).
The draft oral decision proposed by the President
of the General Assembly is a technical rollover of the
intergovernmental negotiations, in accordance with
previous practice, and it constitutes a balanced reflection

21-1610815/23

A/75/PV.84

of the discussions and results of the intergovernmental
negotiations. The adoption of the draft oral decision
by consensus in the General Assembly is a longestablished practice. Any questioning of that technical
rollover could compromise or indeed even put an end to
the intergovernmental negotiations process.
In its proposed amendment to the draft oral
decision, the Group of Four is attempting to give the
co-Chairs’ document the status of a basis for the future
intergovernmental negotiations process. We cannot
accept that, because the co-Chairs’ document does
not reflect the common and comprehensive position of
the African Union, which is enshrined in the Ezulwini
Consensus and the Sirte Declaration.
Moreover, the framework document distributed by
the President of the General Assembly in 2015, which
is the preferred document of the Group of African
States, could, along with the co-Chairs’ document,
provide a useful guide for the future intergovernmental
negotiations process.
The content of the Group of Four’s amendment
pertains to very controversial issues and is being
met with firm opposition in discussions within the
intergovernmental negotiations. We do not believe that
such an amendment is conducive to the success of future
intergovernmental negotiations. It is time, in our view,
to defend a technical rollover by supporting the draft
oral decision of the President of the General Assembly,
as well as to defend general agreement and the base
consensus of Member States on the intergovernmental
negotiations process.
At the same time, we commend the efforts
undertaken by the Ambassadors of Qatar and Poland
and my delegation is pleased to see the consensus that
has indeed emerged on the issue.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): We would like to
thank you, Sir, for reconvening us today to consider
the draft oral decision on the rollover process of
the intergovernmental negotiations on Security
Council reform.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representatives of Sierra Leone on
behalf of the Committee of Ten and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines on behalf of the L.69 group (see A/75/
PV.80). We would like to make the following points in
our national capacity.
16/23

22/06/2021

At the outset, we would also like to extend our
deep appreciation to the efforts of Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka and Ambassador Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
as co-Chairs of the intergovernmental negotiations,
which culminated in the development of the elements
paper. We further thank Ambassador Al-Thani for
her leadership in engaging skilfully with the different
delegations to get us to this point today.
South Africa’s experience serving on the Security
Council has strengthened our conviction that the lack
of permanent African representation and Africa’s
underrepresentation in the non-permanent category
adversely affects the Council’s ability to adequately
address matters of peace and security on the continent.
It is therefore of fundamental importance that we
address that historical injustice.
To that end, genuine text-based negotiations
should commence, as that is the only way to achieve
the commitments made in the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (resolution 60/1) and the Declaration on the
Commemoration of the Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of
the United Nations (resolution 75/1).
Furthermore, in our view, for the fulfilment of the
Common African Position, we have no choice but to
commence with text-based negotiations. We believe
that the African Heads of State would not have provided
us with a common position unless their intention was
for us to find a means to realize it within the process
provided by the General Assembly.
While the view has been expressed that the
African Union (AU) has not provided clear direction
on engagement on text-based negotiations, more
importantly, the AU has not precluded progressing on
that basis in any decision it has taken. In 2005, with
the adoption of the Ezulwini Consensus, Africa made
its position clear regarding the reform of the United
Nations Security Council, stating its goal:
“To be fully represented in all decision-making
organs of the United Nations, particularly in
the Security Council, which is the principal
decision-making organ of the United Nations in
matters relating to international peace and security.”
I wish to stress — that remains our primary
goal. South Africa therefore thanks Member States
for supporting the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte
Declaration. We also thank you, Sir, for stating that in
the summary you provided today.
21-16108

22/06/2021

Delays in the reform of the Security Council will
not assist us in refining the global means of addressing
threats to international peace and security, or in
addressing the lack of representation in the Council to
ensure that it is able to fulfil its obligation under the
Charter of the United Nations to legitimately act on
behalf of the broader United Nations membership.
The world and the work of the Council have changed
over the past 75 years. Failure to address the antiquated
composition of the Security Council runs the risk of
intensifying the persistent questions raised as to the
legitimacy and credibility of the world’s foremost body
tasked with the maintenance of international peace and
security, which is the most sacred of objectives.
We welcome the inclusion of the commitment made
by Heads of State and Government, in commemorating
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations,
to instil new life in the discussion on the reform of
the Security Council. We hope that will allow us to
move forward on the basis of a document that we have
all supported.
As Member States, we have the objective of
ensuring the effectiveness of the intergovernmental
negotiations by concretizing discussions to enable
the speedy reform of the Council. The reinstatement
of the past practice of adopting an annual draft
resolution — as opposed to adopting an annual rollover
intergovernmental negotiations mandate through a
draft oral decision without any official record in the
adopted resolutions of the Assembly — would represent
a tangible step forward and thereby reinvigorate our
collective commitment made in light of the urgent need
for reform.
We believe that objective is something we can
all support. It is therefore a necessity that we begin
to move forward and not stagnate in betrayal of the
intentions of our Heads of State and Government and
indeed the people who are affected on a daily basis by
violent conflict and instability.
Mr. Othman (Malaysia): My delegation takes
the floor today to reaffirm its position with regard
to Security Council reform and its process. We also
appreciate and support the proposal made by the
Permanent Representative of Qatar with regard to the
amendment to the draft oral decision of the President of
the General Assembly.

A/75/PV.84

We believe that, in order to make it more legitimate,
representative, democratic and accountable, the reform
of the Security Council should be comprehensive, both
in terms of its working methods and the expansion
of its membership. That includes working towards
exploring pragmatic approaches for moving the reform
process forward, particularly in areas where there
are still significant differences. The reform of the
Council should also enjoy the widest possible political
acceptance among Member States.
My delegation also wishes to emphasize that
Malaysia does not belong to any groups with regard
to the Security Council reform process, despite some
similarities between their positions and our national
position. Our approach to the reform process has
always been pragmatic and objective and we have been
consistent in advocating for an inclusive and transparent
reform process that is guided by consultation and
dialogue among Member States.
Let me conclude by assuring the Assembly of
Malaysia’s commitment to moving this process forward
with other Member States, guided by the commitment
of our leaders to instil new life in the discussion on the
reform of the Security Council.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French):
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to thank
Ambassador Wronecka of Poland and Ambassador
Al-Thani of Qatar for their efforts and for the document
on convergences and divergences. We particularly
welcome
Ambassador
Al-Thani’s
commitment
and her proposal, which has enabled us to reach a
consensus solution.
France supports the proposed amendment to the
draft oral decision, while stressing that the Group of
Four’s proposal is acceptable and in accordance with
the objectives we hope to achieve within the framework
of the discussions on the reform of the Security
Council. We will continue our efforts to participate
constructively in the intergovernmental process,
which is of great importance to the States Members
of the United Nations. We also call on all delegations
to demonstrate the same spirit of flexibility in the
negotiations, which we hope will bear fruit during the
upcoming session of the General Assembly.
Finally, on behalf of my delegation, I would like
to commend you, Sir, for your dedication and efforts
to reach a consensus, as well as your leadership of

21-1610817/23

A/75/PV.84

22/06/2021

this debate, including the reconvening of this meeting
today, in order to arrive at a satisfying conclusion.

Security Council during the seventy-sixth session of
the General Assembly, if Member States so decide;

The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote.

Fifthly, also decides to include in the agenda of the
seventy-sixth session of the General Assembly the item
entitled “Question of equitable representation on and
increase in the membership of the Security Council and
other matters related to the Security Council”?

We shall now take a decision on the draft oral
decision, as orally amended.
May I take it that the General Assembly:
First, decides to reaffirm the central role of the
General Assembly concerning the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and other matters related to the
Security Council and the commitment of Heads of State
and Government, representing the peoples of the world,
to instil new life in the discussions on the reform of the
Security Council;
Secondly, decides to immediately continue
intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council
reform in informal plenary of the General Assembly
at its seventy-sixth session, as mandated by Assembly
decisions 62/557 of 15 September 2008, 63/565 B of
14 September 2009, 64/568 of 13 September 2010,
65/554 of 12 September 2011, 66/566 of 13 September
2012, 67/561 of 29 August 2013, 68/557 of 8 September
2014, 69/560 of 14 September 2015, 70/559 of 27 July
2016, 71/553 of 19 July 2017, 72/557 of 29 June 2018,
73/554 of 25 June 2019 and 74/569 of 31 August 2020,
building on the informal meetings held during its
seventy-fifth session, as reflected in the letter dated
12 May 2021 from the co-Chairs, and on the document
entitled “Co-Chairs’ elements paper on convergences
and divergences on the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of
the Security Council and related matters”, circulated on
29 April 2021, as well as the positions of and proposals
made by Member States, reflected in the text and its
annex circulated on 31 July 2015, to help to inform its
future work;
Thirdly, welcomes the active engagement,
initiatives and intensive efforts of the President of
the General Assembly, and notes with appreciation
the active role and concrete efforts of the co-Chairs
undertaken in a consultative manner with a view to an
early comprehensive reform of the Security Council;
Fourthly, decides to convene the Open-ended
Working Group on the Question of Equitable
Representation on and Increase in the Membership of
the Security Council and Other Matters related to the
18/23

It was so decided (decision 75/569).
The President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by representatives from
their seats.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): Let me begin by
expressing my agreement with my Russian colleague,
who clearly said that we should not have had the debate
today. Why do I say that? With all due respect, Sir, you
will remember how last week I criticized the fact that
the draft rollover decision had been submitted without
prior consultation with the major groups, without
picking up on the mandate of the Heads of State and
Government to instil new life into our debates and
without picking up on the co-Chairs’ proposals, which
clearly sought the prioritization of the elements paper
(see A/75/PV.80).
Therefore, while we could have prevented it, I must
say that I agree with you, Sir, that last week’s debate
was a very lively one. Overall, it was a good thing that
we held the debate because it brought our discussions
out of obscurity. Those discussions, including today’s
discussions, were broadcast live, giving the public a
chance to follow our debates. We should continue to
have the intergovernmental negotiations debates in
public and broadcast on United Nations Web TV and
publish the documents.
Why is that? Here I would like to pick up on what
your predecessor, the President of the General Assembly
at its seventy-fourth session, said, namely that what we
are doing here is for the people outside who want the
United Nations to function and who want the United
Nations to represent the realities of the world today. I
think all of us here can admit that the composition of
the Security Council, which was last changed in the
1960s, does not represent the reality on the ground. The
people of the world are justly demanding that we take
action and come to a conclusion.
21-16108

22/06/2021

Therefore, that was a positive experience and I
commend you, Sir, for your readiness to change the
draft oral decision. It is also positive that the call of
the Heads of State and Government to instil new life in
the discussions on the reform of the Security Council
is now referenced in the decision that we have just
adopted (decision 75/569).
However, I must express my surprise to hear
that some of my colleagues, including those from
Pakistan and China, consider the proposals put
forward — including our Group of Four proposal to
add to the decision a reference to instilling new life in
the discussions — controversial elements or aggressive
demands. What were our demands? Our demands were
to include in the decision the co-Chairs’ conclusion that
the elements paper should be prioritized, informed by
the framework document. I do not understand why that
would be considered aggressive.
Last but not least, on a positive note we benefited
once again from the able capacities of our colleague
from Qatar, Ambassador Al-Thani, who did a fantastic
job at making the best out of a very complicated
situation. I would like to thank her for her relentless
efforts during the past few days.
While there are a number of positives, we must say
that in terms of substance, we regret not having made the
progress that we hoped for. What did we want to achieve?
We wanted to achieve what the representative of the
African Union called for during the intergovernmental
negotiations, namely to come out of this process with
a single consolidated text. We wanted to go in the
direction of what our South African colleague called
for earlier, namely text-based negotiations, because that
is the only way we can achieve the aspirations of the
people scrutinizing our work.
We were of the opinion that the proposal by the
co-Chairs to prioritize the elements paper, which would
be informed by the framework document, would in fact
suffice to adequately cover the African Union’s position.
We have heard and respect the fact that the African
Union was not fully satisfied with that. The Group of
Four fully commits to the Common African Position
and we ask that, at the seventy-sixth session, the African
position be clearly referenced in the elements paper.
We also ask all colleagues here to clearly say whether
they commit to the African position, as well as those
countries that then put pressure on representatives here
or in capitals to prevent delegations from asking for

A/75/PV.84

text-based negotiations or a single text to stop that. In
that regard, I can only echo what my Pakistani colleague
earlier: I hope to see the last of such pressure tactics.
Let me also pick up again something that from my
perspective was perhaps the most important statement
that I heard today, which again was from your
predecessor, Mr. President, the Ambassador of Nigeria.
He said that consensus was good but that it was not
a goal in itself. The goal of this Assembly must be to
reform the Security Council. As my Pakistani colleague
reminded us, there is a provision for a vote. We have to
accept this by a two-thirds vote. We should therefore
not prevent voting. I think that it would not have been
a disaster to vote on the amendments. Why not? Why
not do that? We will never have 193 countries agree on
a solution; there will also be some that will not like it.
Let us therefore include that in our considerations.
I wish the General Assembly good luck at its
seventy-sixth session, and I hope that the successors
will succeed in instilling new life and will respond to
the aspirations of the people who look to us and our
work. They look at if we are able to actually resolve the
issues and provide the conclusions.
The President: I would like to express my sincere
appreciation to Her Excellency Joanna Wronecka,
Permanent Representative of Poland to the United
Nations, and Her Excellency Ms. Alya Ahmed Saif
Al-Thani, Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, who ably and patiently conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations on the question
of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and other matters
related to the Security Council. I also thank Ambassador
Al-Thani for her contribution to reaching a consensus
over the past few days. I am sure that members of the
Assembly join me in extending our sincere appreciation
to them.
At this point, I would also like to share with Member
States some of my views on the conduct of discussions
at the last stage of those negotiations. I worked for a
President who said that sometimes one year is too short
but one day is too long. As the chief negotiator of my
country with the European Union, I therefore really
learned a great deal of things about negotiations. In
the 10 months here in the General Assembly, I have
also learned how difficult it sometimes is to reach a
consensus but also that the important thing is to find
ways of doing that.

21-1610819/23

A/75/PV.84

Perhaps some delegations were surprised to see
me remain so silent when at least one Member State
representative personally pointed out some error in
my remaining silent. I will take the words expressed
by my Egyptian colleague, who said that the Hall is
very hot now. But today the Hall is not hot and cold and
the climate is very good here. I would therefore like
to explain my remaining silence to the representative
of a Member State who in New York is known to be
a plain-speaking man and made very sentimental
remarks — I think during or before the meeting — that
were not in line with the diplomatic traditions of the
General Assembly.
Let me also be honest. My name is Volkan.
Volkan means volcano. As the representative of Italy,
Mrs. Maria Angela Zappia, mentioned here once, there
are two types of volcanoes. What is the Etna type? It
spews smoke and ashes in constant eruption but it does
not destroy. They call it La Montagne, the mountain,
and, while admiring it, they also pray to keep her quiet.
The dangerous one is the silent Vesuvius. The day that
it erupts, it will spread huge destruction. I remained
silent and did not reply to the representative at that
time, but I just want to clarify that my silence was in
line with the Vesuvian volcano style.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 127.
Agenda item 76 (continued)
Oceans and the law of the sea
(a) Oceans and the law of the sea
Draft decision (A/75/L.96)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Singapore to introduce draft decision
A/75/L.96.
Mr. Khng (Singapore): On behalf of Ambassador
Rena Lee, President of the Intergovernmental
Conference on an international legally binding
instrument under the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use
of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national
jurisdiction, I have the honour of introducing draft
decision A/75/L.96, on the postponement of the fourth
session of the Conference.
Vice-President Masuku (Eswatini) took the Chair.
20/23

22/06/2021

The draft decision was submitted due to the ongoing
coronavirus disease situation. Prior to its submission,
the President consulted the members of the Bureau
of the Conference and delegations on whether the
fourth session should proceed as scheduled in August.
The feedback included concerns over the potential
limitations on the participation of delegations, arising
from the continued restrictions on travel.
The draft decision proposes that the Assembly
decide to postpone the fourth session of the Conference
to the earliest possible date in 2022, preferably during
the first half of the year. It also proposes that the
Assembly request the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary support and services for online discussions
in 2021.
We hope that the Assembly will adopt this draft
decision without a vote.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft decision A/75/L.96.
In that connection, I give the floor to the
representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): The present statement is made
in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
Under the terms of the first and second operative
paragraphs of draft decision A/75/L.96, the General
Assembly would decide to postpone the fourth session of
the Conference to the earliest possible available date in
2022, preferably during the first half of the year, and request
the Secretary-General to convene the fourth session of
the Conference, with full conference services, including
documentation, as required, for a duration of 10 days, on
the dates to be determined by the Secretary-General, in
consultation with the President of the Intergovernmental
Conference; and request the Secretary-General to provide
the necessary support and services for online discussions
to be convened by the President of the Intergovernmental
Conference in 2021.
The activities referred to in the draft decision relate
to programme 1, General Assembly and Economic and
Social Council affairs and conference management, and
programme 24, Global communications, and to section
2, General Assembly and Economic and Social Council
affairs and conference management, and section 28,
Global communications, of the proposed programme
21-16108

22/06/2021

budget for 2022, as presented in A/76/6 (Sect.2) and
A/76/6 (Sect.28).
Pursuant to the request contained in the second
operative paragraph of the draft decision, the fourth
session of the conference in New York in 2022 would
consist of 20 meetings, one in the morning and one in the
afternoon, in 10 days, with interpretation in all six official
languages of the United Nations, constituting an addition
to the meetings workload of the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management in 2022. With
regard to the request for documentation services, while
constituting an addition to the documentation workload
of the Department in 2022, the requirements are yet to be
fully determined and will be based on the outcome of the
consultations that are planned to take place in 2021. The
requested services would be provided on the assumption
that the timeline of submission and processing of
documentation, as well as the dates for the conference,
are determined in consultation with the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management. In
addition, requirements are envisaged for live webcasts in
all official languages for the duration of the conference
in 2022.
Accordingly, the adoption of draft decision A/75/L.96
would give rise to budgetary implications of between
$520,000 and $600,000 under the proposed programme
budget for 2022 under section 2, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council affairs and conference
management, and section 28, Global communications.
Pursuant to the request in the third operative
paragraph of the draft decision, services would be
provided for three to four online meetings in 2021,
each comprising of up to three hours, for which it
is understood that interpretation services would not
be required.
In the context of resolution 75/239, related
requirements in the amount of $595,800, including
recosting, were approved, under section 2 of the
programme budget for 2021, for the fourth session of the
intergovernmental conference, which had been requested
to be convened from 16 to 27 August. As at the date of
this oral statement, the resource requirements for online
discussions in 2021 are estimated at $640 per meeting,
with an estimated total of $2,560. The difference between
the approved budget for 2021 and the final expenditure will
be surrendered in the context of the financial performance
report for 2021, to be presented to the General Assembly
at the main part of its seventy-seventh session.

A/75/PV.84

In conclusion, should the General Assembly adopt
draft decision A/75/L.96, the Secretariat would present
a revised estimates report to the General Assembly at
the main part of its seventy-sixth session, detailing the
additional requirements needed under the proposed
programme budget for 2022.
The statements that I just read were distributed
through the Plenary Place on the e-deleGATE portal
and will be made available in the Journal of the United
Nations under the e-statements link for the meeting.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft decision A/75/L.96, entitled
“Intergovernmental conference on an international
legally binding instrument under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation
and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of
areas beyond national jurisdiction”.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): I should like to announce that,
since the submission of the draft decision and in addition
to those delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have also become sponsors of draft decision
A/75/L.96: Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, GuineaBissau, Nigeria, the Philippines, Sao Tome and Principe,
Senegal and Sri Lanka.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft decision
A/75/L.96?
Draft
decision
(decision 75/570).

A/75/L.96

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 76.
Agenda item 130 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
Draft resolution (A/75/L.98)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tuvalu to introduce draft resolution
A/75/L.98.

21-1610821/23

A/75/PV.84

Mr. Laloniu (Tuvalu): I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/75/L.98, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Pacific Islands
Forum”, on behalf of the members of the Forum.
The draft resolution is an update of resolution 73/332
and serves to take stock of the various developments
over the past two years, while encouraging further
cooperation between the United Nations and the Pacific
Islands Forum. Let me highlight a few significant
updates in this year’s draft resolution.
The preambular part of the draft resolution
underlines the importance of the Pacific region’s
collective action regarding shared stewardship of the
Pacific Ocean and recognizes our region’s vulnerability
to the impacts of climate change as the single greatest
threat to the livelihoods, security and well-being of the
peoples of the Pacific.
In the operative section, paragraph 1 encourages the
scheduling of the next meeting between the SecretaryGeneral and the Pacific Islands Forum leaders for
September 2021, on the margins of the general debate.
In paragraph 5, we welcome the high-level meeting
that was held on 27 September 2019 to review progress
made in addressing the priorities of small island
developing States (SIDS) through the implementation
of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA)
Pathway and the adoption on 10 October 2019 of its
political declaration (resolution 74/3), in which Heads
of State and Government reaffirmed their commitment
to strengthening cooperation with, and support to,
SIDS in the context of sustainable development.
Paragraph 6 recalls resolution 75/215, of 21 December
2020, on the follow-up to and implementation of the
SAMOA Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the
Further Implementation of the Programme of Action
for the Sustainable Development of SIDS, in which the
threat posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic to human health, safety and well-being and to
the sustainable development of SIDS envisioned in the
SAMOA Pathway and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is noted with great concern.
We recall in paragraph 7 decision 74/548, on
postponing the high-level 2020 United Nations
Conference to Support the Implementation of
Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and
sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources
for sustainable development, to be held in Lisbon.
22/23

22/06/2021

In paragraph 9, we acknowledge the severe,
far-reaching and enduring economic and social
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic for the
sustainable development of SIDS envisioned in the
SAMOA Pathway and the 2030 Agenda, and note the
United Nations support for the Pacific Islands Forum
Humanitarian Pathway on COVID-19 as a coordinated
unified response to the pandemic.
Paragraph 10 expresses the need for urgent action
to address the adverse impacts of climate change,
including those related to sea-level rise and extreme
weather events, which continue to pose a significant
risk to small island developing States and to their
efforts to achieve sustainable development.
Lastly, paragraphs 19 and 20 recognize the ongoing
implementation of the multi-country office reviews and
welcome the progress made thus far in the establishment
of a multi-country office in the North Pacific.
On behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum, I would
like to thank all delegations for their constructive
engagement throughout the negotiations, and we
express our sincere gratitude for the invaluable support
of delegations that co-sponsored the draft resolution.
We welcome the General Assembly’s adoption of the
draft resolution by consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/75/L.98, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Pacific Islands Forum”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become co-sponsors
of draft resolution A/75/L.98: Albania, Austria, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Costa Rica, Equatorial
Guinea, Finland, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Hungary,
Italy, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Maldives, Malta, Montenegro, the Netherlands, Nigeria,
Paraguay, Poland, Qatar, Romania, Sao Tome and
Principe, Slovakia, Sweden, Switzerland and Thailand.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.98?
21-16108

22/06/2021

Draft
resolution
(resolution 75/288).

A/75/PV.84

A/75/L.98

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to speakers in explanation of position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): My delegation takes the
floor to deliver and express our position on resolution
75/288, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Pacific Islands Forum”. My delegation
joined the consensus and welcomes the adoption of the
resolution. In that regard, we would like to highlight
three points.
First, my delegation commends the efforts and
leadership of Tuvalu in steering the negotiation of
the resolution. Indonesia engaged constructively
throughout the negotiations. It is our principled position
that we support resolutions that enhance cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the Pacific Islands Forum.
Secondly, Indonesia shares various common
interests with the Pacific island countries, covering
multiple issues, such as climate change, disaster risk
reduction, agriculture, fisheries and tourism, as well as
small and medium enterprise development. We would
like to reaffirm our commitment to strengthening our
group with the Pacific island countries to respond to
our shared challenges, including through capacitybuilding and technical cooperation.
Thirdly, my delegation would nevertheless like to
disassociate itself from the specific language in the
fifth preambular paragraph. We once again reiterate
our reservation against the communiqué document
of the forty-ninth Pacific Islands Forum for reasons
that we stated during the 102nd plenary meeting of
the General Assembly at its seventy-third session (see
A/73/PV.102).

Ms. Kabua (Marshall Islands): The Republic of
the Marshall Islands approaches resolution 75/288 as a
Pacific island nation and is a close friend and partner
to all nations in our Pacific island subregion. We are
proud to join the consensus in adopting the resolution.
On 5 March, our national Parliament, the Nitijela,
adopted a resolution approving the denouncement
of the Agreement Establishing the Pacific Islands
Forum, as well as any related predecessor agreements
in force. Our constitutional process is fully concluded.
This denouncement was transmitted to the specified
depository on 9 March and the withdrawal will take full
legal effect one year and one day from that date.
The Republic of the Marshall Islands acknowledges
ongoing high-level political engagement between
a representative of the Forum and members of the
Micronesian Presidents Summit grouping regarding
this matter. Should there be no change in the present
situation, the Republic of the Marshall Islands provides
notice that aspects of paragraphs 4, 11, 14 and 16 of
resolution 75/288 may no longer have any direct
application to the Marshall Islands once our withdrawal
from the Forum is given full legal effect. However, we
continue to welcome the resolution and its application
to remaining Forum members.
The Republic of the Marshall Islands remains a
member of many technical agencies within the Pacific
Islands region and committed to working with Pacific
small island developing States and other partners in
addressing common regional interests.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (p) of agenda item 130?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

21-1610823/23
