S/PV.7739

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7739th meeting

Monday, 18 July 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Spain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Seck
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Ms. Power
Mr. Bermúdez
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2016/589)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-22255 (E)
*1622255 *

S/PV.7739

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2016/589)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Germany to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
and His Excellency Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2016/589, which contains the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Feltman, Mr. Vale de Almeida, and His
Excellency Mr. Román Oyarzun Marchesi, Permanent
Representative of Spain, in his capacity as facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: A year ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 2231 (2015), which endorsed
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
The resolution, including the historic agreement it
addresses, stands apart as a signal accomplishment
in the history of the Council. Through diplomacy and
negotiations, China, France, Germany, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom and the United States,
with the support of the European Union and the Islamic
Republic of Iran, addressed one of the most pressing
peace and security issues on the agenda of the Security
Council for the past decade.
Resolution 2231 (2015) heralded a new chapter
in Iran’s relationship with the Security Council.
2/21

18/07/2016

Fully implemented, the JCPOA will reinforce global
non-proliferation norms and assure the international
community of the exclusively peaceful nature of Iran’s
nuclear programme. It will also, through the lifting of
sanctions, help to realize the long-awaited hopes and
aspirations of the Iranian people to be reconnected to
the global economy and the international community.
Six months after implementation day, the Secretary­
General commends the Islamic Republic of Iran for
implementing its nuclear-related commitments, as
verified by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
He also commends the European Union and the United
States for steps they have taken in accordance with
their sanctions-related commitments under the JCPOA.
As we consider today’s report (S/2016/589) on
the implementation of the provisions of annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015), we do so against the backdrop
of progress in the implementation of the JCPOA and
the express commitment of all its participants to jointly
working through implementation challenges. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report, implementation
challenges exist for any agreement, let alone one as
comprehensive and complex as the JCPOA. He calls on
all participants to stay the course to fully implement all
aspects of that landmark agreement and work through
challenges in the spirit of cooperation, compromise,
good faith and reciprocity.
I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to brief the
Security Council on the first report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). The report was circulated to the Council on
1 July, pursuant to annex B to resolution 2231 (2015) and
paragraph 7 of the note by the President of the Security
Council, issued on 16 January 2016 (S/2016/44). This
report, officially released today, strictly focuses on
the restrictive measures in annex B of resolution 2231
(2015, which came into force on 16 January.
Our mandate is neither to report on all other aspects
of the resolution or annex A of the JCPOA, nor touch
upon the work of the Joint Commission established
in the agreement. These annex B provisions include
restrictions on nuclear-related transfers and activities,
ballistic missile-related transfers and activities, and
arms-related transfers, as well as an assets freeze and
a travel ban. The report informs the Security Council
that since 16 January, the Secretary-General has not
received any report, and is he aware of no open source of
information regarding the supply, sale, transfer or export
16-22255

18/07/2016

Non-proliferation

to Iran of nuclear-related items undertaken contrary to
the provisions of the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015).
As Council members are aware, the Secretariat
helped to establish the operational linkages between
the Security Council and the Procurement Working
Group of the Joint Commission for the processing of
nuclear-related proposals submitted by Member States
under the procurement channel. These have been
established with due regard for information security
and confidentiality. Optional forms in all six official
United Nations languages are also available for use by
Member States on the Council’s 2231 web page.
I now turn to the restrictive measures on ballistic
missile-related transfers and activities.
Since 16 January, the Secretariat has received
no information regarding the supply, sale, transfer
or export to Iran of ballistic missile-related items
undertaken contrary to the provisions of resolution
2231 (2015). However, in early March 2016, during
military exercises, Iran launched a series of ballistic
missiles. The report includes details of those launches
from Iranian media sources and information provided
to the Secretary-General by France, Germany, the
United Kingdom and the United States. The report also
includes the views of Iran on the issue.
As Council members are aware, the Security
Council discussed those launches on 14 March and
1 April. There are clear differences in the Council
regarding whether those ballistic missile launches
are inconsistent with the resolution. Iran, too, has its
own interpretation of this provision. While it is for the
Security Council to interpret its own resolutions, the
Secretary-General has stressed that we must maintain
the momentum created by the conclusion of the JCPOA,
consistent with its constructive spirit. In that regard,
he calls upon Iran to avoid such ballistic missile
launches, which have the potential to increase tensions
in the region.
In terms of restrictions on arms transfers, the report
notes the seizure of an arms shipment by the United
States Navy in the Gulf of Oman in March. The United
States concluded that the arms had originated in Iran
and that this transfer was contrary to the provisions of
annex B to the resolution. Iran informed the Secretariat
that it had never engaged in such activity. The
Secretariat will continue reviewing the information
provided by both countries.

S/PV.7739

The report also provides information to the
Security Council on the participation of Iranian entities
in the Fifth Iraq Defence Exhibition, held from 5 to
8 March in Baghdad. It is our understanding that the
transfer of arms from Iran to Iraq should have required
the prior approval of the Security Council, pursuant to
paragraph 6 (b) of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).
Iran considered that no prior approval was required
from the Council for that activity because Iran retained
ownership of the items exhibited. It also appears that the
Defence Industries Organisation, an entity currently on
the 2231 list, may have participated in the exhibition,
which may have implications for the implementation
of the assets freeze provisions in annex B. Finally, the
report also draws the attention of Council members to
the possible foreign travel undertaken by Major General
Qasem Soleimani contrary to the provisions of annex B
of the resolution.
In resolution 2231 (2015), the Council expressed
its desire to bring about a fundamental shift in its
relationship with Iran. I would like to share the fact
that we had regular and close interactions with Iran
throughout the process of drafting the report, including
sharing with its representatives relevant information
that the Secretariat was examining and providing them
with a right of reply. The Secretariat intends to continue
its close interaction with Iran. The next report of the
Secretary-General will be submitted to the Council in
January 2017.
As we mark the first anniversary of the JCPOA and
the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), the SecretaryGeneral wishes to reaffirm the enormous responsibility
that JCPOA participants carry for the full and effective
implementation of the agreement. Hope for a more
secure world, closer partnership to resolve common
challenges, and the delivery of tangible benefits to the
people of Iran rest in the Council’s hands.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vale de Almeida.
Mr. Vale de Almeida: I thank you, Sir, for giving
me the floor. I am honoured to address the Council
today on behalf of the designate representative of
the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in her capacity as
Coordinator of the Joint Commission established by the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), to whom
I shall refer hereafter as the “Coordinator”.

16-22255 3/21

S/PV.7739

Non-proliferation

The date of 14 July marked the first anniversary of
the conclusion of the JCPOA and six months from its
implementation day. In this first year, important steps
have been taken by all parties, the E3/EU+3 and Iran,
towards the successful implementation of the deal. We
are also pleased to say that JCPOA implementation
is on track. So far, all parties have fulfilled their
commitments, as confirmed by the two reports of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) on Iran’s
nuclear commitments and by the lifting of the agreed
nuclear-related economic and financial sanctions on
implementation day. However, JCPOA implementation
is still a work in progress and we expect the full and
effective implementation throughout the lifetime of the
agreement on the part of all sides. We remain committed
to that goal.
As Coordinator of the Joint Commission, the body
established by the JCPOA, the High Representative
and its representatives oversee the successful
implementation of the deal, as well as the effective
operation of its working groups. We have a strong interest
in and responsibility for the successful implementation
of the deal, which we believe is a clear demonstration
that with political will, perseverance and multilateral
diplomacy, workable solutions can be found to the most
difficult problems. In that respect, another meeting of
the Joint Commission with the E3/EU+3 and Iran will
take place in Vienna tomorrow.

18/07/2016

of E3/EU+3 and Iranian representatives. The Group has
been in full operation since then.
Transparency has been one of our guiding principles
during the negotiations and a cornerstone of the JCPOA.
According to paragraph 6.10 of JCPOA annex IV,
“the Joint Commission will report to the United
Nations Security Council at least every 6 months
on the status of the Procurement Working Group’s
decisions and on any implementation issues”
(resolution 2231 (2015), annex A, p. 92).
In this context, on 8 July, the Coordinator of the
Procurement Working Group submitted to the facilitator,
on behalf of the Joint Commission, the report of the
Joint Commission to the Security Council on the status
of the Procurement Working Group’s decisions and on
any implementation issues. This is the first report of its
kind; it is factual, and it aims at providing the facilitator
and Security Council members with an overview of
the work undertaken by the Procurement Working
Group in the period since JCPOA implementation day,
16 January 2016, up to 6 July.

I would also like at this point to extend my gratitude
to the facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), my good friend His Excellency Mr. Román
Oyarzun Marchesi, for his excellent cooperation since
implementation day, and to thank our colleagues in the
Security Council Affairs Division for their unwavering
support regarding the establishment of the procurement
channel. I would also like to take note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2016/589) on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), as outlined by the UnderSecretary-General.

During that period, the participants in the
Procurement Working Group — the E/EU3+3 and
Iran — worked intensively to establish the Group and
define its modalities for operation. Participants held
seven meetings, at one of which the IAEA participated
as an observer. The Group has made great efforts to
be as transparent as possible, without compromising
confidentiality, by reaching out to third States and
promoting a better understanding of its aims, objectives
and review process. To be more precise, since JCPOA
implementation, the Group has collectively engaged
with third States and briefed representatives of the
Security Council, as well as of States Members of the
United Nations, during an open briefing organized
by the facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). Participants also held separate bilateral
discussions with a number of interested third States.

I will now focus on the work of the Procurement
Working Group of the Joint Commission. The
Coordinator of the Joint Commission and the
Procurement Working Group is responsible for the
smooth operation of that newly established mechanism,
which has been tasked to review the proposals of
States seeking to engage in activities with Iran that
are for nuclear and non-nuclear civilian end-uses. On
implementation day, the Joint Commission established
the Procurement Working Group, which is comprised

We have taken note of the points raised by States
during those meetings. In that respect, the Joint
Commission has endorsed several documents relating
to the work of the Procurement Working Group,
namely, the information on the procurement channel,
the optional application form, the optional end-use
certification and the relevant explanatory notes, as well
as the statement on confidentiality in the Procurement
Working Group and the Joint Commission for matters
relating to the procurement channel. All of those

4/21

16-22255

18/07/2016

Non-proliferation

S/PV.7739

documents have been published on the Security Council
website.

regard, as it provided us with templates for each type
of communication.

Let me conclude by reiterating our strong interest
and sense of responsibility in the successful operation
of the Procurement Working Group and of the JCPOA
as a whole.

To date, to my surprise, we have only received one
proposal by a Member State, which was subsequently
withdrawn, to participate in permitted activities as
set forth in paragraph 2 of annex B of resolution 2231
(2015). During the reporting period I did not receive
any notification regarding certain activities described
in paragraph 2 of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015),
nor did I receive travel-ban or assets-freeze exemptions
requests. However, the good news is that system is
operational. I am sure that it will provide legal certainty,
and I hope that my successors will find it to be solid
and useful.

The President: I thank Mr. Vale de Almeida for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Feltman and
Ambassador Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union, for their briefings.
According to the note by the President of the
Security Council, the Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) shall brief the members of the
Security Council on his work and on the implementation
of the resolution every six months. In my briefing, which
will be short, I will highlight three parts of my report:
first, the setting up of the 2231 (2015) format and the
procurement channel; secondly, the monitoring of the
resolution; and, finally, issues related to transparency,
outreach and guidance.
First, with regard to the setting up of the 2231 (2015)
format, I should recognize that, when the Council
appointed me as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), the first thing that came to my
mind was: What is a Facilitator of a resolution? The 2231
(2015) format did not exist and none of us, nor members
of our team, really knew what the new provisions
set forth in resolution 2231 (2015) entailed for the
Facilitator. Hence my first task was to set up the 2231
(2015) format and to develop a new working method.
That work would never have been possible without
the valuable assistance of the Secretariat, specifically
through the Security Council Affairs Division.
One of the most challenging issues was establishing
a channel for communication between the Security
Council and the Joint Commission of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). For such
transactions, which need to go both through the Joint
Commission and the Security Council, we had to figure
out two main things: first, the format we should use
to communicate with them and, most important, the
issues we would inform each other about on a regular
basis. The Secretariat played a crucial role in that

Another task pertaining to the setting up of the
2231 (2015) system was the establishment of a website.
I believe we have developed a very instructive website
for those interested in the implementation of the
resolution, in particular with regard to information on
nuclear transfers and other activities.
The second part of my report pertains to the
monitoring of the resolution. During the reporting
period, the Council received information on alleged
actions inconsistent with the resolution. The Council
received information on 7 and 9 March with regard to
ballistic-missile launches by the Islamic Republic of
Iran. The Security Council met under the resolution
2231 (2015) format to further consider those launches. I
am not going to repeat the discussion that took place, as
it is well described in the report. However, I would like
to highlight some of the conclusions that were drawn
from that meeting.
First, the Security Council agrees that all Member
States, including Iran, must act in accordance with all
the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). Secondly, it is
essential that the Security Council act with unity when
it comes to resolution 2231 (2015), so as to assist in its
effective implementation and to create legal certainty.
The Council has also received information with
regard to two alleged cases of arms seizures. On 7 June,
a Member State submitted a report informing that its
naval forces had encountered and boarded a ship that
was transiting international waters in the vicinity of
the Gulf of Oman. According to the report, the arms
originated in Iran and were likely bound for Yemen.
With regard to this case, I sent a letter to the Permanent
Representative of Iran in which I invited his Government
to comment on the report. As I was finishing my report,

16-22255 5/21

S/PV.7739

Non-proliferation

18/07/2016

Iran had still not responded formally to my letter.
However, in the course of my frequent contacts with the
Permanent Mission of Iran to the United Nations, the
Mission informed me that it rejected such an allegation
and that Iran had never engaged in such delivery.

Iran to ensure that Iran’s nuclear programme is and will
remain a peaceful one. Despite a long history of deep
mistrust on both sides, commitments have been kept.
Despite dire predictions to the contrary, the deal has
held. That is a truly significant achievement.

On 5 July, another Member State submitted to
the Security Council a report informing that its naval
forces had encountered and boarded a ship in the
northern Indian Ocean that contained an major arms
cache. The Member State concluded that the arms
originated in Iran and were likely bound for Yemen and
Somalia. In that connection, I would like to stress that,
under paragraph 6 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015),
engaging in the activities I have just described without
the authorization of the Security Council would be a
violation of the resolution.

In the time since, Iran has dismantled two-thirds
of its centrifuges and filled the core of its plutonium
reactor at Arak with concrete. More than 98 per cent
of Iran’s stockpile of enriched uranium has been
moved out of the country. The remainder is under
continuous monitoring to make sure that Iran stays
withing the stockpile limit. As result, Iran’s pathways
to a nuclear weapon remain closed, and Iran’s breakout time has been extended from two to three months
before the deal to at least a year today. We know all this
and more because the deal granted the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) unprecedented access
to Iran’s nuclear facility and supply chains, allowing
for effective monitoring and evaluation. If and when
questions or concerns arise in this monitoring, we have
a process to address them.

Thirdly, during this period, I attached high priority
to transparency, outreach and practical guidance. In
order to improve the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), it is important that all stakeholders understand
perfectly the provisions of the resolution. On 1 March,
I convened an open briefing on resolution 2231 (2015),
during which I gave an overview of its main provisions
and its implementation by the Security Council. I
believe that transparency is especially important in this
case, given the technical complexity of the resolution.
Finally, I would like to say that it has been a great
pleasure for me to work with the members of the
Security Council, the European Union delegation and
the Permanent Mission of Iran. They all demonstrated
flexibility and a constructive spirit during the period
under review, which allowed for the report and the
Facilitator’s activities to come about easily. I have
nothing but words of gratitude for them.
The President: I thank Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi for his briefing.
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his briefing
today and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi both for the
briefing and the leadership that he and his team have
demonstrated in supporting the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
It has been one year since the United States,
France, the United Kingdom, Germany, China, Russia
and the European Union (EU) concluded a deal with
6/21

The United States acknowledges and welcomes
Iran’s swift implementation of this historic deal, which
has produced real, tangible change — change that,
without question, has improved international peace and
security, which is the primary purpose of the Security
Council. We also recognize that negotiating this deal
and implementing it has required overcoming great
scepticism in some Iranian quarters. The world is safer
because of this deal.
It has been six months since the IAEA’s
verification that Iran completed its key nuclear-related
commitments under the deal and the simultaneous
lifting of United Nations, EU and United States nuclearrelated sanctions. While Member State implementation
of the commitments of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) is a subject for the Joint Commission
rather than the Council, let me be clear that the United
States, our P5+1 partners and the EU have thus far fully
and unequivocally implemented all our commitments
under this deal by lifting nuclear-related sanctions
specified in the deal and by providing clear and timely
guidance to Government and private-sector partners
about engagement with Iran that is now permitted.
Consistent with the terms of the deal and directly
resulting from the choices that its leaders have made,
the economic burden on the Iranian people has been
eased, and the United States will continue to implement
16-22255

18/07/2016

Non-proliferation

its commitments in good faith and without exception
under the JCPOA. Yet while it is undeniable that the
deal has led to significant verifiable progress in rolling
back Iran’s nuclear programme, it is also true that Iran
and other Member States have at times taken actions
that, while not always violations of the JCPOA, are
inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).
The report released today by the Secretary-General
(S/2016/589) documents a number of such actions.
These include Iran’s repeated ballistic missile launches,
which the Council called upon Iran not to undertake.
The report states that these launches have the potential
to increase tensions within the region. Iran does not
hide these launches. The report also notes violations
by Iran of resolution 2231 (2015), such as armed
transfers to other parts of the region, some of which
have been interdicted. The Secretary-General’s report
also documents violations of asset freezes and travel
restrictions applicable to Iranian entities designated by
the Council, such as the participation of Iran’s Defence
Industries Organisation in an arms exhibition in Iraq.
No one — including United Nations Member States,
the Security Council and the Secretariat — should turn a
blind eye to such actions. As we have said all along with
regard to this resolution, implementation is everything.
That means that when the resolution is violated or
actions are taken that are inconsistent with it, those
actions must be documented and condemned. And it
means that all Member States, especially the members
of the Council, the P5+1 countries and Iran, which
negotiated the deal, must do their part in implementing
the resolution. That is why the United States commends
the actions of the Royal Australian Navy and the French
Navy, which intercepted and confiscated Iranian arms
shipments on 27 February and 20 March, respectively,
as the United States Navy did on 28 March. It also means
that the Council and the international community must
call out Member States when they do not fulfil their
responsibilities under the resolution.
The United States disagrees strongly with elements
of the report, including the fact that its content goes
beyond the appropriate scope. We understand that Iran
also disagrees strongly with parts of the report. For
our part, while some have argued that to be balanced,
the report should give Iran a chance to express
complaints about sanctions relief under the deal, the
Security Council did not mandate the Secretariat to
report on issues unrelated to implementation of annex
B of resolution 2231 (2015). It was instead the Joint

S/PV.7739

Commission that was carefully designed by the JCPOA
participants to discuss and resolve such implementation
issues, and that is the appropriate channel through
which to raise such concerns.
The United States has fully implemented all of its
sanctions-related commitments under the deal, and we
have responded to questions about them both through
the Joint Commission and through extensive bilateral
engagement with Iran. Even beyond fulfilling its
JCPOA commitments, the United States has engaged
with Governments, businesses and banks throughout
the world that have questions about our changed
sanctions environment.
To be clear, the deal has not resolved all of our
differences with Iran. We continue to be profoundly
concerned about human rights abuses that Iran commits
against its own people and the instability that Iran
continues to fuel through its destabilizing activities in
the region, including repeated threats against Israel.
But we are undoubtedly in a better place to address
these and other challenges without the threat of a
nuclear-armed Iran. The lines of communication that
we have developed with Iran over the course of our
negotiations have already proven useful to engaging
in other areas of vital interest, as occurred in January
when Iran detained ten United States sailors and two
United States naval vessels in the Persian Gulf. The
sailors were released in less than a day in no small
part because Secretary Kerry and Foreign Minister
Zarif are able to work constructively. Iran has joined
the International Syria Support Group, which is trying
to resolve the horrific conflict in Syria — a goal that
would be impossible without all the countries that are
involved in the conflict in Syria at the table.
In conclusion, as we all know, it took the P5+1,
the EU and Iran two years of gruelling negotiations
to reach a deal designed to address the international
community’s concerns about Iran’s nuclear programme.
At several points, negotiations nearly collapsed, owing
to distrust and the inability of participants to find
a compromise. But we persisted, knowing that the
instability that would come from a potential conflict
demanded that we exhaust all options in seeking an
effective diplomatic solution. The deal is a reminder
of what we can achieve when we come together to
confront shared threats and engage our adversaries
through robust, principled diplomacy.

16-22255 7/21

S/PV.7739

Non-proliferation

Yet building on the progress made — progress that
critics of the deal said the world would never see — is not
guaranteed, and it is not irreversible. Rather, it continues
to depend on the willingness of the Security Council,
the Secretariat and each of our individual countries
to do their part in implementing the resolution. Our
collective security demands nothing less.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Jeffrey Feltman, the Permanent Representative of Spain
and the head of the Delegation of the European Union
for their briefings.
The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action agreed in
Vienna and resolution 2231 (2015), which endorsed it,
are a year old. At the time of their adoption, we paid
tribute to an historic moment for international peace
and security. After more than a decade of concern
by the international community in facing the Iranian
proliferation crisis, the Vienna agreement has paved the
way for the re-establishment of trust in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme, thereby
consolidating the non-proliferation regime.
Where are we one year after the conclusion of
the agreement? The International Atomic Energy
Agency has continued its verification and surveillance
activities of Iran’s implementation of its commitments
on the nuclear component under the Vienna agreement,
and it has done so without any impediment. We will
continue to ensure the rigorous implementation of all
nuclear provisions under the Vienna agreement, which
remains a priority for us.
As required by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, Iran has the right to use nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes. The Vienna agreement
has defined the framework for the development of
civilian nuclear cooperation with Iran. France is
committed to the implementation of the agreement in
all its dimensions. That is why our two countries have
held discussions on bilateral cooperation in the field
of nuclear fusion, within the framework defined by
the agreement.
With regard to the lifting of sanctions, I wish to
emphasize that we have met all our commitments
under the Vienna agreement since the 16 January 2016
implementation date. The French Government, in line
with its European Union partners, has provided all the
necessary information and guidance on the scope of the
sanctions that have been lifted. The lifting of sanctions
is already beginning to bear fruit, as the resumption
8/21

18/07/2016

of Iran’s oil exports, among other examples, attest. We
also understand Iran’s concerns about the slowness
of the effects on its economy of lifting sanctions. We
have spared no effort to provide companies with the
necessary clarifications on the lifting of sanctions, and
will continue to do so. We call on all our partners to
continue their efforts on that issue. However, I would
like to point out that other factors also come into play
when a business decides to invest in Iran. For the lifting
of sanctions to be fully felt in the Iranian economy, it is
also incumbent upon Tehran to create an environment
of trust for businesses.
I now come to my final point. We are concerned
about the numerous reports on Iran’s non-compliance
on several important provisions of resolution 2231
(2015) over the course of the past six months. That
information is detailed in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2016/589) just presented to us. In that
regard, I thank the Secretary-General for his report,
which is comprehensive, factual and balanced and
lays the foundation for rigorous monitoring of the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) in the coming
years. Iran’s destabilizing actions are numerous. I will
list just a few.
Last March, Iran launched several ballistic missiles
capable of delivering nuclear weapons, contrary to the
provisions of paragraph 3, annex B, of resolution 2231
(2015). France, in collaboration with its European 3+1
partners, has therefore notified the Security Council.
In addition, the United States and France informed the
Security Council of two Iranian weapons seizures, last
June and July, respectively, constituting violations of
paragraph 6 (b) of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).
Finally, we are equally concerned about
information relating to travel abroad by Major
General Qasem Soleimani, who is still subject to
travel restrictions imposed by the Security Council, as
confirmed by resolution 2231 (2015). We believe it is
essential for international security and the stability of
the region that Iran refrain from any destabilizing and
dangerous activities.
In conclusion, I appeal to all parties to redouble
their efforts for the rigorous implementation of all the
provisions of the Vienna agreement and resolution
2231 (2015). The Vienna agreement and the adoption
of resolution 2231 (2015) will be a singular diplomatic
success if the measures of the provisions are rigorously
16-22255

18/07/2016

Non-proliferation

S/PV.7739

observed. France will ensure throughout the process
that the Security Council remains quite vigilant.

However, our comments and our proposals were not
heard. I will outline some of our main reservations.

Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Permanent Representative
of Spain for the briefing on his work as the Security
Council facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), as well as the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union, who spoke about the Working Group on
transfers. We also listened closely to Mr. Feltman, who
presented the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/589)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

Let us begin with the fact that the document
contains simple factual errors, such as, for example,
that JCPOA was never signed, as is stated in the report.
According to the methodology of the selection and use
of information, we think it unacceptable to include any
unchecked data, which is simply being picked up by the
media or received from isolated countries. In particular
in those cases, when the question being considered
has not yet been finished, the Secretariat should work
solely on the basis of officially provided information
and verified facts.

In July 2015, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear programme
was concluded. It was a triumph for multilateral
diplomacy, which has allowed us to resolve one of the
most difficult questions of international relations, and
to do so through peaceful means. However, that success
must be anchored by the conscientious fulfilment of the
JCPOA by all of the parties to the agreement. We think
that, on the whole, the implementation of the JCPOA
is going rather well. At this stage, all of those involved
in the process need to concentrate on unswerving
implementation of the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015) and of the JCPOA, which stipulates all the
necessary mechanisms to be confident that Iran is
keeping to its commitments.
I will be direct. The Secretary-General’s report
comes from outside the usual, necessary working
methods. The document has a politically biased
character and goes beyond the factual outlining of
the course of the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). Furthermore, it contains a number of pieces of
information that are not really relevant in that regard. I
would like to remind the Council that when resolution
2231 (2015) was agreed it was decided that we would not
set up a group of experts similar to that of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). Unfortunately, this document looks like
a hapless relapse into the activities of that Group of
Experts. In its current form, the report will not just
facilitate the sustainable fulfilment of the JCPOA, but
it also may undermine the agreements reached so far.
Advocating a compact, technical and factual document,
we assumed first and foremost it would work from the
politically sensitive nature of the question and the
fragility of the compromises reflected in the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015). We offerred corrections in
the course of the preliminary discussions, and we hoped
to avoid public criticism of the Secretary-General.

In the sections on so-called violations, they
should be limited to an outline of the issue and official
comments from the affected parties and references
to the fact that information in these statements have
yet to be checked and that the question is still under
consideration. Their analysis has not yet been completed
with the exclusion of missile launches. Any conclusions
or recommendations on that basis are hasty, and with
the absence of verified information, simply impossible.
We assume that the question of including data in the
report should be reviewed as part of the preparation for
the next Secretary-General’s report, which will come
out in six months.
In the course of these discussions, we have seen
interesting methodologies being used. Individual
countries are making statements when references
are being included in the Secretary-General’s report.
But why are those countries referring to a report as
documentary evidence of what they have asserted? All
of this would simply be funny if we were not talking
about such an important issue as the implementation of
the JCPOA.
Some provisions of the Secretary-General’s report
have no relation to his mandate nor to the terms of
reference of resolution 2231 (2015) or the JCPOA. In
our view, if the Secretary-General wants to outline his
own point of view, then he or Mr. Feltman could always
do that in the course of today’s oral presentation of
the report in the Security Council. May I remind the
Council that, in accordance with point 7 of the Chair’s
notes of 16 January, recommendations, encouragements
and views of the Secretary-General should be in
strict conformity with his authorities and should be
addressed first and foremost to the Security Council.

16-22255 9/21

S/PV.7739

Non-proliferation

That is a fundamental point. I will give the Council
some examples.
The mention of alleged inscriptions on the Iranian
missiles simply do not coincide with the subject of
the report, nor do the arguments on the impact of the
launch of missiles on the situation in the Middle East.
There are also questions on the recommendation of the
Secretary-General regarding the preferences for some
kind of form for submission of applications for the
supply of materiel of nuclear and dual-use items to Iran.
That is the prerogative of the Joint Committee and the
Procurement Working Group.
The absence in the report of any mention of the
Russian suggestion on coordination within the Security
Council of a standard form for applications of arms
transfers of conventional weapons to Iran under the
seven categories of the United Nations Register of
Conventional Arms arouses genuine bewilderment.
I will explain. That was an initiative of Russia put
forward in the Security Council as part of an official
draft note by the President. It was aimed at ensuring
that States Members of the United Nations had the
possibility to fully realize the potential of resolution
2231 (2015), which includes a regulatory approval
system for such transfers, but does not regulate the
mechanism for submission of relevant applications.
But our proposal fully falls under the scope of the
Secretary-General’s report, as outlined by him in
paragraph 3 of the introduction. A similar form for
submitting applications was agreed to for transfers to
Iran of nuclear and dual-use goods and was highly in
demand among potential suppliers.
We regret that some partners in the Council have
refused to look at that proposal — I note, without any
justification for their reluctance to strictly follow the
provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). We note that the
opponents of that initiative have taken a course on
the free interpretation of the resolution for their own
political ends. That is quite contrary to the letter and
spirit of the resolution, and impedes Iran from fully
exercising its rights as a State Member of the United
Nations to self-defence, in accordance with Article 51
of the Charter of the United Nations.
I would like to note that, in the course of our
comments, there was also a recommendation to add to
the report a reference to the possibility of cancelling
of the restrictive measures ahead of schedule if
the Director General of the International Atomic
10/21

18/07/2016

Energy Agency released a report asserting that all
nuclear material on Iranian territory was being used
for peaceful nuclear activities. That wish was also
ignored, as was the proposal to mention, in paragraph
2 of the introduction of the report, that the beginning
of practical implementation of the Joint Plan in many
ways has been possible thank to the assistance offered
by Russia to Iran in fulfilling the key provision of
the JCPOA, namely, reaching the established limit
for enriched nuclear materials of 300 kilogrammes. I
mention this because the role of European Union and
the United States in the implementation of the JCPOA
is mentioned in every possible way — in section II
of the report, moreover, in an area where the Iranian
party actually has serious claims. Such a deviation is
simply improper. We hope that in the next reports our
comments will be taken into account.
In conclusion, I would like to mention the report of
the Security Council facilitator on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). On the whole, we take a
positive view of the facilitator, as we do of the work of
the Permanent Representative of Spain in that capacity.
Nonetheless, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to a range of provisions in the report that
raises some doubts.
First, the sections on weapons seizures do not
reflect the scepticism of a number of Council members
towards such assertions. We note with confidence that
they do not set out the facts on the basis of which an
impartial analysis could be conducted. In essence, we
are invited to take at their word those countries that
provided the reports and to share their conclusions.
Secondly, the section on the so-called 2231 list
is far too verbose. We recall that the comprehensive
sanctions against Iran have been repealed. It would
have been possible to limit the number of physical
and legal persons against whom restrictions are being
maintained to a simple statistic. However, we must also
note that, on the whole, the report of the facilitator is
concise, factual, politically neutral and balanced. We
consider that document to be a good handover for the
future for the new Security Council facilitator on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) who will
replace the Spanish delegation next year.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his first report (S/2016/589) on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). It has been
produced in challenging circumstances, but it is a strong
16-22255

18/07/2016

Non-proliferation

report that covers the full range of implementation.
I also thank both briefers, and Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi for his excellent work as facilitator.
On 14 July 2015, after nearly two years of
negotiation, the P-5+1 and Iran agreed to the historic
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. All the parties
worked hard to uphold their obligations, which
culminated in the implementation of the deal on
16 January after the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) confirmed that Iran had completed all
the steps necessary to reduce its nuclear programme.
We welcome the latest IAEA report, issued on 27 May,
which confirms that Iran continues to comply with its
nuclear commitments under the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action. The United Kingdom is committed
to working with Iran and our E3+3 partners through
the Joint Commission and the Working Groups
established under the deal. That includes our role on
the procurement channel established, for the export
of nuclear-related goods and services to Iran. We will
continue to operate transparently in that regard, while
respecting the confidentiality of applications made by
States Members of the United Nations.
The implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action triggered the first phase of sanctions
relief, including United Nations, European Union
and United States sanctions. We are committed to
ensuring that this delivers tangible economic benefits
for the Iranian people. We encourage businesses to take
advantage of those new economic opportunities. The
second phase of sanctions lifting, which will commence
a maximum of eight years after implementation day,
provides a further incentive for Iran. However, in the
meantime those restrictions remain in place, and we are
unswerving in our efforts to ensure that the sanctions
that remain in place continue to be robustly enforced by
all Member States.
I must be clear that we remain concerned about
Iran’s regional behaviour. Its continued testing of
ballistic missiles that are designed to be capable of
carrying nuclear weapons is destabilizing to regional
security and inconsistent with resolution 2231
(2015). The United Kingdom determines that the
ballistic missiles tested by the Islamic Republic of
Iran are designed to deliver a payload of at least 500
kilogrammes, which is the weight of a first-generation
nuclear warhead. Those missiles are designed to reach
a range of at least 300 kilometres, which would qualify
as a strategic strike. Therefore, in our view, they are

S/PV.7739

designed to be inherently capable of delivering nuclear
weapons. Together with international partners, we
wrote to the Security Council in March to express our
concern, as ballistic missile launches have the potential
to heighten regional and global tensions. It is completely
unacceptable that references to Israel were reportedly
written in Hebrew on a missile, and we call on Iran to
refrain from such provocative actions. We urge Member
States to continue to enforce the sanctions regime on
ballistic missile technology, and encourage Members
States to act on and report all suspected violations of
those sanctions.
We are concerned that Iran continues to provide
substantial military and financial support to Hizbullah
and to the Syrian regime, in contravention of the United
Nations embargo on the export of weapons by Iran. We
are also worried about reports that an arms shipment
seized in March had originated in Iran and was likely
bound for Yemen. We therefore urge Member States
to continue to enforce the binding restrictions in place
under resolution 2231 (2015), and encourage Member
States to act on and report all suspected violations of
those sanctions.
The United Kingdom is committed to ensuring that
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is a success.
We have always been clear that, for it to work, all sides
need to implement fully the provisions of the agreement
and of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015). For Iran
to benefit from the deal, it must build the confidence of
the international community, including the commercial
sector, that it intends to enter into a new relationship
with the international community. As a regional Power,
we expect Iran to play a positive and responsible role on
the significant issues facing the region. We call on all
participants to redouble efforts to implement all aspects
of the deal, which will build that confidence.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. We
thank Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Jeffrey Feltman, Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi and
Ambassador Vale de Almeida for their briefings.
In July 2015, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2231 (2015), on the Iranian nuclear issue,
in which it endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) concluded by the E3/EU+3 and Iran.
The conclusion of the JCPOA was a success story in
the settlement of an international and regional hotspot
issue by political and diplomatic means. It will succeed

16-22255 11/21

S/PV.7739

Non-proliferation

so long as the parties maintain their confidence in the
political settlement process, demonstrate political will
and make tireless efforts to that end.
The implementation of the JCPOA is a protracted
process. Inevitably, there will be difficulties and
challenges. The parties must continue to strive, first,
to adhere to the principle of gradual and reciprocal
implementation and to fully implement their
commitments under the JCPOA; secondly, to keep the
larger picture in mind, assiduously strengthen mutual
confidence, and allow political trust to serve as the
ballast for the follow-up implementation of the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015); and thirdly, to promote
mutual understanding and accommodation, duly settle
their differences, actively seek consensus and jointly
seek progress. The JCPOA will stand only if they
act accordingly.
China notes the report (S/2016/589) submitted by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi. We believe that the
report must reflect the implementation of the JCPOA
by all parties in an objective and balanced manner. The
efforts of all parties should be reflected in the report.
China also notes the report recently submitted by the
Joint Commission on the work of its Procurement
Working Group. China will continue to participate
actively in the work of the Joint Commission and the
Procurement Working Group.
China has always advocated the settlement of the
Iranian nuclear issue by political and diplomatic means
and is committed to strengthening the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime in order to maintain
international peace and stability. China actively
and constructively participated in the entire JCPOA
negotiating process, and proposed useful plans and
ideas for the deal. China is ready to work with all parties
to implement the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) in
earnest and to make new contributions to the facilitation
of a comprehensive, long-term and appropriate solution
to the Iranian nuclear issue.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by thanking you, Sir, for your
outstanding initiative in organizing this briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I also thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Ambassador Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
12/21

18/07/2016

United Nations, and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi,
Permanent Representative of Spain and facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for
their briefings.
On 20 July 2015, the Security Council endorsed,
through resolution 2231 (2015), the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) as the culmination of 12 years
of the sustained diplomatic efforts of the five permanent
members of the Security Council and Germany, with
the participation of the European Union. They reached
an historic agreement on the Iranian nuclear issue. Six
months later, on 16 January 2016, following confirmation
by the International Atomic Energy Agency that Iran
had taken all the necessary steps — in particular those
stipulated in sub-paragraphs 1 to 11 of paragraph 15 of
annex V of the JCPOA — and aware of the complexity
involved in the harmonious implementation of the
resolution, the Security Council took the precaution of
appointing a facilitator for the process.
The delegation of Senegal commends the
outstanding work done by our colleague, Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi, who has managed — with the
generous and able assistance of the Secretariat and with
his own ingenuity, rigour and transparency — to render
the content of resolution 2231 (2015) more intelligible
and comprehensible, thereby making it less difficult for
the parties and the rest of the international community
to monitor its implementation. In the letter and spirit of
the note of the President of the Security Council dated
16 January 2016 (S/2016/44), Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi has successfully put in place what he himself
referred to as the 2231 format, which has provided a
good platform for communication, interaction and
creating synergies between the different components
of the network created by the Council to guarantee the
implementation of the resolution.
The interface thereby created between the Security
Council and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
has worked well. It has guaranteed visibility, inclusivity
and transparency. There is also a dedicated website
that has already been visited 70,000 times, according
to the report (S/2016/589). The Member States thus
have access to the necessary information to meet their
obligations under Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations, with respect to accepting and carrying
out the decisions of the Security Council, including
the provisions of paragraph 7 of resolution 2231
(2015), which terminates the provisions of the previous
resolutions and establishes new ones.
16-22255

18/07/2016

Non-proliferation

I can affirm that the Senegalese delegation now
sees things much more clearly, with respect to both
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and the
follow-up of those actions that might not be in line
with the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). The
matters of supply lines, confidentiality, notification,
exemptions — not to mention questions of transparency
and dissemination — are more comprehensible. The
updating of the list of entities and individuals concerned
by the sanctions established in resolution 1737 (2006) is
also relevant.
We should also welcome the fact that the
mechanisms and procedures that have been in place
since January have allowed for good follow-up and
processing of allegations of non-compliance with the
provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). This is the case
even though, as indicated in the report, the facilitator
has called for unity as vital among Council members
in order to create the legal certainty necessary, with
the political will expressed by all, to ensure that the
provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) are implemented
fully as long as they remain in force.
It is in that spirit that we should address the
question of Iran’s launch of ballistic missiles and the
seizure in the Gulf of Oman of quantities of weapons
that are probably destined for Somalia or Yemen. The
Senegalese delegation is of the view that the stocktaking
for the first six months of implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) has been positive overall. To that end, it
encourages the facilitator and all other stakeholders
involved in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, as
well as all other States Members of the United Nations,
to continue in the right direction.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking Under-Secretary-General
Feltman for his highly valuable briefing. I would also
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Spain,
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, for his work as
facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), and for his exhaustive report (S/2016/589),
which makes mention, inter alia, of the informal
Security Council meetings that were held at the expert
level in this new context. I would also like to thank the
Head of the Delegation of the European Union for the
briefing he made on behalf of the Joint Commission.
Egypt welcomes the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) and the adoption of resolution 2231
(2015), which take us one step further towards the

S/PV.7739

declaration of the Middle East as a zone free of nuclear
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, which
could contribute to regional peace and security and
help to diminish tension at a very crucial juncture in
the Middle East, where we have seen so much conflict.
In this context, Egypt commends the international
relationships that led to the nuclear commitments made
by the Islamic Republic of Iran in resolution 2231
(2015). We encourage Iran to continue working in this
same vein.
Resolution 2231 (2015) touches not only on
Iran’s nuclear commitments, but also on its ballistic
missile-launching activities and the transfer of
conventional weapons. The Council discussed Iran’s
ballistic missile launches in March and was informed
of the seizure of weapons cargo suspected to have
been transferred from Iran in violation of resolution
2231 (2015). Such issues elicit a great deal of interest
in the countries of the region as they have serious
consequences for regional peace and stability.
Egypt appreciates the effort and commitment
the Secretary-General has shown in the drafting of a
balanced report on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015), which outlines these
incidents. We hope that future reports will contain clear
and precise recommendations to fill in any existing
gaps in the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015),
particularly with regard to measures to control ballisticmissile launches and the transfer of nuclear weapons.
The Security Council is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security. The
resolutions it adopts, including resolution 2231 (2015),
are one of the ways the Council expresses its will in
that regard. That is why divergence in views with
regard to technical aspects and the interpretation of
resolution 2231 (2015) should not overly absorb the
Council’s attention, nor should they deter or derails the
Council from its mission to ensure international peace
and security.
Unquestionably, the launching of ballistic missiles
by Iran, which has been mentioned in many reports on
Iranian arms transfers in conflict zones in the Middle
East, is fully contrary to the purposes of resolution
2231 (2015). They can only contribute to the escalation
of conflict and to heightening tensions between Iran
and its neighbours.
The Security Council is obliged to send a clear
message to Iran and the countries of the region regarding

16-22255 13/21

S/PV.7739

Non-proliferation

the key importance of regional peace and stability
and the security of all members of the international
community. Council members must also avoid getting
caught up in the technical details and manoeuvres in
the interpretation of resolutions. It must make every
effort to ensure peace and stability in the Middle East,
working in cooperation with the countries of the region
to build bridges and confidence among parties through
the complete commitment to and full implementation
of the Council’s goals and resolutions.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We thank
Under-Secretary Feltman for his briefing and the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2016/589). The
Secretary-General had a difficult task on a sensitive
topic. In our view, he has presented a balanced report
that provides a useful overview of developments since
the adoption and implementation of the agreement
negotiated between Iran, the United States, Russia,
China, the United Kingdom, France, Germany and the
European Union. We also thank Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi for briefing the Council in his capacity
as facilitator of resolution 2231 (2015), as well as
Ambassador Vale de Almeida for his briefing on behalf
of the Joint Commission.
We welcome a key message in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that is also reflected in recent reporting
by the International Atomic Energy Agency. Iran is
honouring its nuclear-related commitments under the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). This
is vital to building further trust between Iran and the
international community.
New Zealand appreciates the efforts of all parties to
uphold the spirit of the agreement as well as the letter. It
was this spirit of constructive engagement — a success
of diplomacy and cooperation over confrontation and
mistrust — that enabled agreement in the first place. As
we said when the agreement was endorsed by the Council
in resolution 2231 (2015) under our presidency, in July
2015, we hope that Iran will seize this opportunity to
reset its relationships with the international community
and play a more constructive role in its region. That is
urgently needed.
At a time of increasing instability and conflict, the
need for cooperative regional engagement could not be
more critical. In this regard, reports of conventional
arms transfers to Yemen are of particular concern.
Such transfers are unhelpful to Yemen’s stability and
further undermine efforts being made by the Council
14/21

18/07/2016

and others to secure peace for that country. Provocative
actions, such as the Iranian launch of ballistic missiles
in March, also risk further inflaming regional tensions.
While we recognize Iran’s right to provide for its selfdefence, its leaders cannot pretend that the intemperate
indeed ridiculous actions of the Revolutionary Guards
are not their responsibility.
The Secretary-General’s regular reporting to the
Council is a vital tool for keeping the process on track.
We look forward to the Council receiving this further
analysis of how the resolution’s implementation is faring.
If the JCPOA is to be sustainable, all sides must live
up to their commitments. Iran must act responsibly. It
also has the right to the full benefits of the agreement,
including economic benefits. The responsibility for
achieving this is a shared one, not just for the parties
that negotiated the JCPOA but for the international
community, whose support was represented in the
resolution adopted by the Council.
For its part, the New Zealand Government is
engaging with our banking sector and others to
strengthen our commercial ties with Iran. Reciprocal
visits by the Foreign Minister of New Zealand and Iran
have reinforced progress in our bilateral relationship.
We look forward to building on this progress in the
year ahead.
It has taken longer than we all expected for the
private sector to re-engage with Iran. The complex
terms of the JCPOA have been difficult to navigate,
particularly for those who were not involved in the
negotiations. We appreciate the efforts taken by the
parties to share information and clarify expectations
with the private sector, and we encourage this to
continue. We also appreciate outreach efforts under
the 2231 (2015) format so that members can better
understand and fulfil their own obligations.
We all have an interest in the long-term viability
of the agreement and in ensuring the peaceful nature
of Iran’s nuclear programme. We recognize that the
international community must maintain its vigilance to
ensure that this historic agreement is fully and properly
implemented. We must also now capitalize fully on the
opportunity to promote trust and cooperation between
Iran and the international community.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Permanent Representative of Spain,
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, acting in his capacity
16-22255

18/07/2016

Non-proliferation

as facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), for providing comprehensive and substantial
reports, which contribute to raising general awareness
on the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
and on the resolution itself. He has clearly explained
key tasks and interactions within new mechanism and
structures established pursuant to the resolution and
has given a detailed presentation of the work conducted
in this area during the last six months.
We highly commend the dedicated efforts of the
United Nations Secretariat, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Facilitator’s team
aimed at full and proper implementation of the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015), which inaugurated a new
stage with regard not only to the Iranian nuclear issue
but also to the non-proliferation regime in general.
Before going directly into the subject of today’s
meeting, let me note that yesterday — 17 July — marked
the second anniversary of the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 in the Donetsk oblast of Ukraine.
We reiterate our deepest sympathies and condolences to
the families of victims and to all grieving nations. Let
me recall the demand of the Security Council that
“those responsible for this incident be held to
account and that all States cooperate fully with
efforts to establish accountability” (resolution 2166
(2014), para. 11).
A more detailed press statement was distributed
yesterday by the Permanent Missions of the States
participating in the joint investigation.
As a country that demonstrated a proactive approach
and set an example for others to follow by abandoning
its nuclear capability and acceding to the Treaty on the
Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), Ukraine
remains a strong advocate of the NPT and emphasizes
the need for all States parties to that instrument to
comply fully with their relevant obligations.
Recalling the right of States parties, in conformity
with articles I and II of the NPT, to develop and
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without
discrimination, Ukraine highly commends the
comprehensive, long-term and proper solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue that culminated in the JCPOA. Up
until now, we have witnessed positive developments in
the implementation of that crucial document. Ukraine
welcomes IAEA reports that prove Iran’s intention to

S/PV.7739

use nuclear material and technologies exclusively for
peaceful purposes.
At the same time, while recognizing the inalienable
right of every State to protect its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, we share the concerns about the
launches of ballistic missiles designed to be capable
of delivering nuclear weapons, as mentioned in the
reports, as well as incidents of seizures of conventional
arms that were likely bound for conflict zones, without
the necessary authorization of the Security Council.
Those particular cases run counter to the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015).
Ukraine acts in accordance with the importance
of diligently implementing both the JCPOA and
resolution 2231 (2015). It is essential that all the
States engaged in the process interact constructively
to resolve outstanding issues for the sake of this hardwon non-proliferation deal, the proper implementation
of which would be a key contribution to regional and
global security and stability. In that regard, we call on
all the parties to ensure that the concerns raised in the
reports of the Secretary-General and the Facilitator do
not serve to lay the groundwork for further disputes,
but rather that they be duly considered and resolved
through negotiations.
Proceeding from what I have said here, and taking
into account the current tense situation in the region,
we also stress the importance of refraining from
aggressive and war-like rhetoric, for the sake of the
progress achieved on this track.
To conclude my remarks, I wish to reiterate the
importance of a united Council stance when dealing with
this sensitive issue, as well as our intention to ensure
the further implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s meeting on this exceedingly
critical international issue. We thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Jeffrey Feltman for his briefing on the report
(S/2016/589) of the Secretary-General. We also thank
Ambassador João Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the
Delegation of the European Union, for his briefing on
the activities of the Procurement Working Group of the
Joint Commission. And we thank Ambassador Román
Oyarzun Marchesi, Permanent Representative of Spain,
for the briefing he made in his capacity as Facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

16-22255 15/21

S/PV.7739

Non-proliferation

The agreement reached with Iran on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), after years of
complex and very difficult negotiations, was swiftly
followed by the unanimous adoption by the Security
Council one year ago of resolution 2231 (2015), endorsing
the JCPOA, which came into effect three months later
on adoption day on 18 October 2015. Furthermore, the
submission by the Director-General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of a report confirming
that Iran had taken the actions specified in the JCPOA
brought the agreement to the landmark implementation
day and the lifting of sanctions against Iran. From
then on, concerted efforts by Iran and the international
community have been made that will hopefully lead,
in the long-term, to the adoption of a draft resolution
on termination day, in which the IAEA DirectorGeneral will declare the broader conclusion according
to which all nuclear material in Iran is exclusively used
for peaceful purposes — hopefully at a time by which
Iran will be fully integrated into the international
community and able to make a meaningful contribution
to international peace and security, given its importance
as a regional and international player.
The conclusion of the JCPOA was a decisive step
forward in strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation
regime and a demonstration that, with a spirit of
compromise and political will, the most difficult
issues in international relations could be the subject of
a peaceful, diplomatic solution. The JCPOA was also
a ground-breaking development in the Middle East,
where diplomacy had been unable to score any gains
since the peace treaties concluded between Egypt and
Jordan with Israel many years ago.
The JCPOA prompted a fundamental shift in
the Iranian nuclear programme. Its conclusion and
implementation confirms how the international
community and Iran are willing to forge a new
relationship based on mutual respect and cooperation.
It is our expectation that the smooth implementation
of the JCPOA — confirming the exclusively peaceful
nature of Iran’s nuclear programme — will contribute
to building trust and deepening expert cooperation in
all areas, including on issues pertaining to peace and
security in the Middle East.
In the past six months since implementation day and
the issuance of a note by the President of the Security
Council setting forth arrangements and procedures for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), concrete
steps have been taken in structuring a framework for the
16/21

18/07/2016

resolution’s implementation, through the establishment
of a channel for communication between members of the
Council and the Joint Commission; in the establishment
of operational linkages with the Procurement Working
Group; in building discussions with representatives of
the Security Council; and in setting up a website for
those interested in the implementation of the resolution.
We have taken due note of the transparency, outreach
and guidance measures developed by the Facilitator
and the Secretariat with a view to improving the
implementation of the resolution and its understanding,
mainly concerning procedures related to the submission
of proposals to the Council, which retains the central
role in reviewing and deciding on procurement and
supplying of nuclear-related transfers and other activities.
We deem it absolutely essential that the JCPOA be
rigorously implemented. To that end, the strengthening
of mutual trust is a fundamental prerequisite, by
keeping dialogue and diplomatic channels permanently
open in a spirit of goodwill to resolve all contentious
issues arising from the agreement’s implementation and
by guaranteeing that the Iranian nuclear programme
remains exclusively for peaceful purposes, an outcome
that would benefit nuclear non-proliferation worldwide.
We fully concur with the Facilitator’s recommendation
that the Security Council must ensure that the JCPOA,
as stated in resolution 2231 (2015), be conducive to
promoting and facilitating the development of normal
economic and trade contacts and cooperation with Iran.
We call on the JCPOA signatories to do their utmost
to deepen political and diplomatic cooperation towards
appropriate solutions to the conflicts in the Middle
East — in Syria, Iraq and Yemen — and to establish
real unity of purpose in the fight against terrorism. Iran
is a great regional Power whose cooperation is key for
the attainment of solutions to the conflicts in the region.
We firmly believe that, if unlocked, a new chapter in
the relations between Western Powers and Iran could
provide bright prospects for peace and security in the
entire region.
Finally, we appeal to the Iranian authorities to
continue implementing the JCPOA provisions with
the same rigour and in good faith, and to persevere
in strengthening trust with its partners, thereby
contributing to the economic and social development
of the country and the easing of tensions in the region.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
16-22255

18/07/2016

Non-proliferation

Under-Secretary-General
for
Political
Affairs;
Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi, in his capacity
as facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015); and Mr. João Vale de Almeida, Head of
the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, for their briefings.
Uruguay, as a non-nuclear-weapon State; a
State member of the first nuclear-weapon-free
zone, established under the Treaty of Tlatelolco;
a State member of the South Atlantic Peace and
Cooperation Zone; and as State party to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, is
strongly committed to strengthening the disarmament
and non-proliferation regime. The Government of
Uruguay welcomed the International Atomic Energy
Agency’s report indicating that Iran had fulfilled all
its obligations under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action, endorsed on 14 July 2015 in Vienna by the P5+1
countries — China, France, Germany, the Russian
Federation, the United Kingdom and the United
States — and the Islamic Republic of Iran, concerning
the Iranian nuclear programme.
Implementation day reached after more than
two years of intensive diplomatic efforts, was a
historic landmark in multilateral diplomacy towards
non-proliferation. It contributed greatly to international
peace, security and stability, and eliminated one of
the main hotbeds of tension in the Middle East. In
recent weeks, the parties have expressed differences
regarding some aspects of the text of resolution 2231
(2015), which understandably diverges from language
previously used in resolution 1929 (2010). We call on the
parties directly involved to step up their talks to resolve
these differences, in the same spirit of cooperation
and commitment they showed in the long negotiation
process to reach resolution 2231 (2015), and thereby
avoid undermining the historic agreement.
Finally, Uruguay echoes the words of the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2016/589), in which he urges
us to keep the momentum sparked by the signing of
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, in line with its
constructive spirit.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like at the
outset to thank Mr. Jeffrey Feltman for introducing the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/589). I also thank
Ambassador Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; and

S/PV.7739

especially Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi, in
his capacity as facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for his efforts in addressing this
sensitive topic.
One year after the adoption of resolution 2231
(2015), establishing the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action agreed by the United States, the Russian
Federation, China, France, the United Kingdom, the
European Union, Germany and the Islamic Republic
of Iran, we commend and welcome the progress made
in the implementation of the resolution, the fruit of
extraordinary diplomatic efforts to achieve a broad,
long-term and appropriate resolution to the Iranian
nuclear issue. It was a political commitment among the
parties that must be recognized because it represents an
exceptional means of resolving conflicts that threaten
world peace.
The outcome underscores the importance of political
and diplomatic efforts to find a peaceful resolution
to this dispute, in line with Article 2 of the Charter
of the United Nations, showing that when parties are
committed to one another, peace and dialogue trump
the contentious rhetoric that breeds mistrust. The
implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action and its strict enforcement ensure that the Islamic
Republic of Iran can exercise its sovereign right to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, in accordance
with article IV of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. Similarly, its implementation
has contributed to establishing a climate conducive
to dialogue and understanding between Iran and the
States parties to the agreement, based on mutual trust
and respect, and a joint commitment to strengthening
international peace and security.
As for the Secretary-General’s report (S/2016/589)
on the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), which
was introduced today, my delegation believes that it
should reflect a fundamental change in the way we
address this issue, based on the parties’ willingness
to establish a new relationship with Iran through the
application of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
In the same vein, we believe that this first report should
have been guided by the principles of impartiality
and objectivity in order to avoid the introduction
of controversial elements that could lead to an
imbalanced treatment of the issues, in consideration
of the information submitted by the parties and Iran’s
compliance with its commitments under the Plan of

16-22255 17/21

S/PV.7739

Non-proliferation

Action, which has been verified by the International
Atomic Energy Agency in its report.
In like manner, any presentation of cases of
supposed non-compliance on the part of the parties
must be based on reliable, duly verified research in
order to ensure a clear understanding of the facts. We
must prevent future reports from containing elements
that are characteristic of a sanctions committee.
The mechanism that was established through the
adoption of resolution 2231 (2015) should facilitate the
implementation process — a goal to which we should
all be committed.
We also believe that elements that go beyond the
scope of resolution 2231 (2015) should not be included
in the reports. Aspects of the Secretary-General’s
report that require clarification should not be used for
political ends to undermine the climate of trust that
has been coalescing following the adoption of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. The Islamic Republic
of Iran has reaffirmed its commitment to fulfilling its
obligations in the framework of its agreements with
all parties to the process. Likewise, we must bear in
mind that Iran has been working constructively with
other countries to reach negotiated political solutions
to the serious conflicts that afflict the troubled region
of the Middle East, which is an important step towards
building trust among the parties.
Despite the progress made in the implementation
of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and the
commitments and agreements on the definitive lifting
of the sanctions regime imposed on the Islamic
Republic of Iran, as well as other unilateral coercive
measures taken illegally in other arenas regarding
Iran’s nuclear programme, we encourage the parties to
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action to act prudently
to put an end to all unilateral measures that continue to
affect the Islamic Republic of Iran. We also encourage
parties to refrain from adopting any policy that would
negatively affect the normalization of economic and
trade relations with the Islamic Republic of Iran and
thereby undermine the effective implementation of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
We should take advantage of this historic political
momentum and the positive dynamic between P5+1 and
Iran in order to focus on resolving differences through
dialogue and negotiation. The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action is a model for success that could be
replicated in addressing, by political and diplomatic
18/21

18/07/2016

means, other regional and international issues affecting
international peace and security, such as the search for
common positions among countries of the region and
the Council that would allow us to tackle the crises that
affect that important geographic zone, inter alia, the
Palestinian issue, the conflicts in Syria and Yemen, and
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism. We
also remain hopeful that this important step taken by
Iran and the other parties to the agreement will help
other countries of the region to refrain from engaging
in a nuclear arms race. We believe that the international
community should focus and demonstrate the political
will to establish a zone free of nuclear weapons in the
Middle East, in accordance with the decisions adopted
during the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference
and reiterated at subsequent conferences.
Finally, we reiterate our full support for the
implementation of this historic process in order to
ensure the well-being and progress of the Iranian people,
as well as to ease the tensions and contribute to stability
in the Middle East. We therefore urge the parties to
fulfil the agreement reached on the basis of good faith
and mutual respect and to avoid any action that would
jeopardize its effective implementation. All parties
should avoid inflammatory rhetoric and confrontation
and refrain from actions or acts of provocation that
affect the atmosphere of détente necessary to continue
implementing the agreement. The progress achieved in
fulfilling the agreement shows once again that, when
there is political will among the parties and respect
for legitimate mutual interests, the international
community can resolve the conflicts and crises that
affect international peace and security.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman for his briefing on the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2016/589), Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi for his briefing in his capacity as facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), and
Ambassador Vale de Almeida for his briefing on behalf
of the Joint Commission of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) on the report of the Procurement
Working Group.
We welcome the two quarterly reports issued by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) — in
March and June, respectively — on the verification and
monitoring activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Malaysia appreciates the IAEA’s efforts to continue
verifying the non-diversion of declared nuclear material
by Iran under its Safeguards Agreement.
16-22255

18/07/2016

Non-proliferation

Malaysia believes that the centrality of the JCPOA
must continue to underpin the Council’s approach, and
by extension, the international community’s approach
towards Iran.
Given the historical significance of the Iranian
nuclear agreement for the non-proliferation agenda, the
value of remaining steadfast in the implementation of
the provisions outlined in resolution 2231 (2015) cannot
be understated, so as to do justice to the diplomatic
efforts of all parties involved in ensuring the success
of the JCPOA. Hence, we welcome the crucial set-up
of the 2231 (2015) format meeting and the procurement
channel and commend the facilitator’s stewardship of
2231 (2015) format meetings, as well as the Secretariat’s
facilitation to provide coordination between the Council
and the Joint Commission of the JCPOA.
While we understand the concerns that have been
voiced with regard to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
progress on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), we believe that the shared concerns raised about
the complexities of the technicalities of the resolution
are best addressed through active engagement with Iran.
On the Secretary-General’s report, Malaysia calls on
all parties to continue working constructively together
in good faith in order to make significant progress on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). We are
encouraged by the approach of transparency, outreach
and practical guidance, anchored by the facilitator in
that regard, to ensure that the main provisions and
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) are well
understood. This is pertinent particularly given the
high interest in the implementation of the resolution on
transfers and activities as provided for in paragraph 2
of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015).
In an effort to further remove ambiguity and lend
transparency to the implementation of the provisions
of resolution 2231 (2015), Malaysia welcomes the
recommendations made in the Secretary-General’s
report, particularly on the need to clarify the application
of paragraph 6 (b) to all supply, sale or transfer regardless
of change, following the participation of Iranian entities
in the fifth Iraq Defence Exhibition, held in Baghdad in
March. Notwithstanding, the obligations of all Member
States to fully implement all the provisions of resolution
2231 (2015) must not be understated.
As we proceed henceforth, Malaysia urges balance,
prudence and collective engagement in the Council’s
work on facilitating the implementation of resolution

S/PV.7739

2231 (2015). We reaffirm our commitment to work
constructively with other Council members, being fully
mindful of the need to preserve the Council’s unity in
the process. We reassert that collective cooperation
and continuous engagement by all stakeholders are
indispensable to the success of the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). We wish to also commend
the Secretariat’s work, particularly in support of
the facilitator.
Malaysia continues to uphold its belief in the
importance of striking a balance in our discussions
on the nuclear non-proliferation agenda, particularly
on the nuclear disarmament side. The divisiveness
of discussions on the nuclear disarmament agenda
remains a cause of concern for all of us, particularly
for the non-nuclear-weapon States. We therefore urge
renewed commitment and action, particularly by the
nuclear-weapon States, to provide a fresh impetus and
reinvigorate discussions on this agenda, in a collective
effort by all the parties concerned to achieve the aim of
a world free of nuclear weapons.
Before I conclude, I wish to join the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine in his statement that
yesterday marks the second anniversary of the downing
of Malysia Airlines Flight MH-17. I wish to add that
we will continue to seek satisfactory explanations for
the event that led to the tragedy and strive for justice
through the avenues of international law.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
At the outset I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Jeffrey Feltman; Ambassador João
Vale de Almeida, representing the Joint Commission
established by the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA); and Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi,
facilitator of resolution 2231 (2015), for their detailed
briefings on this important topic.
The historic agreement on the JCPOA was achieved
one year ago through earnest negotiations by members
of the international community after years of sanctions.
The successful conclusion of the negotiations on
JCPOA demonstrates that the right combination of
pressure and dialogue can move a country to accept a
good agreement on an important and difficult issue.
The JCPOA must be fully implemented in order
to strengthen the international non-proliferation
regime. We highly value and support the role that the

16-22255 19/21

S/PV.7739

Non-proliferation

International Atomic Energy Agency is playing in that
regard. The goal is to make sure that nuclear energy is
used exclusively for peaceful purposes in Iran. Japan
will continue to provide assistance in the field of
nuclear safety, among others, in order to contribute to
ensuring the implementation of the JCPOA.
Another expected result of this historic agreement is
the integration of Iran into the international community
and the global economy. On 16 January, we welcomed
the advent of the implementation day of the JCPOA. In
line with resolution 2231 (2015), States Members of the
United Nations have removed measures that had been
applied based on previous Security Council resolutions.
The full implementation of resolution 2231 (2015)
by Iran and the international community will strengthen
a relationship of trust among Iran and its neighbours,
thereby contributing to peace and security in the Middle
East. As a long-standing friend with historic ties to
Iran, Japan believes that Iran can play an important and
constructive role in such difficult issues as Syria and
Yemen. In that regard, we view Iran’s ballistic-missile
launch test in March as unconducive to the stability of
the region. We clearly informed Iran that such actions
ran counter to our expectations.
Last week, the members to the JCPOA celebrated
the first anniversary of this historic agreement and
stated that the JCPOA was being implemented. Mindful
that resolution 2231 (2015) is expected to remain in
force until October 2025, we are reminded that we are
currently taking only the first steps in a long process.
I would like to conclude by urging Iran, the JCPOA
members, the Security Council and the States Members
of the United Nations to continue to work together to
ensure that this historic agreement is fully implemented
to the end.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Germany.
Mr. Braun (Germany): The Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA), agreed in Vienna one year
ago, and the subsequent resolution 2231 (2015), which
endorsed the Vienna agreement, were indeed historic
achievements. Since then, considerable progress has
been made towards the implementation of the agreed
provisions. On 16 January, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed that Iran had
fulfilled its obligations under the JCPOA. Since that
20/21

18/07/2016

implementation day, two subsequent IAEA reports have
indicated Iran’s compliance with its commitments.
Today, Germany would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and Under-Secretary-General Feltman for the
first biannual report (S/2016/589) on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). I would also like to thank
Security Council member Spain and Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi for his interesting briefing, and
European Union Ambassador Vale de Almeida for his
very relevant briefing. Please allow me to highlight
three points.
First, Germany welcomes the close cooperation
between Iran and the IAEA, which has repeatedly
confirmed the implementation of Iran’s nuclearrelated commitments under the JCPOA. Monitoring,
verification and reporting are essential to ensuring
the full implementation of the Vienna agreement.
We will continue to support the IAEA in fulfilling
its mandate. With regard to the work of the Security
Council, Germany welcomes the establishment of
the operational linkages between the Council and the
Procurement Working Group of the Joint Commission
as a crucial step towards ensuring the functioning of
the procurement channel.
Secondly, in line with the Secretary-General’s
report, Germany is deeply concerned about the
ballistic-missile tests conducted by Iran in March. We
regard them as inconsistent with resolution 2231 (2015).
Germany also notes with concern all further incidents
listed in the report. We call on Iran to refrain from any
action that could give rise to mutual mistrust. And we
call upon Iran to play a constructive role in resolving
regional conflicts, as a responsible member of the
international community.
Thirdly, Germany reaffirms its commitment to
further developing and intensifying relations with Iran.
We continue to pursue the goal of a full re-engagement
of German and European banks and businesses in Iran.
Together with the European Union, France and the
United Kingdom, we have been actively ensuring the
full implementation of the JCPOA. To that end, we deem
it important that Iran make further efforts to improve
economic and fiscal policy, create a reliable business
environment and fully implement the rule of law. We
stand ready to provide further support if needed. From
a German perspective, exports are door-openers for
investments, and therefore for development. We are
16-22255

18/07/2016

Non-proliferation

particularly glad to be again in a position to use export
credits to facilitate trade with Iran.
In conclusion, the Vienna agreement and resolution
2231 (2015) have ended the decade-long conflict
surrounding Iran’s nuclear programme. They are
a victory for diplomacy and for the principles of the
United Nations, and Germany is proud to have been, and

S/PV.7739

to remain, one of the parties to the agreement. It will
now be crucial to effectively implement the agreement,
as well as resolution 2231 (2015), in all its aspects. We
are confident that all partners of the Vienna agreement
are on the right path towards that common objective.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

16-22255 21/21
