United Nations

A/RES/66/43

General Assembly

Distr.: General
12 January 2012

Sixty-sixth session
Agenda item 98 (c)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 2 December 2011
[on the report of the First Committee (A/66/412)]

66/43. Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
(Bangkok Treaty)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/39 of 2 December 2009, entitled “Treaty on the
South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (Bangkok Treaty)”,
Welcoming the desire of the South-East Asian States to maintain peace and
stability in the region in the spirit of peaceful coexistence and mutual understanding
and cooperation,
Noting the entry into force of the Charter of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations on 15 December 2008, which states, inter alia, that one of the purposes of
the Association is to preserve South-East Asia as a nuclear-weapon-free zone, free
of all other weapons of mass destruction,
Noting also the convening of the second Conference of States Parties and
Signatories of Treaties that Establish Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones and Mongolia,
Reaffirming its conviction of the important role of nuclear-weapon-free zones,
established, where appropriate, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among
States of the region concerned and in accordance with the 1999 guidelines of the
Disarmament Commission, 1 in strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
in contributing towards realizing the objectives of nuclear disarmament and in
extending the areas of the world that are free of nuclear weapons, and, with
particular reference to the responsibilities of the nuclear-weapon States, calling
upon all States to seek a safer world for all and to achieve peace and security in a
world without nuclear weapons in a way that promotes international stability and
based on the principle of undiminished security for all,
Convinced that the establishment of a South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zone, as an essential component of the Declaration on the Zone of Peace, Freedom
and Neutrality, signed in Kuala Lumpur on 27 November 1971, will contribute

_______________
1

11-46140

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 42 (A/54/42).

*1146140*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/66/43

towards strengthening the security of States within the Zone and towards enhancing
international peace and security as a whole,
Noting the entry into force of the Treaty on the South-East Asia NuclearWeapon-Free Zone on 27 March 1997 2 and the tenth anniversary of its entry into
force in 2007,
Welcoming the reaffirmation of South-East Asian States that the South-East
Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone shall continue to play a pivotal role in the area of
confidence-building measures, preventive diplomacy and the approaches to conflict
resolution as enshrined in the Declaration of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations Concord II (Bali Concord II), 3
Reaffirming the inalienable right of all the parties to the Treaty on the South
East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone to develop research, production and use of
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes without discrimination and in conformity with
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 4
Recognizing that by signing and ratifying the relevant protocols to the treaties
establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones, nuclear-weapon States would undertake
individual legally binding commitments to respect the status of such zones and not
to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against States parties to such treaties,
Recalling the applicable principles and rules of international law relating to
the freedom of the high seas and the rights of innocent passage, archipelagic sea
lanes passage or transit passage of ships and aircraft, particularly those of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 5
1.
Welcomes the commitment and efforts of the Commission for the Treaty
on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone to further enhance and
strengthen the implementation of the Bangkok Treaty2 by implementing the Plan of
Action for the period 2007–2012, adopted in Manila on 29 July 2007, and the recent
decision of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations Political-Security
Community Council, established under the Charter of the Association, to give
priority to the implementation of the Plan of Action;
Also welcomes the resumption of direct consultations between the States
2.
parties to the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone and the five
nuclear-weapon States, and encourages States parties to the Treaty to continue direct
consultations with the five nuclear-weapon States to resolve comprehensively, in
accordance with the objectives and principles of the Treaty, existing outstanding
issues on a number of provisions of the Treaty and the Protocol thereto;
Encourages nuclear-weapon States and States parties to the Treaty on the
3.
South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone to work constructively with a view to
ensuring the early accession of the nuclear weapon States to the Protocol to the
Treaty;
Underlines the value of enhancing and implementing further ways and
4.
means of cooperation among the States parties to nuclear-weapon-free zone treaties
and the protocols thereto;
_______________
2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1981, No. 33873.
A/58/548, annex I.
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
5
Ibid., vol. 1833, No. 31363.
3

2

A/RES/66/43

5.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-eighth session
the item entitled “Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone
(Bangkok Treaty)”.
71st plenary meeting
2 December 2011

3
