United Nations

S/PV.4635

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-seventh year

4635

th meeting
Monday, 28 October 2002, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Belinga-Eboutou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Cameroon)

Members:

Bulgaria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guinea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Singapore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Syrian Arab Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Tafrov
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Traoré
Mr. Corr
Mrs. Napaul
Mr. Aguilar Zinser
Mr. Kolby
Mr. Karev
Ms. Lee
Mr. Wehbe
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Rosenblatt

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women, peace and security (S/2002/1154).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

02-66305 (E)

*0266305*

S/PV.4635

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Report of the Secretary-General on women,
peace and security (S/2002/1154)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Bangladesh,
Canada, Chile, Denmark, Egypt, Fiji, Indonesia,
Jamaica, Japan, Liechtenstein, Morocco, Namibia, New
Zealand, Pakistan, Philippines, the Republic of Korea,
South Africa and Venezuela in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Dauth
(Australia),
Mr.
Pfanzelter
(Austria),
Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh), Mr. Heinbecker
(Canada), Mr. Valdés (Chile), Ms. Løj (Denmark),
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Naidu (Fiji),
Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Mr. Neil (Jamaica),
Ms. Saiga
(Japan),
Mr.
Wenaweser
(Liechtenstein), Mr. Bennouna (Morocco),
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia), Mr. Mackay (New
Zealand), Mr. Akram (Pakistan), Mr. Yuchengco
(Philippines), Mr. Sun (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Kumalo (South Africa) and Ms. Pulido
Santana (Venezuela) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Ivan Šimonović, President of
the Economic and Social Council.
It is so agreed.

2

I invite Mr. Ivan Šimonović, President of the
Economic and Social Council, to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Ms. Carolyn
Hannan, Officer-in-Charge of the Office of the Special
Adviser on Gender Issues and the Advancement of
Women.
It is so agreed.
I invite Ms. Carolyn Hannan to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2002/1154, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on women, peace and security.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, and invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: Let me start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for your initiative in holding this
meeting on women, peace and security.
Two years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1325 (2000), a landmark step in raising
awareness of the impact of armed conflict on women
and girls, and of the vital role women play in conflict
resolution and peace-building.
Since then, the Council has continued to devote
close attention to this key aspect of international peace
and security. It has used the Arria formula to hear
directly from women living in countries mired in
conflict. During missions to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Kosovo and Sierra Leone, Council
members have met with women’s groups and networks,
and last July the Council held a further open discussion
on the issue.
Resolution 1325 (2000) has also galvanized the
United Nations system into looking more critically at
our own work, and at how we deal with gender
perspectives not only in peacemaking, peace-building
and peacekeeping, but also in humanitarian,
disarmament and reconstruction activities.

S/PV.4635

More importantly, women at the grassroots level
around the world have found the resolution an effective
tool in bringing greater attention to their needs and
priorities and in supporting their efforts to contribute to
peace processes.
My report on women, peace and security, called
for in resolution 1325 (2000), is now before the
Council. It is based on the larger study distributed to
the Council earlier this week. I hope that members will
read it closely and sustain the momentum that has been
generated. Towards that end, I would like to draw the
Council’s attention to a few issues.
The report stresses that, while many of the
experiences of women and girls in armed conflict are
similar to those of men and boys, there are important
differences. Existing inequalities between women and
men, and patterns of discrimination against women and
girls, tend to exacerbate their situation in armed
conflict.
Women and girls become particularly vulnerable
to sexual violence and exploitation. Women and
children make up the majority of the world’s refugees
and internally displaced persons. Even in refugee
camps, which are meant to be safe havens, the
vulnerability of women and girls may continue,
especially if there is a proliferation of small arms.
Some women may be forced to follow camps of armed
forces, providing domestic services or being used as
sexual slaves.
But if women suffer the impact of conflict
disproportionately, they are also the key to the solution
of conflict. Women’s groups and networks at the
grassroots level have provided many examples of the
imaginative strategies and flexible approaches required
for effective conflict prevention. They have worked
tirelessly and courageously in preserving social order
in the midst of chaos, and promoting reconciliation
through informal processes that receive very little
support. However, with few exceptions, women are not
present in formal peace negotiations.
The report calls for greater representation of
women in formal peace negotiations and for the
incorporation of gender perspectives in conflict
prevention activities and in mandates for peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations, including those
set in motion by the Council. It also stresses the need
to increase the appointment of women at the highest
levels of decision-making, including as special

representatives, deputy special representatives and
special envoys.
The report also points out serious gaps in the
legal protections available to women. Certainly,
advances have been made in recognizing women’s
rights. The legal framework is increasingly responsive
to the experiences of women and girls in conflict,
especially in cases of sexual violence, as we have seen
in the important work being carried out by the
international criminal tribunals. But much remains to
be done, particularly to improve prevention and to
combat impunity.
The report recommends the strongest possible
response to the sexual exploitation of women and girls,
including prostitution and trafficking, which can occur
in the context of peacekeeping, humanitarian activities
and other international interventions. The United
Nations and its Member States, in particular troopcontributing States, must do their utmost to ensure that
an international presence provides protection and
security for all people — women and men, girls and
boys — and does not exacerbate inequalities or lead to
an increase in violence against women and girls. The
United Nations must not and will not tolerate sexual or
other abuse by any staff — civilian, military or
humanitarian.
Two important steps in this direction are the
investigation by the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS) of allegations of sexual abuse in West
Africa, the results of which were made public earlier
this week, and the work of the Inter-Agency Standing
Committee Task Force on Protection from Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse in Humanitarian Crises.
Since the allegations leading to the OIOS report
first arose, the United Nations has been determined to
act firmly and quickly, not just in West Africa, but on a
global basis. Improved systems for recourse,
investigation and discipline are being instituted.
Mechanisms for protecting those who depend on
international aid are being strengthened, and strict
standards of behaviour — expected of all United
Nations personnel and our partners in the nongovernmental organization community — are being
adopted. I welcome those steps and reaffirm my
commitment to working closely with all involved to
ensure full and speedy action wherever necessary.
Finally, the report emphasizes the need for
extensive capacity-building. If women are to play their

3

S/PV.4635

full part in negotiating peace accords, mediating
disputes, creating new Governments, rebuilding
judicial and civil infrastructures and the many other
activities that support peace, the world needs to make
an investment in building up their skills for doing so.
This will require both political will and a much larger
pool of funding.
In addition to my own study and report, an
Independent Experts Assessment, commissioned by the
United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), has been made available to you. Elisabeth
Rehn and Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf travelled to many of
the world’s conflict zones and talked to women and
girls who have experienced the devastating impact of
conflict firsthand. Their analysis, insight and
recommendations provide additional food for thought
to this Council, as well as for the wider membership,
the United Nations system and civil society.
The world can no longer afford to neglect the
abuses to which women and girls are subjected in
armed conflict and its aftermath, or to ignore the
contributions that women make to the search for peace.
It is time that they are given the voice in formal peacebuilding and peacemaking processes that they deserve.
Sustainable peace and security will not be achieved
without their full and equal participation. Just as your
work can promote gender equality, so can gender
equality make your work more likely to succeed.
Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I should like at the outset to express my
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this open debate of the Security Council to
deliberate on the issue of women and peace and
security — an issue that occupies an important place on
the international agenda.
I should like to welcome the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, back from his trip, and to thank him
for his statement as well as for the report that is before
us, which we consider to be outstanding.
The convening of this Security Council meeting
on the second anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security is proof
of the increasing concern of the Security Council about
this very important issue, that is, the role of women in
peace and security, including in post-conflict periods.
In this regard, I should like to express our
gratitude to the delegation of Singapore for having

4

convened an Arria-formula meeting — the kind of
meeting referred to by the Secretary-General earlier —
several days ago to consider the issue of women and
peace and security.
Men, women and children suffer greatly and
catastrophically during armed conflict. However the
effect of such conflict is surely worse on women and
children because they are the most vulnerable members
of society. During periods of conflict, women shoulder
the burden of many responsibilities, including caring
for and defending their families in dire circumstances
and for obvious reasons.
The fact that women are affected by conflict and
have a direct role in mitigating its consequences surely
underlines how valuable and essential they can be in
helping to resolve conflict by participating in
negotiations leading to agreements. Women are in
touch with the masses and are fully cognizant of the
needs and demands of various sectors of society.
Enhancing the role of women in peacekeeping
and peace-building missions is essential and important,
as affirmed in Security Council resolution 1325 (2000).
We have noted the importance attached to these key
areas in the report of the Secretary-General contained
in document S/2002/1154 and in the statement he has
just made.
My delegation has read the report of the
Secretary-General, which contains a comprehensive
analysis of the impact of armed conflict on women and
the role of women in peace-building. We believe that
some of the Secretary-General’s recommendations
provide an excellent basis to build upon to reinforce
the positive steps taken so far and to address any
shortcomings that may now exist. Furthermore, the
Secretary-General’s observations reflect the facts on
the ground. We therefore believe that a greater effort
should be made to address them. In that regard, I
should like to recall the outcomes of various United
Nations conferences on women, the latest of which was
the twenty-third special session of the General
Assembly, on “Women 2000: Gender Equality,
Development and Peace for the Twenty-First Century”,
because we believe that those outcomes are important
milestones on the road to promoting the status of
women in national societies and in the international
community, as well as their role in all aspects of life,
including the subject under discussion today.

S/PV.4635

Resolution 1325 (2000) correctly expressed
concern that women and children account for the vast
majority of those adversely affected by armed conflict
because they are easily targeted. In that regard, I
cannot fail to mention the Arab women and children in
the occupied Arab territories, who are, indeed, easy
targets for the Israeli occupying forces. It would not be
an exaggeration to say that at least half, if not more, of
the victims of the Israeli military machine are women
and children. In times of conflict and occupation,
women are deprived of their right to participate in
political decision-making on issues of peace and
security, particularly if they cannot even leave their
homes or shelters. In that regard, we stress the need for
the Israeli occupying authorities to respect
international humanitarian law and the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to civilians, particularly
women and children and to put an end to the practices
that they carry out daily, violating the rights of Arab
civilians, in particular Arab women, in the occupied
Arab territories.
In the Syrian Arab Republic women are given
great importance. That is clearly shown in the
achievements made in improving the status of women
in all political, economic and social fields, based on the
equality of men and women in their rights and
obligations under the Constitution.
Mr. Rosenblatt (United States of America): We
welcome the opportunity to participate in this
discussion on women and peace and security. It has
been nearly two years to the day since the passage of
the landmark Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
and we are pleased that the Council has maintained a
focus on tracking its implementation.
We welcome the completion of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on women, peace and security
(S/2002/1154), which provides a thoughtful analysis of
the challenges confronting women and girls during
armed conflict and which offers a number of useful
recommendations on ways the international community
can help address them. We thank the Secretary-General
for presenting this report to us personally and for
sharing with us his goals for implementation of the
report’s recommendations. The report and the study
from which it is drawn provide documentation
concerning women both as victims and as actors that
cannot, in the twenty-first century, be ignored. We also
thank Carolyn Hannan, Director of the Division for the
Advancement of Women, which produced this report,

and acknowledge Noeleen Heyzer, Executive Director
of the United Nations Development Fund for Women,
whose parallel report will be released in the next few
days.
Since the adoption of Security Council resolution
1325 (2000), the United Nations, Member States and
the international community have made significant
progress in responding to the particular needs of
women in times of conflict. The Council has
recognized and supported the informal peace initiatives
of women’s groups and networks. Additionally,
establishment by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) of gender units and gender adviser
positions in missions such as the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone has made a difference on the
ground in the lives of women and girls affected by
armed conflict. We commend the efforts of DPKO,
troop-contributing countries and Council members
towards implementing resolution 1325 (2000).
However, much more remains to be done. I know
that we are in agreement that reports and discussions
about the situation of women and girls in armed
conflict are just a beginning. But reports provide the
supporting data that the Secretary-General, the
Council, the Secretariat and Member States
contributing to peace operations can use to integrate
gender
perspectives
into
all
peace-building,
peacekeeping and peacemaking efforts. Reports can
help us to determine the best way to achieve our goals
in three specific areas: to improve the lives of women
and girls who are victims of armed conflict; to ensure
that women and girls who have been combatants are
eligible for the same assistance as men; and finally, to
involve women increasingly as actors, at the grassroots level, in peacekeeping missions and at the
planning and decision-making levels at United Nations
Headquarters.
My Government supports the Secretary-General’s
recommendation set forth in the report that data
collected in research, assessments and appraisals on
peace operations be disaggregated by sex and age, and
that specific data on the situation of women and girls
be provided. That data will inform future planning and
operations. But we should not ignore the wealth of data

5

S/PV.4635

already available to us, which will enable us to begin
the integration process now.
We hope there will be an opportunity at a later
date to discuss in depth some of the issues raised in the
report and to begin to look at ways of prioritizing
action on the various recommendations. For example,
the United States would be interested in hearing the
views of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
on its progress in mainstreaming gender perspectives in
peacekeeping operations and on the challenges it faces
in promoting more gender diversity among the
peacekeeping operations staff.
We enthusiastically support an increase in gender
diversity in peacekeeping operations, and the
appointment of more women as special representatives
of the Secretary-General and as special envoys, and we
have provided the names of qualified women
candidates to the Secretary-General for that purpose.
Finally, I will just note that my delegation always
has questions regarding the budget implications of
some of the report’s recommendations, which we will
raise at the appropriate opportunity. Thank you again,
Mr. President, for convening this important and timely
meeting. We look forward to further discussion on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in the future.
Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation for
the presence of the Secretary-General at this meeting.
It is through his presence here that the report on
women, peace and security is being brought before the
Council. The report that is the basis of our work today
is undoubtedly the subject upon which the Security
Council will have to work in order to fulfil the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000). We also want to
thank the Secretary General’s Special Advisor on
Gender Issues and the Advancement of Women,
Angela King, for having supervised the preparation of
the study, and her staff and all the experts and bodies
that contributed to the preparation of the document,
including, in particular, international organizations and
non-governmental organizations that took part in the
Inter-Agency Task Force as observers. These two
documents, together with the UNIFEM study by
independent experts — which will be published shortly
but whose recommendation have already been
publicized — will serve as guidance in achieving the
objectives of resolution 1325 (2000), which as the
Secretary-General has noted, is a historic resolution.

6

This research gives us a full and detailed picture
of the strong impact, both physical and psychological,
that armed conflicts have on the lives of women and
girl children, one that we should all regard as
intolerable. The documents also speak, inter alia, of the
role of women in promoting and building peace, and of
the importance of having the gender perspective
systematically integrated into peacekeeping operations.
At the same time, the documents present a
number of specific measures to strengthen and speed
up the achievement of the objectives and
recommendations of resolution 1325 (2000). My
delegation is of the view that it is important that
Members of the United Nations, the United Nations
system in its entirety, and civil society take into
account the Secretary-General’s recommendations. We
should embrace them and begin to put them into effect
as soon as possible. The recommendations of the
independent experts, which concur with or supplement
those of the Secretary-General, are also valuable
instruments that will enable us to achieve their
objectives.
Once
we
have
begun
to
put
these
recommendations into practice, it will be necessary to
carry out detailed, regular and frequent follow-up of
the progress in fulfilling the objectives of resolution
1325
(2000).
My
delegation
supports
the
recommendations of the Secretary-General and is ready
to take an active part in the process of action and
follow-up so that the objectives set in the resolution
may be a central element in all the actions of the
United Nations in the interests of peace and security.
I wish to highlight some of the conclusions in the
Secretary-General’s report which have caught the
attention of my delegation in particular, some of which
concur with what we stated at the Council’s meeting on
the same item in July.
The report affirms what had ready been stated in
resolution 1325 (2000): the fact that women and
children suffer from the effects of armed conflict in a
different manner than men and boys, although,
generally speaking, civilian populations are the hardest
hit by current conflicts, in contrast to the aftermath
suffered in earlier ages. Women and girls are the
victims of all forms of violence, particularly sexual
violence and exploitation. Much of this aggression, as
the report indicates, enjoys the support of the high
command of the combatant forces and of the regular

S/PV.4635

armies. This is due to the fact that in most of today’s
wars, women have effectively taken on a symbolic
value as military objectives. Thus my delegation
supports the recommendation of the Secretary-General
that peace agreements under the aegis of the United
Nations should rule out any possibility of amnesty for
those committing war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide, including gender-based crimes.

emphatic in that regard, noting that the United Nations
simply should not promote the negotiation of any peace
agreement which did not, from the start, include the
full participation of women. Such participation must
not be symbolic in nature. It is necessary for women
and women’s organizations to be able to rely on
advisory services and training so that they can have a
real effect on the results of the negotiations.

In addition to highlighting the special
vulnerability of women, the report recalls that women
may also play an active role in conflict and at times are
even responsible for acts of violence against other
civilians. Women are often rejected by their
communities of origin if they are associated with
former combatants, irrespective of whether the
association is a result of voluntary decision or of an
imposition.

One positive factor is the fact that, as is noted in
the report, international law and existing strategies and
guidelines within United Nations entities provide a
strong framework for addressing gender perspectives
within the context of armed conflict and its aftermath.
It is simply a matter of taking advantage of these
instruments, expanding their impact and associating
them continuously and systematically with Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000).

Thus, women and girls need to be included in
programmes of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration into civilian life, and that reintegration
should be particularly stressed. It is important for such
programmes to include measures to prevent violence
within families, especially in families of former
combatants, in view of the clear tendency for violence
to be perpetuated or even intensified in post-conflict
periods. One factor that increases the risk of domestic
violence and violence against women in the postconflict period is the proliferation of small arms. For
this reason, women and girls often participate actively
in arms collection programmes.

The
report
contains
very
specific
recommendations about the phase of reconstruction and
rehabilitation after a conflict. Among other aspects, it
highlights the need to develop clear strategies and
action plans on the incorporation of gender
mainstreaming in rehabilitation and reconstruction
programmes, which would need to include monitoring
mechanisms.

The report also underlines the positive role that
women play in the promotion of peace. The way in
which they tend to be excluded from the formal peace
processes and the reasons for that are circumstances
that must change. One of the recommendations in the
report to remedy this situation specifically involves the
responsibility of the United Nations: that any peace
agreement sponsored by the Organization should
systematically and explicitly incorporate the gender
perspective, both in terms of recognition of the way in
which conflicts affect women and with respect to the
role women play in peace processes and their specific
needs in post-conflict phases.
Another recommendation is to ensure the
involvement of women in negotiations of peace
agreements at national and international levels. One of
the participants in the Arria-formula meeting that has
been referred to here, held a few days ago, was very

A fundamental factor in achieving sustainable
and lasting peace is ensuring that attention to gender
perspectives in economic reconstruction entails
analysis of economic policy-making from a gender
perspective, and increased participation for women in
economic decision-making along with incorporating
gender perspectives into all support for national budget
processes, in line with the outcome of the International
Conference on Financing for Development, held in
Monterrey.
My delegation would like to say that we have
previously spoken in favour of enhancing the
participation of women on all levels and in all aspects
of peacekeeping operations, in particular at the
decision-making level. Likewise we have voiced our
support for setting up a focal point for gender at United
Nations Headquarters, specifically within the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO),
along with the inclusion of gender specialists in
peacekeeping missions. In that regard, we welcome the
targets the Secretary-General will be setting for the
appointment of women as his special representatives

7

S/PV.4635

and special envoys, with the aim of achieving the
overall target of 50 per cent by the year 2015.
To ensure that the scale of the violations of the
human rights of women and girls in conflicts is
consistently recognized, the specific needs of women
in conflict and post-conflict situations must be
recognized and must receive the attention they deserve.
We must ensure that women have a better level of
participation in peace-building. In order to achieve all
of this, it is essential for the United Nations to
demonstrate
leadership
by
systematically
mainstreaming the gender perspective within the
Organization itself.
Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and the
report and the study which stemmed from it have the
potential of arousing serious expectations in civil
society, specifically among women who have been
directly affected by conflicts. We have seen a clear
example of this at last week’s Arria-formula meeting
when Ms. Angelina Atyam, of northern Uganda,
Chairperson of the Concerned Parents Association,
asked us how that resolution and subsequent Council
decisions could help end the violence committed
against civilians in that region by the so-called Lord’s
Resistance Army, which led to the abduction and
disappearance of her daughter and of thousands of
other boys and girls. Those hopes must not be betrayed.
This represents a major challenge for the United
Nations and its Member States, and is yet one more
reason for us to work consistently towards achieving
the objectives set forth in resolution 1325 (2000).
Mr. Corr (Ireland): First, Mr. President, I would
like to thank you for convening this open meeting
today on women and peace and security. I would also
like to express the appreciation of my delegation to the
Secretary-General for personally introducing his report
(S/2002/1154) this afternoon.
The representative of Denmark will shortly make
a statement on behalf of the European Union, and
Ireland, of course, fully associates itself with that
statement.
Resolution 1325 (2000) involved a two-fold
dimension: the immense and disproportionate impact of
armed conflict on women and girls, and also, crucially,
as the Secretary-General emphasized in his remarks
this afternoon, the central role women can and must
play at the centre of efforts to resolve armed conflict.
As Assistant Secretary-General Angela King said here

8

last July (see S/PV.4589), sustainable peace and lasting
security cannot be achieved without women’s
empowerment and full involvement. This is central to
the work of the United Nations. As the SecretaryGeneral put it to the Council before the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), while the United Nations was
set up to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, the Charter also proclaims the equal rights of
men and women, and we must live up to both
challenges or we shall not succeed fully in either (see
S/PV.4208, p. 2).
My delegation believes that the SecretaryGeneral’s report illustrates that this is one of the most
important issues facing the entire international
community today and that it must be at the forefront of
our agenda. We are also grateful for the
recommendations in the study coordinated by Assistant
Secretary-General King as well as for the
recommendations made by the independent experts
commissioned by UNIFEM, Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf and
Elisabeth Rehn. They point the way forward.
I would also add that my delegation fully agrees
with the observations made by the Secretary-General in
his report concerning the abuse of the human rights of
women and girls and welcomes the recommendations
he has made with a view to protecting those rights.
There are several main issues involved in our
discussion here today: that resolution 1325 (2000)
provides a blueprint for action in recognition of the
essential contribution of women to the maintenance
and promotion of peace and security; that we have
travelled some distance institutionally in implementing
resolution 1325 (2000), but that we still have far to go;
that progress depends on implementing change not
only in New York at United Nations Headquarters but
in conflict areas, in prevention of conflict, in rebuilding
after conflict around the world; that, in implementing
the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) we are
tackling fundamental issues not only of justice and
equity, but also of effective policy if conflicts are to be
prevented and war-torn societies are to be restored; and
that this issue and how to make strong and rapid
progress are among the greatest challenges facing the
United Nations and the entire international community
today.
In fully agreeing with the Secretary-General’s
recommendations, I would like to emphasize a number
of points of particular importance to my delegation.

S/PV.4635

First, the main challenge ahead is to ensure that
the recommendations and guidelines contained in the
Secretary-General’s
report
are
implemented
consistently, and to ensure that, where the United
Nations system deals with peace-making, peacemaking,
peacekeeping and peace-building, the gender
perspectives are taken fully into account as a matter of
course by the Departments centrally involved.
My delegation believes that this is of central
importance, and we welcome the recommendation in
the report for explicitly incorporating gender mandates
into all peacekeeping missions and provisions to
systematically address this issue in all reports to the
Security Council.
Secondly, it is essential to ensure that the
necessary financial and human resources are made
available for gender mainstreaming, including the
establishment of gender advisers or units in
multidimensional
peacekeeping
operations
and
capacity-building activities. Gender advisors should be
deployed at the outset of peace operations, including at
the planning stages, and should be sufficiently senior to
have an influence on the decision-making process. We
recognize the progress that has been achieved in East
Timor, Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Sierra
Leone because of the presence of full-time gender
advisers.
Thirdly, my delegation believes that an increase
in the number of women participating in the military,
civilian and humanitarian components of missions,
including at the highest level, would have an important
impact on the effectiveness of each mission. We note
the Secretary-General’s comments in the report about
steps taken to increase the number of female staff in
peace operations. We welcome the commitment the
Secretary-General has given towards achieving greater
gender equality in this area, while acknowledging the
point he makes that Member States must also be active
in this regard.
Fourthly, it is equally important to ensure that
gender issues are fully addressed in the transition from
peacekeeping to peace-building, so that the promotion
of equality and women’s rights is integrated into the
peace-building phase, as well as during humanitarian
operations and the reconstruction process. My
delegation notes with satisfaction the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation concerning the importance
of close consultations with women’s groups and

networks. From the Mano River Union to Burundi, we
have seen the crucial role that women’s groups play in
conflict resolution.
As the Secretary-General said earlier, the Security
Council, in its missions to the Great Lakes region and
elsewhere over the past year, have seen the value of
this work first hand. The full involvement of women in
negotiation of peace agreements is essential, as is the
recognition of the particular needs of women and girls
in the design and implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
On a national level, Ireland has been strongly
supportive of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
and we are anxious to see it fully implemented and
taken forward. I might add that, from our own
experiences of the peace process in Northern Ireland,
we are fully aware of the immense contribution made
by women’s civil society groups doing what the
Secretary-General once referred to as the work of
building bridges, not walls.
We believe that the issues raised in the SecretaryGeneral’s report are of the greatest importance.
Accordingly, we believe that there should be
continuous monitoring and evaluation of how different
parts of the United Nations family are doing, and what
steps could be taken to improve the system to ensure a
fully consistent and coherent approach.
Considerable progress has been made in the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). A
considerable distance still remains to be travelled. We
in the Security Council, across the range of conflict and
peacemaking issues, have no more urgent task.
Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having convened this important
meeting, which is not just an opportunity of noting the
second anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), a
historic resolution, but also a moment for us to discuss
the Secretary-General’s report on women, peace and
security. I would like to add my voice to those who
thanked the Secretary-General for having introduced
this important report. Personally, we would commend
him on the preparation of this report, which is very
detailed and comprehensive. I would also pay tribute to
Ms. Angela King, Assistant Secretary-General and
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and on the
Advancement of Women, and all her team, in the
preparation of the report, and also to Ms. Noeleen

9

S/PV.4635

Heyzer, Executive Director of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).
The presidency of the European Union, through
the representative of Denmark, will shortly be making
a detailed statement, and Bulgaria, an associate country
of the European Union, associates itself with that
statement.
The report of the Secretary-General on women,
peace and security, and the study on which it is based,
is unique in the sense that it gives a systematic account
of gender-specific activities in the context of peace and
security. It highlights the fact that women and girls are
disproportionately vulnerable in an armed conflict and
represent the majority of the victims, as well as the
majority of refugees and forceably displaced persons.
They are vulnerable to all kinds of harassment, sexual
violence in particular. At the same time, women have
to undergo discrimination in violation of their
fundamental rights.
Given the magnitude of the impact of conflict on
women and girls, the international community must
address this question urgently. The report gives a
thorough account of the difficulties that have to be
faced in order to ensure gender equality in matters of
peace and security.
The report gives specific recommendations for
actions to take to promote a programme focused on
gender-specific approaches. Implementation of these
recommendations is essential in order to achieve
progress in this area. My delegation fully endorses the
conclusions and recommendations set forth in the
report.
Bulgaria is aware of the special value of
resolution 1325 (2000) and its special role in focusing
attention on the substantial contribution that women
can make in conflict settlement and in the maintenance
and building of peace. This resolution is a model for
the integration of appropriate steps, reflecting the
consent of the international community to promote
equality between the sexes in the area of peace and
security. This is why it would be desirable for the
Security Council to fully follow up resolution 1325
(2000) and its implementation, which so far has a long
way to go.
There has been some progress in the
implementation of this resolution in specific measures
in the peacekeeping area, in particular in Timor-Leste,

10

Kosovo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Sierra Leone and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. However, we must
acknowledge that the progress made in this area is
mostly due to the presence of advisers on gender issues
and the role of women.
The Secretary-General has announced his firm
intention to apply a zero-tolerance policy when it
comes to the involvement of “blue helmets” in acts of
sexual exploitation or other acts directed against
women and girls. Bulgaria welcomes this initiative.
However, the record of this resolution is not entirely
satisfactory. Women and children are still the majority
of civilian victims in armed conflict. The problem of
eliminating all kinds of violence inflicted on women,
combating the trafficking of women and children, the
establishment of parity between women and men in
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration
activities, the return of refugees and displaced persons,
as well as the involvement of women in the
administration and in constitutional and electoral
reform, are objectives that require effective action.
We should also note that the knowledge acquired
and experience gained in this field have not been built
into the policies in the planning and execution
processes of all peacekeeping operations in terms of
humanitarian activities and reconstruction activities.
The meetings organized with the representatives
of non-governmental organizations according to the
Arria formula have also contributed to the Council’s
debates on peace processes. I take this opportunity to
thank the delegation of Singapore, in particular
Minister Christine Lee, for having organized the most
recent debate according to the Arria formula.
Those discussions have confirmed the necessity
of increasing women’s multifaceted participation in
peacekeeping operations, particularly at the highest
level. The gender-specific approach should be
incorporated into all mandates and peace plans in order
to enhance their possibilities for success. We need to
adopt appropriate mechanisms to ensure systematically
that women participate in all stages of peace
negotiations, particularly in planning, in decisionmaking and in the effective implementation of
decisions at all levels. We look forward to the adoption
and the upcoming publication by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations of multidimensional manuals
on peacekeeping operations, which should include a
specific chapter on gender parity, on the specific

S/PV.4635

conduct of certain aspects of peacekeeping operations
designed to promote gender parity, and on the followup and evolution of results.
I am convinced that the work of this meeting will
give additional impetus to the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) and that the ideas formulated
during this debate on the report of the SecretaryGeneral will enable us to make future progress.
I cannot conclude my statement without
emphasizing the extremely important role of nongovernmental organizations in the intellectual and
political debate focused on the role of women in the
area of peace and security. I should like to thank the
Secretariat for cooperating with them in order to
promote that noble cause.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Security Council’s adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000) on 31 October 2000 once again
reaffirmed the great importance of the whole range of
issues related to the contribution that women can make
to the maintenance and strengthening of international
peace and security, to the situation of women in times
of conflict and to their participation in peacemaking
and post-conflict settlements.
One result of focusing so clearly on those issues
was the report of the Secretary-General on women,
peace and security (S/2002/1154). The report is
comprehensive in scope and is thorough and analytical
in content. Its practical import is reflected in the
various tasks and recommendations it contains on how
to achieve equality between men and women, in
particular improving the protection of women and girls
in times of armed conflict and integrating gender issues
into the various aspects of peacekeeping operations.
In order to look at what the United Nations could
do in that area, we must look at the recommendations
on allocating the necessary resources — including
financial resources — for dealing with gender issues
within the framework of peacekeeping mandates. We
support the proposal to establish a senior gender
adviser post within the framework of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. That will help to improve
coordination with regard to such matters in United
Nations peacekeeping activities.
In addition, I should like to draw members’
attention to the several recommendations contained in
Section III of the report, on the international legal

framework for taking the gender factor into account in
future ad hoc tribunals. We believe that the
establishment of the International Criminal Court will
obviate the need for future emergency tribunals. That is
clearly confirmed in the Council’s approach of winding
down the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda in the near future. The gender factor is already
duly taken into account in the work of the International
Criminal Court.
We must not forget that the measures taken
through the United Nations are inadequate in
themselves. We must also take into account the special
needs of women and children in conflict situations, and
that must happen not only in words, but in fact. Women
must participate in all stages of conflict prevention and
settlement and in post-conflict peace-building.
A real contribution to resolving all those
problems can be made by civil society, including nongovernmental organizations, many of which have
considerable experience in the entire spectrum of
gender issues. No one would dispute that it is the
particularly vulnerable sectors of the population —
women, children, the elderly, the disabled, refugees,
displaced persons — who suffer most during crisis
situations and conflicts. But women and girls
themselves can also be combatants and can take an
active part in hostilities, and that is why excluding
women from negotiations on a peace settlement or on
establishing a post-conflict power structure is rather
like a delayed-action mine: their exclusion could
trigger new crisis situations.
In conclusion, I should like to thank the
Secretary-General and everyone else who participated
in preparing the report. In addition, I should like to
reaffirm our belief that women can play an important
part in conflict prevention and settlement and in peacebuilding. To achieve that goal, we must try to ensure
that they can participate equally and fully in measures
aimed at the maintenance and strengthening of
international peace and security by, inter alia,
strengthening their role in decision-making with
respect to conflict prevention and settlement.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General for his presence at the opening
of this meeting, but also, and above all, for his
commitment to this great undertaking.

11

S/PV.4635

Just one set of figures enables us to measure the
scope of today’s debate. During the First World War,
80 per cent of those who died in combat were men —
more specifically, soldiers and officers. In the conflicts
ravaging the world today, 80 per cent of victims are
civilians — more specifically, women and children.
That is just to give us some idea of the importance of
taking measures to remedy what is truly a scourge of
our time.
France fully associates itself with the statement to
be made shortly by the Danish presidency of the
European Union.
In a few days — on 31 October, to be exact — the
Council will adopt, at the initiative of the Council
President, a statement recalling that the Council
remains, more than ever, seized of the follow-up and
implementation of the provisions contained in
resolution 1325 (2000), adopted two years ago,
concerning women, peace and security. In that
presidential statement, the Council will focus on the
specific areas that require its attention and action. We
consider today’s debate appropriate for considering and
defining together the guidelines for our action in the
coming months.
The attention that the Security Council gives to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict stems
wholly from its mandate in the area of peace and
security. Of course, like the issue of the protection of
children in armed conflict, the subject of women in
armed conflict must be taken up in a spirit of
cooperation among all the various bodies of the United
Nations, as well as in a spirit of imagination, synthesis
and consensus.
Resolution 1325 (2000) sets forth three basic
principles. The first is that women are not simply
victims of armed conflict; they are, and must be, fullfledged actors in the process of resolving conflicts and
rebuilding after them. Secondly, women are involved in
the decisions and recommendations of the various
competent bodies of the United Nations. There must,
therefore, be more women in decision-making
positions. Lastly, strategies aimed at conflictprevention and strengthening peace must integrate the
gender perspective in order to take into account the
needs of women and to enable them to participate fully
in decision-making at every level.
Mr. Kofi Annan has invited us to take stock of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) two years

12

after its adoption. Let us say right away that, as he
forcefully pointed out in his report, much remains to be
done. I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
the 21 concrete and constructive actions he has
suggested. In that regard, I would like to emphasize
two points.
First, when we look at conflicts we often observe
that women’s roles are still viewed, too often, as
essentially passive ones. We must instead emphasize
participation by women at every turn. Participation was
a key word in the Beijing Platform for Action. In a
word, participation means that women should be able
to act everywhere and under all circumstances. Women
are the ones in the best position to define their
priorities on the basis of their respective situations.
Much progress has to be made in ensuring
cooperation between the United Nations and actors on
the ground. The Council should promote that
cooperation by encouraging regular contacts between
United Nations organs, on the one hand, and women’s
organizations and networks in the field, on the other.
That request is constantly made of us in fairly strong
terms, as we were reminded by the non-governmental
organizations in attendance at the Council meeting held
last week under the Arria formula on the initiative of
Ms. Christine Lee, who is here with us and whom I
would like to thank.
In that vein, allow me to cite two concrete
examples. In Afghanistan the United Nations
encouraged parties to the Bonn Agreement to include
women in their delegations. That was real progress. We
must move ahead in the same direction without letup.
My second example is from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. During the inter-Congolese dialogue held
in Sun City, South Africa, a few months ago, every
delegation included a significant number of
representatives from women’s organizations. Again,
that trend must be continued and strengthened.
Peace cannot be built without the full and
determinant involvement of women. Rebuilding
societies emerging from armed conflicts and
establishing new democratic forms of Government
must be based on the active participation of women in
political as well as, more broadly, public life. In that
regard, I would like to suggest a few specific actions.
First of all, specific measures must be
implemented to include girl soldiers in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programmes.

S/PV.4635

The report of the Secretary-General correctly notes that
girl soldiers do not currently benefit from DDR
programmes. This is something of concern to me
personally, as last year I organized a meeting that
included girl soldiers. I was truly struck by what
amounts to the virtual martyrdom of girl soldiers. I
believe this is something we must follow very closely.
Secondly, I believe that information about women
and girls in armed conflict should be made available to
the Council whenever we take up conflict situations
such as the one in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or any other conflict of concern, and not just
when we hold thematic debates such as today’s.
I should now like to turn to the role of the United
Nations itself. The United Nations must serve as an
example. Having women participate in processes to reestablish peace must also mean systematically having
women participate in every aspect of the Council’s
peacekeeping operations. In that regard, I would like to
pay tribute to the commitment of Under-SecretaryGeneral Jean-Marie Guéhenno, who at every possible
occasion has been promoting the establishment of
gender-adviser posts in many United Nations missions.
In that regard, I have a concrete proposal to
make: why not therefore establish a gender adviser
within the Department of Peacekeeping Operations?
Doing so would make it possible systematically to
include the gender dimension in every one of the 15
peacekeeping missions currently deployed. It would
also make it possible to provide better training for the
personnel being sent into the field, as well as to define
operating standards and procedures in this area.
In that connection, I would also like to mention
an example of something that we in France welcomed.
The Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees has
prepared a code of conduct to combat any possible
sexual abuse in refugee camps. That code should serve
as a basis for similar commitments required of all
personnel serving in peacekeeping operations.
France hopes that today’s debate will be an
opportunity for the Council to continue to think about
how best to develop its strategies and recommendations
when it considers how best to avoid the impact of
armed conflict on women and how to strengthen
women’s role in the rebuilding and strengthening of
peace. It is also the hope of France that the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) will in fact be implemented
in every mission established by the Council.

Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Let me begin by expressing my appreciation to the
delegation of Cameroon for convening this open
meeting and to the Secretary-General for personally
introducing his report.
Likewise, I wish to thank the Office of the
Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of
Women for preparing the report and the United Nations
Development Fund for Women for preparing the
independent experts’ assessment. We are confident that
the study and discussion of those documents will
effectively contribute to improving the situation of
women in the context of armed conflict and the
promotion of a wider understanding of the need for
their equal participation in all spheres of society.
Colombia attaches great importance to the
protection of women and the role they can and must
play in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities. That is why we firmly supported
resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and security
and have been participating in the group of friends with
a view to its implementation and dissemination.
The international community has recognized that
peace is inextricably linked to equality of opportunity
between women and men. However, despite the efforts
made to implement the commitments contained in
resolution 1325 (2000), it is clear that much more
remains to be done. To that end, the 136
recommendations included in the two reports constitute
a valuable contribution to what should be a global
strategy towards our common goal of gender equality
in relation to peace and security.
Colombia believes that the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) must be a process guided by
goals to be met in the short, medium and long terms.
We believe that, after a careful analysis of these
recommendations, the next step should be to prepare a
plan that prioritizes actions, establishes time frames
and assigns responsibilities for implementing
agreements.
The members of the Council will reflect the
views expressed in this debate and their first reaction to
some of the recommendations in a presidential
statement to be adopted on 31 October, the second
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Moreover, Colombia believes it highly important that
the efforts of the Council in this respect go hand in
hand with the work being done by the General

13

S/PV.4635

Assembly to implement and follow up on the
commitments contained in the Beijing Declaration and
Platform for Action and the Outcome Document
adopted at the special session on gender equality,
development and peace for the twenty-first century,
held in 2000.
My delegation would now like to react to some of
the issues contained in the reports.
In the first place, we recognize the need to
facilitate the active involvement of women in peace
processes and in the larger context of decision-making
in order to ensure that their needs are adequately
covered in the social and political arrangements
resulting from peace negotiations. We believe that the
Council can play an important role in this regard by
promoting the inclusion of clauses favouring their
participation in peace agreements.
We share the views of the Secretary-General
emphasizing the important role of women's
organizations and we welcome his intention to
establish a database of gender specialists and women's
groups and networks in countries and regions in
conflict. The meetings with these groups held by
members of the Council in their missions to the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Kosovo and Sierra
Leone, as well as those held under the Arria formula,
have contributed positive elements to the Council’s
debates on peace processes.
Secondly, I would like to refer to peacekeeping
operations in order to reiterate the importance of
integrating gender perspectives into the mandates of all
missions, standard procedures, manuals and other
guidance materials, as well as in the provision of
gender-sensitive staff training. Colombia notes with
appreciation the efforts made so far by the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations. We believe it necessary to
ensure that such efforts be undertaken systematically
through the creation of focal points with qualified
personal, both within the Department and in the field.
To that end, we highly value the experience of
including gender advisers in several peacekeeping
missions, such as those in Timor-Leste, Kosovo, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Sierra Leone. Likewise, Colombia
strongly supports the Secretary-General’s policy of
zero tolerance regarding abuses committed by
peacekeepers and humanitarian personnel involved in

14

the protection of and assistance to communities
affected by armed conflict.
Lastly, I wish to underline the importance of
working through mechanisms that allow us to
overcome the impunity of crimes committed against
women and children, especially in the context of armed
conflict. My delegation considers the strengthening of
national legislation and capacity to penalize and
redress all forms of violence against women to be
fundamental to any attempt towards reconciliation. We
believe that full support for all women and children
survivors of such violence is an essential part of
societies’ reconstruction process and should be
included in aid programmes following conflict.
On several occasions, my country has expressed
its view that one of the more outstanding aspects of
resolution 1325 (2000) is the important role played by
civil society organizations, and especially by the many
women’s organizations that contributed to the process
leading to the adoption and implementation of the
resolution and its provisions.
My delegation is pleased to see that this has
become an ongoing process and wishes to express its
readiness to continue to work with the SecretaryGeneral and Member States in the integration of gender
equality into activities related to peace and security.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At the outset, I wish to thank the Secretary-General for
personally introducing his report. I also wish to thank
Ms. Angela King, Ms. Hannan and the relevant
agencies of the United Nations for their efforts to
advance the full participation of women in the cause of
peacekeeping. We thank them for their efforts and for
the valuable views they have put forward.
The Chinese delegation welcomes and has
carefully read the report submitted by the SecretaryGeneral. It is very comprehensive and valuable. We
attach great importance to the 21-point action plan
drafted by the Secretary-General and are carefully
studying them at this point. We also hope to engage in
an in-depth exchange of views with all sides on its
feasibility. China particularly welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s goal of attaining a 50-per cent appointment
ratio for female special representatives and special
envoys by 2015. China is also actively seeking suitable
candidates.

S/PV.4635

In any armed conflict, the most grievously
harmed victims are women. We must therefore take all
necessary measures to protect their rights and interests.
We must also recognize that, in preventing conflicts,
promoting reconciliation and rebuilding societies,
women truly play an extremely important role. We
should give full play to their advantages and potential.
The international community has also reached a
consensus on that and has adopted a series of
international instruments to strengthen that. In recent
years, the Security Council has deliberated on this
matter on several occasions and has incorporated the
gender perspective into specific peacekeeping
operations’ mandates, such as in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Timor-Leste. When the Security
Council sends missions to conflict areas like Sierra
Leone and Kosovo for on-site observation, it also
listens closely to the views and suggestions of local
women’s organizations, which fully reveals the
importance the Council attaches to that matter.
At the same time, we believe that we can protect
women’s rights and interests only through curbing
conflicts, promoting development, reducing poverty,
eliminating the root causes of strife and through
development. Therefore, on one hand, we should give
full consideration to a gender perspective in places
where conflicts have already taken place, support the
Secretary-General’s recommendations on implementing
a policy of zero tolerance with respect to peacekeepers,
maintain a database on gender specialists and women’s
groups and networks in conflict countries and regions,
give full play to the role of local women’s
organizations, promote their participation in decisionmaking and pay close attention to the gender dimension
in the process of disarmament and reintegration into
society. We call on the parties concerned to start taking
action to implement those recommendations.
On the other hand, we should adopt effective
measures to prevent and curb conflicts and, in that
context, give full consideration to the gender
perspective. To that end, China supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation concerning women’s
participation in peace negotiations and in promoting
reconciliation. We strongly appeal to the parties to a
conflict to abide by international humanitarian law and
to respect human rights. The Security Council should
make further efforts to effectively prevent and curb
conflicts and take all measures to prevent situations in
which the achievements of the international community

in protecting the rights and interests of women and
giving full play to their role unravel because of the
outbreak of a war or conflict.
The Secretary-General’s report reflects the
various aspects of women’s participation in the peace
process. Truly meeting the special needs of women and
giving full play to their unique role requires the
concerted efforts of all sides. The best results can be
achieved only when the United Nations agencies
emphasize the overall advantages of such a course. In
proceeding in its work, the Security Council should
fully respect the work being done by the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and
relevant agencies.
Ms. Napaul (Mauritius): Thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this meeting today. On behalf
of my delegation, I wish to thank the Secretary-General
for introducing personally the report on the results of
the study on the impact of armed conflict on women
and girls and on the role of women in peace-building
and the gender dimensions of peace processes and
conflict resolution. Our delegation found the
observations very useful, and we support the
recommendations fully.
This week we mark the second anniversary of
landmark resolution 1325 (2000). Indeed, much has
been done to bring into focus the problems faced by
millions of women and girls in armed conflicts
throughout the world. However, despite increased
attention to that issue, the daily lives of women and
girls in armed conflict areas have not improved to the
extent we would wish them to have. We have yet to see
the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
We welcome the concrete and practical
recommendations in the report before us. We would
wish all of them to be implemented as quickly as
possible, but, to be practical, perhaps the Council needs
to prioritize them in such a way that we could
implement those that would show immediate results.
The increase in the participation of women in all
aspects of peace operations, among international staff
and particularly at the highest levels of decisionmaking, has been identified as a priority and should be
implemented immediately. In that regard, the
Secretary-General’s intention of setting concrete
targets to appoint women as his special representatives
and special envoys, with a view to gender parity by
2015, is praiseworthy. We hope that Member States

15

S/PV.4635

will seize that opportunity and will submit nominations
of qualified women for those posts.
The Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, which is currently
looking into ways of enhancing the role of special
representatives of the Secretary-General, has made a
recommendation for the appointment of more women
at that level.
There is a need for more women in peacekeeping
missions to act as role models. It is an undeniable fact
that the presence of women in missions helps facilitate
contact and foster confidence and trust among local
women. Concrete examples can be seen in TimorLeste, Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina, where
gender units and gender advisers of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor, the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo have contributed respectively to capacitybuilding among local women. The recruitment of
officers with specific expertise in issues such as gender
bias and sexual violence by the Civilian Police
Division of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is another positive step to be encouraged.
Additionally,
training
of
personnel
of
peacekeeping missions to develop awareness,
commitment and capacity on the relevant gender
perspectives needs reinforcement. We remain
concerned at the limited availability of human and
financial resources, both at Headquarters and in field
missions, to effectively promote gender mainstreaming.
We hope that necessary resources will soon be released
to enable the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to fulfil its gender mainstreaming responsibilities in
line with resolution 1325 (2000). We urge those
responsible to take concrete action in that regard.
In almost all States that have had armed conflict,
women have been denied justice. Crimes against them
have gone unrecorded. In many cases, increased
violence against women has continued in post-conflict
periods, be it at home, on the street or in camps. Those
who have survived sexual violence do not talk about it
because of fear of rejection by their family or
community. They have often been humiliated, mocked
and laughed at during their testimony in courts. They
have nowhere to turn and are left struggling to recover
and return to meaningful community life. We would
like to draw attention here to the positive and important

16

role played by non-governmental organizations by
increasing awareness and helping to alleviate the
miseries of women in such situations.
With very few exceptions, those who have
committed heinous crimes against women in wars have
not been punished, nor have the women been granted
redress.
We need to put an end to this culture of impunity.
My delegation strongly supports the recommendation
of the Secretary-General to condemn all violations of
the human rights of women and girls in situations of
armed conflict and to ensure that amnesty provisions
included in peace agreements exclude impunity from
all war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide,
including gender-based crimes.
Additionally,
judicial
and
quasi-judicial
mechanisms set up by the Council need to apply
international legal standards in gender-sensitive
matters. It is reported that the two ad hoc tribunals —
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) — have both been
hampered by serious lapses and inconsistencies in the
prosecution of crimes of sexual and gender violence.
In a few cases, women have had to withdraw their
complaints because the Tribunals failed to provide
adequate support and protection, as required by the
rules of the Tribunal. There is therefore an urgent need
to ensure that the interests of all victims are properly
protected.
Central to any transition process is the need to
take account of the different needs of women and men
at all stages of the rebuilding of societies and of the
importance of concrete mechanisms to ensure that all
men and women enjoy freedom and participate equally
in rehabilitation and reconstruction.
There is a need for the implementation of quickimpact projects for women in countries emerging from
conflicts that will ensure their early rehabilitation in
cases where they have been subjected to severe abuse.
Systematic attention should also be given to the
incorporation of gender perspectives in economic
reconstruction programmes and to the involvement of
women in decision-making. They should also benefit
directly from resources mobilized through multilateral
and bilateral donors.

S/PV.4635

Finally, words alone are not the solution to the
problems of millions of women and girls in situations
of armed conflict. The Council needs to be updated
regularly
on
the
progress
made
on
the
recommendations of the Secretary-General to alleviate
the sufferings of these women and girls and to
eliminate all discrimination against them.
Mr. Traoré (Guinea) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, on behalf of my delegation, I should like to
thank you for convening this public debate, which
deals with an extremely important and topical issue:
women and peace and security. I should like also to pay
tribute to the Secretary-General and to thank him for
his excellent report and for his statement.
The various conferences on women — in Mexico
in 1975, in Nairobi in 1985, in Beijing in 1995 — and
the Windhoek Declaration and Plan of Action of 2000
provided the basis for our resolution 1325 (2000). That
resolution deals with the impact of armed conflict on
women and girls, their role in conflict prevention and
resolution, and their contribution to peace-building.
The resolution calls on the various players to
shoulder their responsibilities for implementing the
recommendations relating to gender issues in general
and to the situation of women in armed conflict in
particular.
Recently, in this very Chamber, as a prelude to
this meeting, we held a public debate on follow-up to
resolution 1325 (2000). At that meeting, Ms. Heyzer
ended her statement by telling us of a message from a
13-year-old girl who had been kidnapped in northern
Uganda by the Lord’s Resistance Army. She said:
“I want to go to school. I want to rebuild my life.
How can you help me?” (S/PV.4589, p. 8)
At our meeting today, we must be able to find an
answer to that question. That is why my delegation is
pleased that the report takes account of such important
factors as socio-cultural considerations; protecting
women and girls from armed conflict; their
participation in peace processes, including in
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration; and
gender equality. This is an indication of the importance
that the international community attaches to the
suffering of women and girls in armed conflict and of
its resolve to end that suffering.
We endorse the recommendations in the report,
and we would like also to emphasize that the new intra-

State nature of conflicts has given rise, inter alia, to
problems relating to the proliferation of small arms and
light weapons and to the failure to respect international
humanitarian law and human rights.
In this context, my delegation believes that the
following aspects must be thoroughly studied:
prevention, education, health, coordination and
cooperation, women and girl soldiers, and socioeconomic considerations.
It is our hope that the forthcoming meeting on
women and small arms and the conference to be held in
Chile in November on women in peacekeeping
operations will provide useful outcomes.
We welcome the coordination within the United
Nations system as part of the follow-up to resolution
1325 (2000), and we believe that there should also be
coordination between the organizations concerned and
the various actors.
My country is ready to make its contribution on
the basis of the experience we have acquired on the
ground through the Guinean branch of the Network of
African Women Ministers and Parliamentarians
(REFAMP), supported by the Mano River Union
Women’s Network.
We also encourage the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Special Adviser on
Gender Issues in their efforts to prepare a guide on the
multidimensional aspects of peacekeeping operations.
We hope that the guide, once completed, will be made
available to Member States.
I should like to point out also that the end of war
does not mean the restoration of peace. Once peace has
been restored, it must be strengthened if it is to be
lasting. That means that adequate financial resources
have to be made available and decisive action taken by
the international community. In this connection, we
welcome the fact that last year the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) earmarked
$14 million for the question of women and peace and
security.
Lastly, I think that we can draw inspiration from
the ideas voiced here so that we can work more
effectively to find a solution to the ills that afflict
women, who are our daughters — including that young
Ugandan girl — our sisters, our wives, our mothers and
our grandmothers.

17

S/PV.4635

Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
representative of Denmark will speak later on behalf of
the European Union, and my delegation endorses what
she will say. I would just like to make a few additional
observations in my national capacity.
I would like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his excellent report on the follow-up to
resolution 1325 (2000), which we passed almost
exactly two years ago, and also for his pointed
introduction to this debate. The report sets out the
problems very well and is very clear in its
recommendations. We can support them all.
I also express warm appreciation for the excellent
work of the Secretariat in this area, and I share the
praise bestowed by previous speakers on the efforts of
Angela King and Carolyn Hannan in particular.
The Secretary-General’s report is concise and
well focused and correctly emphasizes what needs to
be done to implement the provisions of resolution 1325
(2000) and to ultimately ensure that all stages of
conflict management are more effective. Before I turn
to it in detail, I should like to make a couple of general
points.
First, it is important to remember that women are
not solely victims of war. They also make tremendous
contributions
to
conflict
resolution,
conflict
management and peace-building. They can of course be
combatants themselves. While the Secretary-General’s
report is right to place emphasis on women in need of
protection during conflict, we should also see them as
potential participants, particularly in peace processes.
For example, in our own national experience, women’s
groups in Northern Ireland play an ongoing important
role in the peace process.
Secondly, following on from that, nongovernmental organizations in civil society are
important
players
in
promoting
peace
and
reconstruction and in protecting women’s rights. We
are pleased to see that the Secretary-General’s report
emphasizes regular grass-roots contacts. Such contacts
need to be flexible; in some circumstances women in
areas of armed conflict are not organized in any formal
or identifiable way.
The report draws out many important points, and
I would like to provide five examples. We strongly
support the recognition that promoting gender equality
is not just women’s responsibility. We agree that

18

reconstruction efforts have to be based on human rights
principles and non-discrimination. We support an
increase in the number of programmes to meet the
needs of child soldiers, specifically girl soldiers. And
we support the objective of a 50-50 gender balance in
all areas of peace operations by 2015. We believe that
the creation of a database of gender specialists would
be a helpful development.
Our focus in the Council, however, as most of us
have said, needs now to be on the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), to which the SecretaryGeneral’s report is a very useful contribution. The
Council’s work is of course part of a wider strategy.
Gender mainstreaming has an essential part to play in
the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals. Conflict management — and that is the context
of our debate today — is crucial to the implementation
of those Goals.
Let us look at the facts. In conflict areas, women
make an important but often unrecognized contribution
as peace educators, both in their households and in the
wider community. Refugee and displaced women often
display remarkable endurance and resourcefulness and
can contribute positively to post-conflict reconstruction
and peacekeeping operations. They need to be involved
more fully in decisions that effect them and their
community. They perform generally better than men in
the control and management of economic resources —
for example, credit schemes — and of natural
resources, such as land and water. This is fundamental
to the success of a society in the post-conflict phase.
The United Nations system needs to move quickly to
enable women to contribute effectively to the
reconstruction or rehabilitation process.
The monitoring of human rights should be
included in the mandates of peacekeeping operations,
few of which make any specific reference to women
and girls. Personnel in peacekeeping operations should
be trained on the gender perspective before
deployment — an aspect on which the United Kingdom
is working with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. Respect for women, and an absence of
impunity for those who do not show such respect, must
be ubiquitous, both inside and outside the United
Nations system.
One element that is not brought out in the report
is the need to place United Nations work on women,
peace and security within the broader humanitarian

S/PV.4635

framework. The Security Council has in the past
delivered key messages on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and on children affected by armed
conflict. It is essential to construct working links
between all of those areas. We would like to see the
United Nations system operating in cross-cutting ways
that integrate this work into programmes on the
ground. We will return to these same themes next
month when the Council discusses the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the protection of civilians.
I would like to make one last point. It is essential
for gender mainstreaming within the United Nations
system to be taken up by the operators and agencies
concerned, drawing on the support of the expert gender
bodies. Progress on gender will not be made unless all
parts of the United Nations system assume
responsibility for leading in their own areas on matters
relating to gender.
Work has already begun on a presidential
statement to follow up the Secretary-General’s report.
This must take gender mainstreaming forward, and not
content itself with recycling analysis, however good
such analysis may be. The Council has to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and the Secretary-General’s
recommendations in its regular work, until we know
that a gender perspective is properly integrated into all
of our relevant work. For that purpose, and to introduce
a touch of accountability into our procedures, I wonder
whether, each year as we apportion jobs among
members of the Council, we should not ask one
delegation to oversee the implementation of our agreed
decisions on gender mainstreaming, working with the
appropriate parts of the Secretariat to achieve it,
because whenever women are disadvantaged in
conflict, we owe them some results.
Ms. Lee (Singapore): Almost two years ago, the
Security Council passed the landmark resolution 1325
(2000) unanimously. I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open meeting
for us to review what we have done to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for being present earlier today to
introduce his report.
The report which we have before us is an
excellent and very comprehensive one, with many
recommendations that we can support. For example, we
support the Secretary-General’s proposals for gender
advisers and gender units in peacekeeping operations,

and for women to be included in the negotiation of
peace agreements. Our appreciation goes also to
Ms. Carolyn Hannan, of the Division for the
Advancement of Women, and to Ms. Noeleen Heyzer,
of the United Nations Development Fund for Women
(UNIFEM), for their efforts on this issue.
At an earlier meeting on conflict, peacekeeping
and gender in July this year, we said that we were
ignoring an invisible elephant of scepticism among
Member States by our failure to incorporate a gender
perspective into peace and security issues. We also said
that we needed to show that what we were doing was
not an abstract exercise, but one which would have an
impact on real lives. In this regard, instead of
reiterating the points made by many of our colleagues
with
regard
to
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations, we thought that it might be useful to
mention how Singapore has been trying to play its part
on this issue, including through the Arria-formula
meeting on women, peace and security that we chaired
last Wednesday, 23 October.
Since there is no formal mechanism whereby the
information shared at the Arria-formula meeting can be
transmitted to the Council, we feel that we need to
share some of what was said at the meeting, so that the
public record of this debate will be a testimony of what
was transmitted to us. We hope that, by putting on
record what was said, these accounts will be
remembered when the topic of women, peace and
security is raised again.
At that meeting, we heard poignant and
passionate statements from women who had been
personally affected by the conflict. For example, we
heard a direct account of how women had been affected
by the conflict in Burundi and how they had played a
part in the Arusha Peace Accords. We also heard about
the Lord’s Resistance Army attacks on camps for
refugees and internally displaced persons in northern
Uganda and the sexual and gender-based violence that
was often inflicted during such attacks.
Fortunately, one point which emerged from the
Arria-formula meeting is that the Security Council is
clearly fully committed to implementing resolution
1325 (2000). But we are barraged by recommendations
from all sides — some presented by the SecretaryGeneral through his report, some by the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) in its soonto-be-released independent assessment and, lastly,

19

S/PV.4635

some by non-governmental organizations through their
materials. A cursory glance at the documents will show
that many of the recommendations are similar and can
be amalgamated and clustered.
At the Arria-formula meeting, some members
therefore felt that there was a need to prioritize. The
Security Council needs the help of relevant agencies to
reorganize and integrate the recommendations. But
more important, the relevant agencies need to prioritize
what needs to be done first. We simply cannot do
everything at once. For example, at the Arria-formula
meeting, a representative from the non-governmental
organization (NGO) Working Group on Women, Peace
and Security felt that the key priority was for a gender
unit to be set up at Headquarters and for all
peacekeeping operations to have a gender adviser. This
is all well and good, but merely saying it will not make
it so. The NGO Working Group, UNIFEM, the
Department for the Advancement of Women and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) will
need to sit down and work out the possible terms of
reference for the gender unit and the advisers. One of
the UNIFEM experts, Ms. Elisabeth Rehn, also
reminded us that we will have to bear in mind that the
gender adviser should be of sufficiently high rank to
have direct access to the Special Representatives of the
Secretary-General. And of course, we will need to find
the funding to ensure that adequate resources are
provided for those offices.
Unless we can decide what our first step should
be and map out clearly the route to take toward fully
implementing resolution 1325 (2000), we are likely to
go around in circles. What is urgently needed, as our
Colombian colleague mentioned at the Arria-formula
meeting — and as Ambassador Valdivieso reminded us
again today — is a timeline or a programme of action
for the effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). In that regard, Singapore would be happy to
work with Cameroon and our other colleagues on the
planned presidential statement to provide for concrete
initial steps that could be taken.
Mr. Kolby (Norway): Norway aligns itself with
the statement to be given by Austria on behalf of the
Human Security Network later in this debate. Allow
me, however, at this stage to make the following
remarks in my national capacity.
Resolution 1325 (2000), which was adopted two
years ago, has put the gender issue on the agenda of the

20

Council in a new way. It has provided us with an
instrument to ensure the full and equal participation of
women at all levels of decision-making and of the
implementation of peace processes, including conflict
prevention
and
resolution
and
post-conflict
reconstruction.
Moreover,
the
resolution
has
contributed significantly to ensuring that gender issues
are systematically taken into account when conflict and
peace efforts are being considered by the United
Nations system as a whole. There is, however, still a
long way to go before the strategy of gender
mainstreaming can be said to be fully reflected in these
activities.
We welcome the recent report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2002/1154), in which he highlights the
findings of the groundbreaking study by his Special
Adviser on Gender Issues. The study convincingly
demonstrates that the linkages between gender equality
and peace are pervasive and powerful. Its main
conclusion is that sustainable peace and lasting security
cannot be achieved without women’s empowerment
and full involvement.
The progress we have made so far on gender
issues related to peace and security makes it
abundantly clear how much we will gain by further
intensifying our efforts. Our point of departure is that
women have a pivotal role to play in the prevention
and peaceful resolution of conflicts and in post-conflict
peace-building. Yet women are systematically kept at a
distance from the very processes that stand to gain
from their participation.
Our main concern is how to ensure that women
do indeed exercise their right to participate in shaping
and securing the peaceful development of the
communities in which they live. Our goal is that gender
issues take their rightful place in Council affairs and
thereby become part and parcel of our efforts to
promote international peace and security. Our task is to
give new impetus to the important work being done to
mainstream a gender perspective in peace operations.
Women are a resource that should be included at all
levels of peace planning and peacemaking.
We must ensure that gender-specific aspects of
peace operations are reflected in reports to the Security
Council. All too often, reports submitted to the Council
do not include a gender perspective. Moreover, in
peace operations the Council must ensure that
international humanitarian and human rights law is

S/PV.4635

fully implemented. That would ensure the protection of
the rights of women and girls during and after
conflicts.
The low level of participation of women in
leading positions in United Nations peacekeeping
operations should be addressed. Efforts should be made
to identify and to promote women candidates both in
peace missions and as special representatives of the
Secretary-General.
The establishment of a gender focal point in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has been
debated in the General Assembly’s Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
and in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations on numerous occasions. We are hopeful that
the proposal will finally be approved by the
Assembly’s Fifth Committee at the end of this year.
Finally, peacekeeping personnel need to be
trained in the fields of protection, human rights and the
special needs of women and children in conflict
situations. In line with this, Norway has argued for a
strategy of zero tolerance in relation to sexual
exploitation of women by peacekeeping personnel.
The Security Council is the primary global body
for promoting international peace and security. As
such, we would like to see it become more involved in
bringing together peace and security, on the one hand,
and development cooperation, humanitarian assistance
and the promotion of human rights, on the other.
Gender issues have a bearing on both peace and
development, and women are an asset in the promotion
of both. By focusing on women and peace in a broader
contextual framework, the Council could assume an
even more efficient role in addressing the interlinked
scourges of war, poverty and suffering around the
world.
We have every reason to give women a greater
role in decision-making in connection with conflict
prevention and resolution. Not only do women have a
legitimate role to play in peace processes, but, in our
experience, their full participation makes a significant
contribution to the general maintenance and promotion
of peace. That is one reason why Norway argued
strongly in favour of active participation by women in
the peace talks on Afghanistan.
Norway stands fully behind the recommendations
of the Secretary-General’s report on women, peace and

security. We note with particular satisfaction that the
focus is more and more explicitly being put on women
as active players in promoting peace and security,
rather than merely as victims of conflict.
It is imperative that the Security Council actively
follow up the actions proposed by the SecretaryGeneral in response to resolution 1325 (2000). In this
regard we are pleased to note that the proposed actions
include practical and detailed mechanisms to ensure
accountability for gender mainstreaming.
The President (spoke in French): I will now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Cameroon.
I wish to first thank the Secretary-General, who
came this afternoon to personally introduce his report
on the impact of armed conflict on women and girls, as
well as on the role of women in peace-building. In
doing this, he confirmed, if that were necessary, his
firm commitment and determination to help eradicate
the causes of conflicts and their consequences for the
most vulnerable civilian populations, particularly
women and children.
I also wish to pay a well deserved tribute to
Ms. Angela King, Special Adviser on Gender Issues
and Advancement of Women, and to Ms. Noeleen
Heyzer, Director of UNIFEM, for their major
contribution to the preparation of this instructive and
thorough report. In addition, I would like to pay tribute
to Ms. Carolyn Hannan, who is present with us at this
discussion.
The Beijing Declaration and Plan of Action quite
correctly underscored that the consequences of armed
conflicts and other conflicts were among the major
concerns for women in today’s world. The Security
Council reaffirmed the role of women in the peace
processes at the celebration of International Women’s
Day on 8 March 2000. It was along these lines that for
the first time it devoted its work to the consideration of
the question of women, peace and security. In doing so,
it clearly highlighted the specific situation of women
and girls in the context of the protection of civilians in
armed conflicts.
On 31 October 2000, the Council unanimously
adopted resolution 1325 (2000) on women, peace and
security. The goal of that resolution was, and remains,
to ensure that women and girls in conflict situations are
protected and that those committing acts of violence

21

S/PV.4635

against them in conflict situations are prosecuted, and
that women may, on equal footing, occupy their proper
place when it comes to taking decisions on questions of
peace and security.
The Government of Cameroon fully endorses this
important objective, which is fully in line with the
efforts it has made on the national level to provide
protection for women and girls in situations of armed
conflict. I note here that this dynamic programme for
the advancement of women in a broad range of
activities associated with peace and security is backed
by a collection of normative texts. Cameroon has
acceded to the four 1949 Geneva Conventions, which
deal with the protection of victims of war and of
women and girls in situations of armed conflict, and to
most instruments relating to human rights. It is also a
signatory of the statute that created the International
Criminal Court and is preparing to ratify it.
We are therefore genuinely pleased to welcome
the report of the Secretary-General in document
S/2002/1154. The recommendations therein take stock
of the strategies to be implemented to promote
partnership between women and men in order to
enhance the effectiveness of the multidimensional
peacekeeping operations.
Cameroon and the Central African region have
played an active part in the preparation of the proposals
in this report. On the initiative of UNIFEM, and in
conjunction with the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa, a
regional consultation on the topic “Parity and
Development: participation of women in Central
Africa” was held in Douala from 22 to 30 May 2002. It
provided an opportunity for regional actors, women
and civil society in particular, to make forceful
suggestion about ways and means of promoting
implementation of Security Council resolution 1325
(2000).
The work done at Douala resulted in the adoption
of a regional plan of action for which follow-up will be
provided by a group comprised of representatives of
Governments and civil society. That plan of action
identifies a set of problems that underlie conflicts in
the region and their consequences for women,
consequences associated with, among other things,
their marginalization, the unlawful circulation of
weapons, and failure to comply with relevant national
and international legal instruments.

22

The Douala plan of action advocates a number of
measures that if implemented would significantly
improve the situation of women vis-à-vis peace and
security. It proposes, among other things, that
consciousness-raising campaigns be organized to
combat impunity; that the networks of Central African
women be reactivated in order to engage in activities to
promote peace in the countries of the sub-region; that a
study be carried out on traditional conflict management
practices;
that
the
weapons-for-development
programme be implemented; that a dialogue be
organized with men in uniform and militia personnel;
and that peaceful demonstrations be organized in
favour of peace and security.
Before I conclude, I wish to commend the Arriaformula meeting of 23 October 2002 on the question of
women, peace and security, which made it possible to
hear some particularly moving testimony concerning
the situation actually experienced in the field by some
of the participants. That meeting was also an
opportunity for us to engage in a profound process of
thinking along with civil society about ways of
enhancing the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000).
The role played by women in conflict prevention,
in encouraging reconciliation and helping to rebuild
what, alas, is destroyed by conflicts has been very
clearly described. The Arria-formula meeting,
skillfully chaired by Minister Lee, produced a number
of recommendations relating, among other things, to
the incorporation of gender specific measures in the
mandates of peacekeeping missions, and the real
participation of women in peace negotiations. All of
these measures converged to a great extent with those
presented in the report of the Secretary-General which
my delegation supports unreservedly. I am convinced
that were these measures to be implemented, they
would lead to genuine advancement for women and
greater appreciation of their role, and thus, to their full
and complete involvement in the promotion of peace
and security.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council. I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ivan
Šimonović, President of the Economic and Social
Council.
Mr. Šimonović: Let me first congratulate you,
Sir, for organizing this debate and thank you for
inviting me to participate.

S/PV.4635

Those of us who have lived it know the terrible
impact of war. While women and girls endure the same
trauma as the rest of the population, they are also
targets of specific forms of violence and abuse
including sexual violence and exploitation. Moreover,
their needs and their potential for contributions have
generally tended to be at the margins of efforts to
prevent armed conflict or to restore peace and rebuild
economies and societies.
The considerations of the Security Council on the
subject of women, peace and security two years ago
resulted in Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), a
landmark in the recognition of the importance of
women’s full involvement in all efforts for the
maintenance of peace and security. The need to
increase women’s role in conflict management,
peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-building was also
clearly
recognized.
The
study,
report
and
recommendations of the Secretary-General called for in
resolution 1325, and now before the Security Council,
constitute a very important step forward, with
significant analysis and proposals for action.
While resolution 1325 addressed the vital matter
of economic, social and human rights concerns from
the perspective of the Security Council, the present
report on women, peace and security addresses those
issues in a holistic manner offering a much broader
perspective. We in the Economic and Social Council
have also been eagerly waiting to see the report of the
study that will, in my opinion, require action from
Member States, the United Nations system and civil
society.
I would like to commend the participatory
process of the preparation of the Secretary-General’s
study on women, peace and security and its able
coordination by Ms. Angela King, the Special Adviser
of the Secretary-General on Gender Issues and
Advancement of Women. I would also like to thank
Ms. Carolyn Hannan for her important contribution. It
is my understanding that the United Nations
Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)’s study on
the same issues (embargoed until 31 October 2002)
envisaged by its Executive Director, Ms. Noeleen
Heyzer, and prepared by independent experts, will
provide additional complementary information and
recommendations for action.
This past July, the Economic and Social Council
adopted resolution 2002/23, on mainstreaming a gender

perspective into all policies and programmes in the
United Nations system. The Council called for action at
all levels by Member States and all other actors of the
United Nations system, and decided to intensify its
efforts to ensure that gender mainstreaming is an
integral part of all activities in its work and that of its
subsidiary bodies. This builds upon agreed conclusions
adopted by the Economic and Social Council in 1997,
and it is a clear outcome of the decision to establish a
regular sub-item on the subject in the work of the
Economic and Social Council.
In resolution 2002/23 the Economic and Social
Council identified several key elements for progress in
gender mainstreaming that resonate well in today’s
deliberations. These include, first, identifying gender
equality as an essential element for the realization of
sustainable development at large, as it is an issue that
cuts across areas of policy; secondly, stressing the need
to include women in planning, decision-making, and
implementation processes at all levels; thirdly,
emphasizing the link between human rights and gender
equality; fourthly, recognizing that men and women are
often affected differently by political, economic, social
and environmental factors, and that policies need to
address this; and fifthly, calling for sex-differentiated
data and indicators as essential elements for accurate
analysis.
It is true that in recent years the understanding of
and commitment to gender equality and gender
mainstreaming has increased significantly. However,
many persistent constraints remain, including
conceptual confusion, inadequate understanding of the
linkages in different areas of work, and gaps in
capacity to address the necessary issues once
identified.
The report and recommendations before us today
on women, peace and security, make a great
contribution by clarifying major findings, challenges
and actions that are necessary in this important area. As
stated by the Secretary-General, “Sustainable peace
will not be achieved without the full and equal
participation of women and men” (S/2002/1154,
para. 68). I can assure you that the deliberations today
in the Security Council will be of particular concern to
the Economic and Social Council as well. Relevant
findings on women, peace and security, among others,
represent a valuable guideline for the Council’s newly
established ad hoc advisory group on Guinea-Bissau.

23

S/PV.4635

Peace and security, and economic and social
affairs, are not just linked. It is important that we
realize that they are different sides of the same coin,
and that on this coin there is the face of a woman.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker is the representative of Denmark. I invite her to
take a seat at the Council table and to make her
statement.
Ms. Løj (Denmark): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The countries of
Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia — and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association country member of the
European Economic Area Iceland, align themselves
with this statement.
We appreciate that this important issue is once
again on the agenda of the Security Council and
welcome the Report of the Secretary-General on
women, peace and security.
In the statement to the Security Council on 25
July 2002 I presented the European Union views with
regard to conflict, peacekeeping and gender. Based on
this, I then provided some practical proposals for
consideration in the study on women, peace and
security. The report of the Secretary-General in front of
us today highlights the major findings of the study and
it would therefore be appropriate for me to offer some
comments on this report.
Allow me first of all to congratulate the
Secretary-General and his staff on an excellent report.
The 21 action points provide some very practical
recommendations that are possible to implement. Once
implemented, the action points will ensure important
progress towards the full and equal participation of
women and men in all stages of conflict resolution,
peacekeeping, peace-building and reconstruction
processes. The European Union (EU) is a firm
supporter of human rights for all, and welcomes and
fully agrees with the recommendations of the
Secretary-General regarding the human rights of
women and girls.
Allow me to bring forward four mainly positive
points from the report that the European Union
believes should be highlighted in today’s meeting, and

24

one less positive point. First, the European Union
supports the proposal to fully integrate gender
perspectives in the planning, the mandates and all the
phases of peace processes. This will require
appropriate tools, such as guidelines and training
programmes. In that regard, the European Union is
happy to note, that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) is developing concrete tools to
help mainstream gender perspectives into the daily
work of all mission components. With that in mind, the
European Union looks forward to receiving the longawaited handbook on multidimensional peacekeeping
operations, with a chapter on gender mainstreaming.
Secondly, we would like to reiterate our support
for the establishment of gender offices or focal points
in all field missions and for their being provided with
the necessary support. That support would also mean
proper back-stopping in DPKO, with the establishment
of a focal point on gender issues, as has been
recommended by the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations. We would, therefore, urge
the Secretary-General to take the necessary steps to
ensure the establishment of this gender capacity in
DPKO.
Thirdly, we regret the continued lack of gender
balance in all aspects of peace operations, but we note
with appreciation that the Secretary-General will make
an even more determined effort to increase the
appointment of women at the Special Representative
and Deputy Special Representative levels. The States
members of the European Union will continue to
provide the Secretary-General with qualified female
candidates to serve in such positions.
Fourthly and finally, the findings of the report
with regard to the inclusion of women, girls and child
soldiers
in
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration (DDR) programmes are important lessons
learned. They need to be considered carefully in all
future missions where DDR programmes are to be
developed and implemented.
In the view of the European Union, there is one
less positive point in the report. That is the lack of
reference to the Secretary-General’s bulletin on
observance by United Nations forces of international
humanitarian law (ST/SGB/1999/13). That bulletin
includes some valid gender paragraphs, and we believe
that all United Nations-mandated military operations
should operate in accordance with the bulletin.

S/PV.4635

At the Council’s meeting in July, I provided
information on an EU-Latin American conference on
women in peace operations. The conference is to take
place in Chile in early November and will include key
players from Latin American and EU countries. The
report of the Secretary-General and the considerations
of the Security Council will undoubtedly be the subject
of extensive discussions, with a focus on the
implementation part of the report.
This leads me to my final point. We will all be
looking for guidance on the way forward in the report
of the Secretary-General and in the recommendations
of the Security Council. But the full and equal
participation of women in peace processes is the
responsibility of many more — that is, the Member
States, the United Nations system, non-governmental
organizations, civil society and others.
The European Union and its member States look
forward to doing our part. We hope that the Security
Council will carefully consider the recommendations
made by the Secretary-General to protect women in
crisis situations and to enhance their role in peace
processes.
The President (spoke in French): Before I give
the floor to the next speaker, I wish to inform Council
members that it is my intention to suspend the meeting
at 6 p.m.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Liechtenstein. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): As a strong
supporter of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000),
we welcome the study and report (S/2002/1154) on
women, peace, and security undertaken pursuant to that
resolution. We also look forward to the independent
experts’ assessment of the impact of armed conflict on
women and of women’s role in peace-building, an
important supplement to the Secretary-General’s
efforts.
We welcome what we perceive as a common
thread running throughout the recommendations of the
study — that is, the emphasis on the necessity for
women actively to participate in all political, judicial,
economic, military and other decision-making
processes at the local, national and international levels.
Effective peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, as well as post-conflict reconstruction and the

effective delivery of humanitarian assistance, are
impossible without the active participation of women,
who are both disproportionally affected by armed
conflict and disproportionately uninvolved in decisions
related to armed conflict. While it is important to
sensitize everyone — men and women alike — to
gender issues relating to armed conflict, and while men
are also capable of adopting gender-based approaches
to peace and security, it remains a fact that decisionmaking will continue to be paternalistic and, what is
more, ineffective if decisions are made on behalf of
women instead of with their active involvement.
Against that background, we are particularly
pleased that the study on women, peace and security
calls on the international community to identify
women’s informal peace-building initiatives, to provide
technical and financial support and to establish
mechanisms to channel the outcome of such initiatives
into formal peace processes, including Track II
negotiations. We believe this constitutes a pragmatic
and useful approach to help integrate women’s
expertise in the formidable task of creating peace.
For several years, Liechtenstein has supported
efforts to bring about a change in the dramatic underrepresentation of women as special representatives and
special envoys. We are therefore please that the study
before us gives due attention to this matter, which is
indeed of utmost importance, and we hope that speedy
progress can be achieved in this area, obviously with
the help of Member States. As far as the participation
of women is concerned, women as special
representatives and envoys can have a major catalytic
effect, and their appointment to such posts must
therefore be a high priority.
The Secretary-General’s study clearly identifies
the need for international legal action to combat
violence against women, particularly in situations of
armed conflict. The ad hoc tribunals established by the
Security Council have greatly aided the creation of
such an international legal framework. We believe that
the International Criminal Court (ICC), as the
cornerstone of this emerging international effort to
fight impunity, will accelerate the progress made in
combating violence against women. The Rome Statute
and its supplemental documents contain detailed
provisions criminalizing gender-based and sexual
violence committed in the context of war crimes,
crimes against humanity or genocide.

25

S/PV.4635

While individual cases before the ICC that apply
the relevant provisions of the Rome Statute will be
instrumental in providing redress to victims and in
advancing the law at the international level, perhaps
even more important are the ongoing efforts to
implement the definitions of those crimes in domestic
legislation and to apply them in domestic courts. Such
efforts are encouraged by the legal and political
incentives that the ICC provides for States to
investigate and prosecute such crimes themselves. That
makes the speedy ratification of the Statute by the
largest possible number of States a necessity. No one,
regardless of his or her motivation, status or
nationality, can be allowed to enjoy impunity for the
commission of crimes of sexual or gender-based
violence.
Liechtenstein has consistently supported efforts
to end impunity, and we have been particularly
committed to ensuring that a gender-based approach is
taken in the administration of international justice. Of
the utmost importance is the participation of women at
the highest level of judicial administration, as judges,
prosecutors and other court officials. We are
particularly pleased that the Assembly of States Parties
of the International Criminal Court has adopted a
procedure implementing the requirement of the Rome
Statute that States take into account the need for fair
representation of women and men when judges are
elected. We would like to take this opportunity to call
on States to ensure that an adequate number of female
candidates are nominated for the first election of judges
to be held by the Assembly of States Parties, in
February.
We are committed to the idea that the
advancement of the rights of women is inextricably
linked to the advancement of peace and security.
Resolution 1325 (2000) has given the international
community an additional tool to put that idea into
practice, supplementing essential legal instruments
such as the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women and its
Optional Protocol, the Geneva Conventions and their
Additional Protocols and the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and
its supplementary Protocols, as well as the Rome
Statute. Thus, it is clear that the standards have been
set and that we all now face the task of applying those
standards and thus of ensuring their implementation.

26

The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Fiji. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.
Mr. Naidu (Fiji): I have the honour to address the
Council on this very important topic on behalf of the
Pacific Islands Forum group: Australia, the Marshall
Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru,
New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu and my own country,
Fiji, as well as Palau.
The study on Security Council resolution 1325
(2000) and the relevant reports of the SecretaryGeneral reinforce our experiences of the gender
dimensions of conflict. In particular, they confirm facts
about women and girls as the principal and most
vulnerable victims of conflict, most notably sexual
violence. They also make clear that we can no longer
ignore the contributions of women and girls to all
stages
of
conflict
resolution,
peacemaking,
peacekeeping and reconstruction processes.
As the landscape of conflict has shifted largely to
intra-State settings, the psychological impact of
conflict has been intensified by the perception of the
State as the perpetrator, which renders it unable to
defend or to protect its citizens. This new aspect of
multilateralism, which has emerged in recent decades,
demands appropriate interventions.
Women in our region have a long history of
active interest in sustainable peace, which continues
today, as shown by the study, which documents well
the successful intermediary role played by women
during the conflict in Bougainville, one of the United
Nations success stories in peace-building. In that
connection, the peace initiatives of the Leitana Nehan
Women’s Development Agency were recognized by the
2000 United Nations Development Fund for Women’s
Millennium Peace Prize for Women. Similarly, women
in Fiji and in the Solomon Islands have played their
traditional roles as peacemakers during times of crises
in their respective countries. Regionally, a growing
network of women’s groups and of informal activities
is supporting peace efforts in our region.
Our group appreciates the current need to transfer
those informal activities to the formal arena of peacebuilding, negotiation and decision-making in conflict
prevention, in early-warning mechanisms and in peace
processes. Only then can changes in gender roles at the

S/PV.4635

micro level be accompanied by corresponding changes
in political or organizational influence. The reported
success in East Timor’s nascent political and peacebuilding processes is encouraging, as is the political
commitment of the international community to
resolution 1325 (2000). With appropriate interventions,
equitable social relations in post-conflict societies that
are conducive to peace-building and to conflict
prevention may finally materialize.
We
welcome
the
Secretary-General’s
recommendations under this item, and we support his
annual review with regard to resolution 1325 (2000) as
an opportunity to profile and build on the positive
initiatives and results of women’s involvement in peace
and security processes. Through that process, we hope
to see positive and constructive progress in
implementing the important recommendations in the
Secretary-General’s current report (S/2002/1154).

For its part, the United Nations needs to realize
its own goals for the advancement of the status of
women in the United Nations system and thus to lead
by example. In that connection, we note with
satisfaction the Secretary-General’s commitment to set
concrete targets for the appointment of women as
Special Representatives and Special Envoys in order to
promote peacekeeping, preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding and peacemaking. The experience in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations since July
2001 is that the full value of a database of gender
specialists database depends on the practical support of
Member States.
The President (spoke in French): I intend now to
suspend the meeting until 11 a.m. tomorrow, Tuesday,
29 October 2002.
The meeting was suspended at 6.05 p.m.

27
