S/PRST/2015/12

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 June 2015
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 7461st meeting of the Security Council, held on 11 June 2015, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Central African
region”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the grave security
situation in parts of Central Africa within the remit of the UN Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA), in particular the ongoing crisis in the Central
African Republic (CAR) and its regional impact, the continuing threat of the
Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA), and the continued terrorist activities
perpetrated by Boko Haram in countries in the subregion. The Council also
expresses its continuing concern regarding maritime insecurity in the Gulf of
Guinea, the illegal wildlife trade and transnational organised crime. The
Council welcomes the local, parliamentary and presidential elections held in
the subregion and stressed the need for upcoming elections in the region to be
held in a timely, transparent and inclusive manner according to their
constitutions, and encourages UNOCA to continue to support States in this
regard including through the promotion of women’s political participation.
“The Security Council commends the role of the ECCAS Heads of States
in the ECCAS-led international mediation process in CAR and welcomes the
leadership of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Abdoulaye
Bathily, in the process. The Council commends SRSG Bathily for his
diplomatic efforts, in collaboration with the ECCAS mediator, President Denis
Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of Congo, the African Union Special Envoy
for the CAR, Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga, as well as the SRSG for the CAR,
Lieutenant General (Retd) Babacar Gaye. In particular, the Council welcomes
the holding of the Bangui Forum for National Reconciliation from 4-11 May,
chaired by SRSG Bathily, and welcomes the outcomes of the meeting. The
Council encourages SRSG Bathily and his Office to continue supporting these
efforts and to support the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), and the
Transition process in the CAR, through the international mediation process.
The Council also stressed the critical importance of effective implementation
of the sanctions regime established pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), and the
key role that regional States, as well as regional and subregional organizations,
can play in this regard.

15-09553 (E)

110615

*1509553*

S/PRST/2015/12

“The Security Council condemns in the strongest terms the terrorist
attacks conducted by Boko Haram since 2009, which have caused large-scale
and devastating loss of life and represent a threat to the stability and peace of
West and Central Africa. In particular, the Council strongly condemns the
continued increase in attacks perpetrated by the terrorist group in Nigeria,
along the Nigeria-Cameroon border, in the northern provinces of Cameroon
and attacks near the Nigeria-Chad border. The Council expresses concern that
the activities of Boko Haram continue to have adverse humanitarian impact on
West and Central Africa including the displacement of an estimated
74,000 Nigerians into neighbouring Cameroon, 96,000 internally displaced
persons within Cameroon, and in Chad almost 20,000 Nigerian refugees,
8,500 returnees and 14,500 internally displaced per sons.
“The Security Council welcomes the recent gains made by States in the
region against Boko Haram, and commends the bravery of the troops involved.
The Council underlines the continuing threat presented by Boko Haram to
peace and stability in the region. It urges States in the region to further
enhance regional military cooperation and coordination to more effectively
and immediately combat Boko Haram, in accordance with international law. In
this regard, it welcomes efforts by the region to set up a multinational joint
taskforce, and strongly encourages the ongoing coordination efforts of
ECCAS, and ECOWAS to counter Boko Haram. The Council stresses the need
to adopt a comprehensive approach in order to successfully tackle the threat
presented by Boko Haram to the region. The Security Council encourages
partners to increase security assistance to Lake Chad Basin Commission
countries and Benin, humanitarian support across the region for those affected
by Boko Haram activities. The Council calls on UNOCA to continue its
collaboration with the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA), in
order to continue to support, as appropriate, the states of the Lake Chad Basin
region to address the impact of the threat on peace and security, including the
political, socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in the subregion. The
Council underlines the need for all actions to counter Boko Haram to be
conducted in compliance with international law, including international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, as applicable.
“The Security Council reiterates its strong condemnation of the appalling
attacks, including those that may amount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity carried out by the LRA and other violations of international
humanitarian law and abuses of human rights, including the LRA’s recruitment
and use of children in armed conflict, killing and maiming, rape, sexual
slavery and other sexual violence, and abductions. The Council demands an
immediate end to all attacks by the LRA and urges the LRA to release all those
abducted, and to disarm and demobilise. The Council welcomes the progress
made with regard to ending crimes under international law in Central Africa
and reiterates its resolve to maintain the current momentum until a perman ent
end to the threat posed by the LRA has been achieved.
“The Security Council pays tribute to the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary General (SRSG) for Central Africa and head of
UNOCA, Abdoulaye Bathily, and African Union (AU) Special Envoy on the
LRA Issue Lieutenant General Jackson Kiprono Tuwei (Rtd.) to strengthen
regional cooperation and facilitate continued AU -Regional Task Force

2/5

15-09553

S/PRST/2015/12

(AU-RTF) operations in the region. The Council urges UNOCA, in its
coordination role, as well as the United Nations political and peacekeeping
missions in the region and other relevant United Nations presences to enhance
their efforts in support of the implementation of the United Nations Regional
Strategy to Address the Threat and Impact of the Activities of the LRA (the
UN strategy), as appropriate and within the limits of their mandates and
capacities. The Council encourages the Secretary-General to optimise
UNOCA’s efforts in this regard, including through the use of staff and
provision of support to counter-LRA efforts.
“The Security Council urges the UN Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the
UN Organisation Stabilization Mission in the DRC (MONUSCO), and the
UN-AU Mission in Darfur (UNAMID), as relevant and in accordance with
their mandates, to cooperate, coordinate, and share information related to the
regional threat of the LRA in a timely manner, and to share relevant
information with governments of States of the region, with non -governmental
organizations and relevant partners, to enhance cross-border cooperation in
order to better anticipate and respond to LRA movements. The Council
emphasises the need for operational coordination and information -sharing
between the AU-RTF and all relevant UN and AU missions, in the context of
their protection of civilians activities, human rights monitoring,
implementation of Disarmament, Demobilization, Repatriation, Reintegration
and Resettlement (DDRRR) programmes, and counter-LRA operations, as
appropriate and in accordance with their mandates.
“The Security Council urges MONUSCO and MINUSCA, and other
United Nations actors in the LRA-affected region to continue to work with
regional
forces,
national
governments,
international
actors
and
non-governmental organisations, as appropriate, to develop a common
approach to the promotion of defections and support for DDRRR efforts across
the LRA-affected area. The Council highlights the importance of programmes
in encouraging defections and in support of the release, return and successful
reintegration of women, children, and men abducted by the LRA, in particular
those that target community acceptance of such individuals, in part icular
children.
“The Council commends the significant progress made by the AU -RTF
and its troop contributing countries, and pays tribute to the important role
played by the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces in tackling the LRA threat. The
Council notes the importance of continued regional and international support
for the AU-RTF’s operations, logistics, and headquarters. In this regard, the
Council welcomes the continued advisory and logistical support provided by
the United States as well as funding provided by the European Union. The
Council underlines the primary responsibility of States in the LRA-affected
region to protect civilians. The Council underlines the need for all military
action against the LRA to be conducted in compliance with international law,
including international humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law, as
applicable, and to minimise the risk of harm to civilians in all areas of
operation and to take into account the association of children with the LRA.
The Council also reiterates its encouragement to deploy child protection
advisers within the AU-RTF.

15-09553

3/5

S/PRST/2015/12

“The Security Council expresses concern that the LRA continues to pose
a regional security threat, particularly in CAR and DRC. The Council calls
upon the affected states to ensure that the LRA does not find safe haven in
their territory, in accordance with international law. The Council takes note
that the presence of some senior LRA leaders in the disputed Kafia Kingi
enclave, on the border between CAR, South Sudan and Sudan continues to be
reported. The Council takes note that the Government of Sudan ha s denied
this. The Council welcomes the invitation extended to the AU to verify reports
of LRA presence in Kafia Kingi, and urges the AU Commission and the AU
Peace and Security Council to verify the allegations. The Council expresses its
continued concern that the gravity of the national crisis in the CAR and
strongly condemns the LRA’s opportunistic cooperation in CAR with other
armed groups including some ex-Séléka combatants.
“The Security Council notes that the number of deaths for which the
LRA was responsible decreased from 76 civilian deaths in 2013 to 36 deaths in
2014, but that the number of abductions in CAR and eastern DRC significantly
increased to several hundreds. The Council expresses its concern at the
increase in United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs’ (OCHA’s) estimate of the number of people displaced by the LRA
threat from 131,090 in September 2014 to 180,000 in December 2014. The
Council commends efforts by international donors to provide humanitarian
assistance to LRA-affected populations in the CAR, the DRC and the Republic
of South Sudan but notes with concern that renewed efforts are urgently
needed to provide humanitarian assistance to LRA affected populations. The
Council reaffirms its call for all parties to allow safe and unhindered
humanitarian access, consistent with the relevant provisions of international
law and the United Nations guiding principles of humanitarian assistance.
“The Security Council welcomes the steps taken to deliver an enhanced,
comprehensive, and more regional approach to the humanitarian situation,
including assistance to victims of sexual violence and other attacks and urges
further progress in this regard.
“The Security Council reiterates its call for the swift and full
implementation of the conclusions of the working group on children and
armed conflict concerning the situation of children and armed conflict affected
by the LRA. In this regard, the Council encourages those countries affected by
the LRA which have not yet done so to establish Standard Operating
Procedures for the reception and handover of LRA children to civilian child
protection actors.
“The Security Council encourages donors to increase funding for early
recovery projects to help affected communities restore stability and rebuild
their livelihoods as the LRA threat begins to recede. The Council requests that
UNOCA work with the AU, World Bank, the UN Development Program, the
UN Children’s Fund and other international experts to develop a development
framework for international efforts to promote the long-term stabilization of
formerly LRA-affected areas in South Sudan, the DRC, and the CAR,
including through early recovery projects and programs to strengthen
community cohesion.

4/5

15-09553

S/PRST/2015/12

“The Security Council welcomes the transfer of Dominic Ongwen to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) in The Hague in January 2015. The
Council expresses its appreciation to all those who cooperated in this effort,
notably the governments of Uganda, CAR and the US, as well as the AU,
MINUSCA, and the ICC. The Council recalls that ICC arrest warrants have yet
to be executed for other LRA leaders, including Joseph Kony, on charges of
war crimes and crimes against humanity, including murder, rape cruel
treatment, intentionally directing attacks against a civilian population and
forced enlistment of children, and calls upon all States to cooperate with
relevant national governments and the ICC, in accordance with their respective
obligations, in order to execute those warrants, and to bring to justice those
responsible.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the link between illicit
trafficking in wildlife and natural resources and financing of armed groups in
the subregion, including the LRA, and, in this regard, encourages UNOCA t o
continue to support the development of a coherent and concerted subregional
approach to address this disturbing phenomenon.
“The Security Council commends UNOCA’s support for regional
anti-piracy efforts, in cooperation with UNOWA, to address maritime
insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea that continues to affect States of Central and
West Africa. The Council encourages UNOCA to continue to assist the region
in implementing the decisions of the Yaoundé summit, and in the
establishment of a regional information-sharing architecture.
“The Security Council welcomes the recommendations of the Strategic
Assessment Review conducted in March 2015. In particular, the Council notes
the recommendation that UNOCA focus on areas of work in which the Office
has recognised strengths and a comparative advantage, including in the four
areas of: good offices, preventive diplomacy and mediation; supporting United
Nations, regional, and subregional initiatives on peace and security; enhancing
United Nations coherence and coordination in the subregion; and advising the
Secretary-General and UN entities in the region on significant peace and
security developments in Central Africa.
“The Security Council requests that the Secretary-General keep it
informed through a report on the situation in Central Africa and UNOCA’s
activities to be submitted before 30 November 2015 and every six months
thereafter, on the activities of UNOCA, progress made in conducting
assessments of the LRA’s evolving area of operations and logistical and
support networks, and the efforts being undertaken respectively by missions in
the region and relevant United Nations agencies to implement the UN’s
Regional Strategy.”

15-09553

5/5
