OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR’

2443rd

MEETING:

NEW

25 MAY 1983

YORK

:.

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2443)
Adoption of the agenda

.. .. .. ... ... ... .. ... .. .... .. .. ... ...

1

.. .. ... .. ... ... .. ... ... ... .. ... .. ... .... . ... ...

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . . . . . .

1

:

:

S/PV.2443

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.
.-.
.-.-e
- ._-_- -_-*
-.
:.
..
.
-.

2443rd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
President: Mr. M. KAMANDA

wa KAMANDA

(Zaire).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
.l.

Adoption

agenda (SiAgendaL2443)

25 May 1983, at 3.30 p.m.

‘

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation fro& French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meet.ing, I invite Mr. Nujoma, President of the South West
Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a place
at the Council table.

_
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma
p/ace at the Council table.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius
to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)

took a

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings on
this item [2439rh to 2442nd meetings], I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Australia,
Bangladesh, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
Cuba, Democratic Yemen, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Gambia,
the Federal Republic of Germany, Guinea;‘India,
Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya, Mali, Morocco, Mozambique, Nigeria, Panama, Romania, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Zambia
to take the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.
!

The meeting was called to order at 4.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Zarf (AfghaniStan), Mr. Hadj Azzout (Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola). Mr. Joseph (Australia), Mr. Hashim (Bangladesh), Mr. A&bade (Benin), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr.
Tsvetkov (Bulgaria), Mr. PeBetier (Canada), Mr. Trucco
(Chile), Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Al-Ashtal (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Lbrahim (Ethiopia),
Mr. Blain (Gambia), Mr. van Well (Federal:Republic of
Germany), Mr. Kaba (Guinea), Mr. Rao (India), Mr. Kusumaatmadja (Indonesia), Mr. Shearer (Jamaica), Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan
(Kuwait), Mr. Bunvin (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr.
Traore (Mali), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco), Mr. Chissano
(Mozambique), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. Cabrera
(Panama), Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Niusse (Senegal), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Stevens (Sierra
Leone), Mr. Adan (Somalia), Mr. van Schirnding.(South
Africa), Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian
Arab Republic), Mr. Slim (Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey),
Mr. Otunnu (Uganda), Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Bassoie (Upper Volta), Mr. Martini Urduneta
(Venezuela), Mr. Mojsov (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Goma

(S/15760);

Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15761)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the representative of Mauritius to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ramlogun (Mauritius) took a place at the Council table.
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and.the other members of the delegation to
take places at the Security Council table.
1

.

.
:

1
.

(Zambia) took the places reservedfor them at the side of the
Council chamber.

11. Finally, I should like to pay a well-deserved tribute
to the Secretary-General, not only for the clarity, lucidity
and courage of his further report on the implementation
of resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) of the Security
Council concerning the question of Namibia [S/Z5776J,
but also for his tireless efforts with a view to Namibia’s
rapid accession to independence. In our opinion, the
Secretary-General is and remains a symbol of the aspirations and hopes of the international community, in general, and of the countries of the third world, in particular,
for more justice, equity, freedom and equality in relations among nations and peoples. The high degree of
conscientiousness and seriousness with which he discharges his responsibilities and which we perceive from
the accuracy of his analyses of situations compel our
respect and our admiration.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received letters from the representatives of Barbados, Cyprus, Gabon, Liberia, Mexico, Mongolia, the
Niger, Qatar and Viet Nam in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure.
At the &tation
of the President, Mr. Moseley (Barbados), Mr. Mozuhoutas (Cypru$, Mr. Davin (Gabon) Mrs.
Jones (Liberia), Mr. Marin Bosch (Mexico), Mr. Erdenechuham (Mongolia), Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr. Jamal (Qatar)
and Mr. Le Kim Chung (Ret Nam) took places at the side
of the Council chamber.

12. We pay a particular tribute to SWAPO, the sole
legitimate
representative of the valiant people of
Namibia, for its political maturity, its spirit of sacrifice
and abnegation and the assurance with which it has
always tackled the question of a negotiated settlement for
the independence of Namibia, placing its trust in the
United Nations and in the commitment undertaken by
the entire international community through the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples contained in General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960.

6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter dated 25 May from the representative of Jordan .[S/15790J, which reads as follows:
..
.
.-.^.
--.
..-_:. .

“I have the honour to request the Security Council
to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, permanent Observer of
the League of Arab States to the United Nations, to
participate in the consideration by the Council of the
item entitled ‘The situation in Namibia’, in accordance
with rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.”

13. We also extend our congratulations to the United
Nations Council for Namibia, the legal Administering
Authority for the Territory, for the remarkable work it
has done to free the Namibian people from the racist and
shameful yoke of an obdurate colonialism and to lead
the country to an independence in which its territorial
integrity is respected and its much-coveted natural
resources are safeguarded.

7. -If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to this request.

14. The question of Namibia has preoccupied the international community
for more than half a century,
because it was in 1915, during the First World War, that
the Territory, which at that time had been under German
administration
since 1884, was entirely occupied by
South Africa forces.

It was so decided
*

8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation frond French): I
should now like to make a statement in my capacity as
representative of ZAIRE.
9. I should like, first of all, to tell Mrs. Kirkpatrick, the
representative of the United States, how much we appreciate the competent way in which she directed the work of
the Council during the month of-April.

15. After the First World War, under the aegis of the
League of Nations, South Africa’s administration of the
Territory, as everyone knows, was no longer consistent
with the provisions of the Mandate: instead of developing the administration
of the Territory according to the
principle whereby the well-being and development of the
Namibian people were to constitute a sacred trust of civilization, and whereby it was necessary to increase by all
means the material and moral well-being and social progress of the inhabitants of the Territory while promoting
their progressive development towards self-government
or independence, South Africa enacted discriminatory
laws and regulations, the obvious purpose of which was
to annex the Territory. It put down the justified revolts
by means of violent repression and established separate
reservations where the Africans were .supposed to reside,

10. I welcome the presence among us of numerous Ministers for Foreign Affairs, who have come from Africa
and elsewhere to participate in the Council’s debate on
the situation in Namibia and to emphasize the concern
which the dangerous continuation both of the illegal occupation of Namibia and of the denial of the basic rights of
the peop!e of Namibia by South Africa causes to their
Governments, with regard to the maintenance of international peace and security, in this sensitive part of Africa,’
which we hope will not become a pawn in the rivalries of
the great Powers.
2

set up a Legislative Assembly in which only whites were
allowed to sit and showed every sign of reluctance to fulfil
its obligation to report regularly on how the Territory was
being administered.

22. That Declaration, which was the embodiment of
our firm resolve to recover our freedom, also confirmed
the justness and corroborated the legitimacy of our struggle, including that waged by SWAP0 in Namibia, for
independence. And if today we are able to act as sovereign nations and sit in the Security Council to debate
world affairs-which
are also our affairs-we wonder
why the same should not be true of Namibia. The Declaration had the merit of replacing a colonial scenario in
international relations by one of decolonization, something with which, whether we like it or not, we have to
live in this last quarter of the twentieth century and the
beginning of the twenty-first. For 23 years now, therefore, the consequences of the adoption of that Declaration have not yet had any effect so far as the Territory of
Namibia is concerned.

16. Since that time, the constant and unequivocal position of the Namibian people, which determines today and
will continue to determine tomorrow the way we treat this
matter in Zaire, is summed up admirably in the following
extract from a statement made by a leader in the liberation movement of Namibia who was captured by the
South Africans:
“We are Namibians and not South Africans. We do
not admit today nor will we ever admit that you have
the right to govern us, to impose upon us laws in which
we have no say, to treat our country as if it belonged to
you, and to treat us as if you were our masters. We
have always considered South Africa an interloper in
our country.‘*

23. That was the third mission betrayed, in terms of the
Declaration which, 23 years ago, proclaimed the need to
put an end, unconditionally
and swiftly, to colonialism in
all its forms and manifestations and called for immediate
steps to transfer all powers to the peoples in those Territories which were not yet independent. But that Declaration is the legal framework within which the United
Nations seeks to speed up progress towards the freedom
and independence of peoples.

17. When the history of Namibia is written and posterity weighs or judges our acts, it is devoutly to be hoped
that the present debate in the Council will not be interpreted as one more demonstration, in a long series, of a
mission betrayed.
18. South Africa, at the time of the League of Nations,
administered the Territory of South We&Africa but violated the Mandate’s provisions. That was the first betrayal
of a mission, in terms of the League of Nations Mandate.

24. On 27 October 1966, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 2145 (XXI), which terminated South
Africa’s Mandate over Namibia, Today, 17 years later,
South Africa continues illegally to occupy Namibia.
What is more, in his statement in the Council yesterday
[2440th meeting], the representative of South Africa went
so far as to assert that his country was still legally administering Namibia in accordance with the League of
Nations Mandate, since no binding judgement to the contrary had revoked that Mandate.

19. When the United Nations came into being in 1945,
South Africa deliberately and overtly did everything it
could to defeat the fundamental purposes of the trusteeship system that are clearly set forth in Article 76 of the
Charter of the United Nations. Furthermore, South Africa’s racist effrontery led it to request, in 1946, that the
Territory be incorporated into South Africa.

25. For a fourth time, then, a mission was betrayed, in
terms of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI), which
was subsequently endorsed by the Security Council.

20. That was the second example of the betrayal of a
mission by a State Member of the United Nations under
the complaisant gaze of those who had the power’ to
ensure respect for the provisions of the Charter relating,
through decolonization, to the maintenance of international peace and security.

26. In 1978, five Members of the United Nations-not
just any members, but five influential Members, which,
in addition, happen to be the main partners of South
Africa, to which they are linked by economic, trade, military and cultural relations of some magnitude-took
the
noble, praiseworthy and courageous initiative of drawing
up a plan designed to ensure .the swift liberation of Namibia within a year. They carried out an information
campaign that finally mobilized the entire international
community in favour of that plan. At the time, the plan
was considered to be the only possible basis for a negotiated and swift settlement of the Namibian question.
The world endorsed it and then the Security Council
unanimously adopted resolution .435 (1978) approving a
plan for a negotiated settlement of the Namibian question. We must agree that hopes were running high at that
time.

21. On 14 December 1960, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 1514 (XV), containing the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples. By the unanimous adoption of that Declaration, the entire world community undertook to lead to
independence and sovereignty all those Territories which
had formerly been colonized, for the limits of the colonization process had been reached, its consequences, as far
as international peace and security and the harmony of
relations between nations and peoples were concerned,
having become irreconcilable and incompatible with the
primary purposes and objectives of the United Nations,
with the requirements of peace and with the efforts to
establish trustful co-operation between nations and
peoples.

27. But five years after the adoption of that resolution
and the world-wide endorsement of the plan, the situa3

tion obtaining in Namibia is worse than it was at the breakdown of the pre-implementation
meeting at Geneva in
January 1981, and even as early as the time when SWAP0
was recognized by the United Nations as the sole legitimate
representative of the people of Namibia; the settlement plan
itself seems once again to have been called into question by
some as regards its being the only possible basis for reaching
a negotiated settlement of the question of Namibia. At the
same time, other problems not foreseen in the settlement
plan have arisen for the first time.

people under .resolution 435 (1978) we must put further.
efforts into drawing up a precise time-table for the implementation of that resolution in order to speed up the
advent of Namibia’s independence.
34. Quite apart from the legal aspect of the problem,
which means that nations must co-operate in implementing resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978), resolution 435
(1978) entails a moral responsibility for the five countries
that conceived it, bore it to the baptismal font and acted
as its godparents. It is thus the duty of those countries to
redouble their efforts to bring about the success of that
plan in a reasonable period of time, while the SecretaryGeneral, because of the direct responsibility assumed by
the United Nations, should be requested to report on the
developments in this matter before the next session of the
General Assembly.

28. The question which occurs to us is the following:
Was that plan for settling the Namibian problem really
intended to speed up the independence of Namibia as we
thought, or was it designed rather to blunt the vigilance of
the Namibians, of Africa and of all right-thinking peoples
throughout the world, if not to hoodwink them?
29. And if, as we continue to believe, that plan was
intended to accelerate the independence of Namibia, how
can we avoid the unfortunate impression, based on the
continuation of the present situation, that it might well have
been dreamt up for other reasons, since it is perfectly
obvious that those who promoted it were unable to ensure,
to this very day, that it would be acceptable to South Africa?

35. If the range of measures that the Council can still take
to ensure the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) is
diminishing, if the margin for action of the Council is
narrowing with each passing day, that is not the fault of
SWAPO, which has always shown great flexibility and
political maturity; nor is it the fault of Africa, the front-line
countries or the non-aligned countries. It is quite simply the
fault of South Africa, which continues obdurately to refuse
to co-operate with the Council in the implementation of the
plan, consequently forcing the Council to resort to the
extreme measures provided for in the Charter, all noncoercive measures and persuasion having been exhausted.
Is that what the Pretoria regime wants, or does it know
already that the extreme measures laid down in the Charter
will never be taken in its case?

30. Can a single nation, one that was itself outlawed by
the international community, one that lives outside the
law, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
internationally recognized norms of behaviour that govem civilized societies the world over, one that practises a
State policy that is universally condemned as a crime
against humanity-can
such a nation really thwart the
States of the world united against apartheid and drawing
their strength from the principles of law and democracy?
We wonder what makes South Africa and its friends
behave as they do in Namibia, bearing in mind-as we
must-that it was that same South Africa that was able to
go along with the Lancaster House Agreements on the
evacuation of Zimbabwe?

36. Does South Africa want peace or does it want confrontation? How can it seek confrontation and, at the
same time, prevent this affair from assuming extraAfrican dimensions in this troubled world, in ‘which the
internal imbalance of such a sensitive region cannot help
but affect world balance?

31. These are questions that arise out of the stalemate
on the Namibian question and that require an answer.

37. Is there anyone who believes that a situation of
neither peace nor war in southern Africa can be considered an option in order to guarantee the interests of the
white minority and consolidate its position in that
region?

32. The situation prevailing in Namibia, a situation
character&d by South Africa’s continuing illegal occupation of the Territory, in defiance of the relevant United
Nations resolutions; by the denial of the fundamental
rights of the Namibian people; by South Africa’s repeated
acts of aggression carried out from the Territory against
such neighbouring African States as Angola-a
part of
whose territory is today still occupied by South African
troops-Mozambique,
Lesotho, Zambia and others I
need not mention; by the endangering of trusting and
harmonious relations among nations, peoples and ethnic
groups in the world; and by the refusal to co-operate with
the United Nations in general and with the Council in
particular in the implementation. of the United Nations
plan-that
situation represents a real danger to intemational peace and security.

38. Are there still people who believe that peace in that
region would not help to protect the legitimate interests
of the minorities that have arrogated to themselves a
position of strength in defiance of the most elementary
rules of law and democracy7
39. If, on the other hand, it is true that South Africa
wants peace, how can it turn a deaf ear to the voice of
reason and to the. appeals of the whole of the intemational community, which has proposed a peaceful and
negotiated settlement in order to achieve a just, lasting
and honourable solution to the problem?
40. Once again, these are questions that arise out of the
stalemate on the Namibian question and that require an
answer.

33. If we do not wish to betray for a fourth time the
obligations we have assumed towards the Namibian
4

41. In Africa, and particularly in Zaire, we want the
1 problem of Namibia, which is in essence a colonial problem, to be settled free from the influence of the East-West
confrontation, and we are opposed to the introduction
into the question of Namibia of alien elements that might
alter its fundamental nature.

Middle East, which make us fear that a conflagration
might flare up at any time, are sufficiently alive in our
memories for us not to attempt to add to such sources of
tension in the world, particularly in the horn of Africa.
46. Thus, while we are very pleased at the encouraging
developments that have occurred, which have been
inspired by the desire for peace in the region, and while
we are gratified at the political maturity and flexibility
demonstrated by SWAP0 and the front-line States, we
deplore and condemn the fact that South Africa has not
been able to make even the slightest gesture that could be
regarded by the international
community as likely to
build confidence in the region.

42. Resolution 435 (1978) must therefore be implemented without either modifications or constraints, and
must be applied practically and with the realism the situation demands.
43. That is why we fully share the opinion expressed by
the Secretary-General of the United Nations when he says
in his report:

47. . The main partners of South Africa and the
members of the contact group, with which we have various ties of friendship and co-operation, must realize the
need not to encourage South Africa to pursue this
course.

“It is evident that the delay in implementing resolution 435 (1978) is having a destructive impact not only
in Namibia itself but also on the prospect of a peaceful
and prosperous future for the region as a whole. The
delay also has an adverse effect on international relations in a wider sphere, adding to the prevailing sense
of frustration and mistrust, with all that that implies
for peace and security in the region.

48. Let me take this opportunity to pay a particular
tribute to France for its very clear and outspoken attitude on certain problems which might very well handicap
and hold up efforts to reach a negotiated solution that
would be both just and lasting.

“ . . .
“Progress has been made in securing a large measure
of agreement on the modalities to be employed in
implementing resolution 435 (1978). In fact, as far as
the United Nations is concerned, the only outstanding
issues are the choice of the electoral system and the
settlement of some fmal problems relating to UNTAG
and its composition. The views of the South African
Government on these problems are still awaited.

49. While Zaire once*again condemns the repeated acts
of aggression committed by South Africa against independent African States in the region, particularly the
occupation of the sovereign territory of Angola, a
brother country with which we have numerous ties
forged by history, geography, language, blood and culture, and also condemns the recent raid against Mozambique, we have, at the same time, every faith in the ability
of the African people to face up to the problems before
them if they are allowed to work on them in peace and
freedom. We must respect the sovereign right of every
State and every people to settle its problems as it sees fit,
free from any interference and without endangering the
interests of other States.

“Unfortunately,
moreover, the positive side of the
balance sheet has been set back by the emergence of
other issues which were neither raised nor envisaged at
the time when resolution 435 (1978) was adopted or in
the subsequent negotiations under United Nations auspices. These issues now apparently constitute the main
reason for the delay in the implementation
of the
United Nations plan.” [S/15776, paras. 16, 18 and 29.3
44. We also share the conclusion
Secretary-General when he says:

50. We in Africa and in Zaire consider ourselves reasonable people who understand many things. But there are
occasions in history when we have to step back and take a
look at our specific interests in order to respond to the
appeals of other human beings, particularly in a world
which believes in human rights and fundamental freedoms and for which the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights is a sacred book. This is what we expect of the
main partners of South Africa and expecially from the
five member countries of the contact group.

reached by the

*‘I am deeply concerned that factors which lie outside
the scope of resolution 435 (1978) should [today]
hamper the implementation
of that resolution.
“The effects of delay are being felt profoundly not
only by the people of Namibia, for whose welfare the
United Nations has a special obligation, -but also by
other States of the region. . . . I believe that the settlement of the Namibian question is of overriding importance for the future peace and prosperity of the entire
region.” [1&d, paras. 19 and 20.1

51. Has the time not come to put an end, by the appropriate means, to the long series of betrayals of the obligations arising from the contract on decolonization with
Namibia-or
are we to continue to stand by, powerless,.
and yield to the pressures and manoeuvres designed to
destroy this decolonization contract concluded between
the United Nations and the people of Namibia? That is
the crux of what is being discussed by the Council today;
that is the question to which a reply will have to be

45. We are firmly ‘in favour of peace and against confrontation in Africa generally and, in particular, in southem Africa. The effects of the tragic series of events in the
5

found, because what is at stake is the credibility of the
Council and the entire work of the United Nations, which
bears direct responsibility
for leading Namibia
to
independence.

60. Mr. CHISSANO (Mozambique): Today the Organization of African Unity (OAU) is commemorating
its
twentieth anniversary. It has been 20 years of struggle for
the self-determination
and independence of the African
peoples. In the course of that period we have been
patient, but determined and militant in the search for
solutions conducive to the total emancipation of our continent. Guided by the spirit and letter of the Charter of
the Organization of African Unity, the African peoples
have succeeded in uniting their efforts and leading an
effective struggle against foreign domination.

52. When the epic struggle of the United Nations for the
restitution of the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of those in Namibia is recorded for posterity, it is to be
hoped that the conclusions of the present discussion in the
Council will be regarded as a courageous act, the culmination of a long and grievous human tragedy, as the final,
transcendent deed which will inscribe in golden letters the
contribution of the Council to the independence of the
Namibian people-the penultimate chapter of a marvellous
epic, crowned by the celebration of Namibia’s independence. This is what is expected of the Council by millions of
men and women in Africa whose eyes are even now turned
towards the glass palace in Manhattan.

61. Some of us experienced colonialism and oppression
for more than five centuries. Hence, independence, freedom and peace are so dear that we accept all sacrifices so
that colonialism and. apartheid may be eradicated from
our continent. Our weapons are unity, the determination
to be free and the strength of our purpose. For this reason we enjoy the full support of the overwhelming majority of the Members of the United Nations.

53. In this context, Zaire will associate itself with any
positive and effective actions which might hasten Namibia’s accession to independence and dispel the unfortunate impression that the whole history of Namibia has
been that of a ‘mission betrayed.

62. We greet you, Mr. President, with special happiness, since you are from an African country, a member of
the OAU and of the United Nations. Your people, like
the people of Namibia, experienced colonial humiliation
and repression. We are convinced that, under your leadership, the Council will find the ways and means that will
lead to the independence of Namibia.

54. For that reason we should like to remind everyone,
particularly our partners, the members of the contact
group, that together we have signed a decolonization contract with the Namibian people; and that contracts are
carried out in good faith. We have to be realistic and take
into account the fact that decolonization is the major political and cultural feature of international relations in this
second half of the twentieth century. It is the reality of
decolonization that today makes necessary all the readjustments which have to be made in the present world order.

63. When I left Maputo I brought with me a specific
mandate to support firmly the legitimate demand of the
people of Namibia that Council resolution 435 (1978) be
implemented
so that their freedom and independence
might be recovered.
64. I came with the determination to support the call by
the international community to restore to the Council
and to the Secretary-General the vital role to which they
are entitled in the solution of the problem of Namibia, a
role which in a subtle manner has been usurped by certain countries that intend -to transform into their exclusive monopoly the right which is shared equally by all
Members of the United Nations to contribute significantly to the search for a negotiated and just solution of
the problem of Namibia.

55. I should not like to conclude my remarks without
reiterating our complete solidarity with SWAPO, whose
heroic liberation struggle we salute. The United Nations
having recognized SWAP0 as the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people, we cannot permit the
Namibians, under the banner of SWAPO, to be treated as
outcasts in their own country.
56. I voice the hope that the Council, in the name of the
United Nations;will completely dissociate itself from the
actions of South Africa and take vigorous and effective
steps to expedite the implementation
of the United
Nations plan for Namibia.

65. I did not come here to speak of the traditional
destabilizing role of South Africa in southern Africa. My
Government thought that the dialogue we reluctantly
agreed to initiate with the inhuman r&ime of South
Africa constituted a healthy, desirable and acceptable
way, encouraged by the international community, to aitivate the norms of peaceful coexistence and mutual
respect between our countries, in the interest of international peace and security.
.
66. I did not come here to remind the members of the
Council of the horrendous acts of aggression and the
massacres perpetrated by the racist r&me in Nyazonia,
Mapai and Chicualacuala in Mozambique.
I did not
come here to remind them of the horrors of the attack
against Matola in January 1981 or of the acts of aggres-

57. Our most heartfelt wish is that the mn.+sions
reached by the present debate in the Council will mark a
new and decisive stage in the already over-long process of
Namibia’s accession to independence.
58. I now resume my function as PRESIDENT
Security Council.

of the

59. The next speaker ‘is the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Mozambique; Mr. Joaquim Albert0 Chissani, whom I
welcome. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
6

sion and attack against Ponta do Ouro, where the corpses
of the Boers who were killed constituted undeniable proof
of the criminal action of the Pretoria r&ime. I did not
come here with the intention of speaking of the recruitment, training, arms and logistical support given by South
Africa to the hordes of armed bandits that kidnap, violate
and assassinate the wives of the peasants in my country;
mutilate the elderly and the children; bum crops and destroy hospitals; bum and loot trains, trucks and stores;
mine and sabotage roads, bridges and railroads; and kidnap and torture nationals of Western and socialist countries serving in Mozambique. I did not come here to speak
of the arson and the destruction of the fuel depot in Beira,
or the dispatch of boats into our territorial waters to carry
out espionage missions.

74. It has been confirmed beyond any doubt that
Orlando Cristina, a Portuguese national and one of the.
prominent leaders of the armed bands, was killed on his
farm near‘pretoria. Could it be that South Africa, with
all its police and intelligence apparatus, did not know of
the existence and the role of this man in disrupting the
peace in the region?
75. A press release, dated 30 October 1981, issued by.
the Permanent Mission of South Africa to the United
Nations, said that the armed bandit, Adrian0 Bomba,
who stole an air-force plane from my country, was receiving training as a pilot of Impala jet war-planes, the same
type of aircraft that strafed Matola in the morning of the
twenty-third of this month.
76. Can South Africa deny that Adrian0 Bomba, the
present leader of the armed bandits who, under the command and with the support of the Pretoria regime, sow
death and destruction, was not trained by Pretoria for’
this sordid mission?

67. I did not come here to speak of all this, because our
Government thought that when, to the surprise of the
entire international community, we agreed to dialogue
with the South African Government we might be contributing towards creating in our region a climate of calm and
peace.

77. Is this how the Pretoria regime promotes peaceful.
coexistence, of which it is so proud, with the countries of
the region? On the other hand, the arrogant agent of
apartheid will never be able to quote one case in which
my country has trained bandits, infiltrated spies, violated
the territory or airspace of South Africa or concentrated
massive contingents of forces along the common border.
Mozambique
has never sent one single soldier, one.
weapon or even one gram of explosive to South Africa.
Those who fight in South Africa are the South African
people.

68. My Government sent me to New York to speak on
the question of Namibia. The diversionary tactics of the
Pretoria regime will not deflect me from my mission.
However, since the representative of the racist regime
sought here to mislead international public opinion and
the opinion of the Council, I thought it appropriate to
introduce a parenthetical note before elaborating on the
issue which brings me here and which is on the agenda of
the Council in order to provide information in a few
words on the escalation of tension in southern Africa and
the South African aggression against my country.

78. As the Council is already aware, a heavily armed
formation of the South African Air Force, comprising
from 14 to 16 aircraft, violated the territory of my country and, at 7.20 a.m., dropped its lethal cargo on civilian
targets and the peaceful inhabitants of Matola, an industrial and residential area a little less than 20 kilometres
from Maputo, the capital of Mozambique.

69. The representative of the racist regime, using hypocritical and aggressive language, tried to present his country as the one most interested in peace and stability in the
region. His allegations-gratuitous,
devoid of any sense
and deliberately orchestrated to deceive representatives
present here and international public opinion-do
not
hold up against the slightest attempt at scrutiny.

79. The result of this action, motivated by hatred and
carried out at a time when the workers were leaving their
homes to go to their jobs, was the death of six civiliansamong them a woman in the final months of pregnancy,
two children aged two and five years, one South African
citizen and two workers of the SOMOPAL
fruit-juice
processing plant-40
civilians wounded, 14 houses damaged and a kindergarten destroyed.

70. The representative of the Pretoria regime, in addressing the Council [24#Oth meettig] wanted it to believe that
Schoeman, being a common criminal, could never be a
South African agent whose mission was to assassinate
leaders of Mozambique, carry out reconnaissance of key
strategic points in my country and commit acts of destruction and sabotage for South Africa.

80. The indiscriminate crimes of the racist leaders of
South Africa were not directed against elements of the
African National Congress of South Africa (ANC), as the
Pretoria authorities claim. The 14 houses destroyed, as has
been confirmed, are not ANC bases of any sort but simply
houses of civilians who fortunately were not hit by the
gencklal
bombs simply because they had left for their
Places Of work. The fruit-juice processing plant, the kindergarten and the, people who were the victims inthese two
places provide overwhelming evidence that those places
were not training centres or the headquarters of ANC which
would .have to be strongly protected and shielded with
anti-aircraft missiles.

71. Who, if not a criminal who has been in and out of
prisons since the age of 14, would have been the person
most qualified to carry out this most sordid mission if he
had been promised his freedom in return?
72. Does the representative of Pretoria want to convince
the Council and world public opinion that South Africa
uses angels and saints to perpetrate acts of aggression
against the front-line States?
73. South Africa has constantly tried to deny its responsibility in the creation, financing and utilization of the
armed bands let loose against my country.
7

81. It was the sovereignty and territorial integrity
Mozambique that were violated once again.
82. It was the people of Mozambique
and massacred.

of

91. South Africa invaded and committed
aggression against a sovereign State.

barbarous

92. The action carried out by ANC last Friday in South
Africa was an internal matter in which the armed forces.
of our country were not involved. Trying to blame a
neighbouring and independent country and retaliating
against it because of an internal action that was the result
of a criminal, segregationist, racist national policy condemned and vehemently opposed by the people of the
country and by the international community constitute
intolerable, arbitrary and gross interference in the internal affairs of a sovereign State.

that were attacked

83. The tactic of using indiscriminate violence against
neighbouring countries under the pretext of harassing and
destroying ANC bases is a device which South Africa
resorts to in order to divert the attention of the intemational community from the grave conflict that is spreading within its own borders. What it wants is to conceal the
nationalist nature of the armed struggle being carried out
by the people of South Africa by alleging that the regime
is the victim of an armed conspiracy by neighbouring
countries.

93. The statement by the representative of the apartheid
regime was notable for its total ,disrespect for the Council
and its apocalyptic threats against the States of the
region. South Africa came to the Council looking for
confrontation. It is therefore a confrontation between
South Africa and the international community as represented in the Council. Pretoria does not recognize any
validity in the numerous resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Council, including those that terminated Pretoria’s Mandate over the Territory of Namibia.

84. However, ANC has been in existence for over 70
years now. Its creation in 1912 therefore predates the creation of the FBELIMO
[Frente de Libertaqio de Mo~ambique] party. The armed struggle of the South African
people began in 1961, many years before we launched our
own armed struggle, which ended with the overthrow -of
the Portuguese colonialists in 1974. Moreover, the South
African people resorted to armed struggle only when the
racist authorities of Pretoria refused dialogue and banned
ANC.

94. On the other hand, we came to the Council guided
by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We are for peace, and we intend to work
for its preservation. South Africa knows this. The
members of the Council know it. Only this year my President hosted a dinner-known
as “the dinner of peace”for the ambassadors representing
the permanent
members of the Security Council accredited to Maputo,
and there our stand was made clear and applauded. Our
central concern was to search for means of establishing a
climate of peace in our region.

85. When our country became independent in June
1975, the struggle of the people of South Africa had
already reached a high level of development and sophistication. The international press was already publishing
reports of ANC attacks on and the destruction of strategic
targets in the interior of South Africa.
86. Nelson Mandela was condemned to life imprisonment by the racist authorities because they said that he
was responsible for the.national liberation struggle.
87. Mandela did not come from Mozambique; perhaps
the authorities in Pretoria wanted the Council to believe
that Mandela was sent by the Portuguese colonial regime
to attack South Africa.

95. At our last meeting with the South African Government we talked about our policies in the search for
avenues leading to peaceful coexistence. We hope to continue this effort. However, we also said, and we continue
to say, that, while we love peace, we do not fear war. If it
is necessary to fight a war in order to preserve peace in
our region, we shall do so once again.

88. The massacres at Sharpeville, Soweto, Gogolito and
Langa clearly demonstrate the fact that the minority and
racist regime which holds power in South Africa is at war
with the majority of the South African people.

96. My country has been at war for over 20 years now.
We fought a war against Portuguese colonialism to free
our people from colonial domination and exploitation.
We fought the war to create peace in our country.

89. That regime’s final goal, pursued through intimidation, terror, aggression and destruction, is the surrender
of the countries of the region to the hegemonic design of
South Africa and their passive acceptance of the practices
of racial segregation prevailing in the heartland of

97. It was the ideal of freedom and the struggle for
peace that led us to accept sacrifices so that the flag of
freedom, equality and harmony among men could fly in
Zimbabwe. Thousands of Mozambican
citizens were
murdered by the illegal regime of Smith, supported by
South Africa. Tens of thousands of children became
orphans. Thousands of women mourned. Economic and
social infrastructures were razed. But those criminal acts
did not prevent the fall of the illegal racist regime of
Southern Rhodesia. Today, in Zimbabwe, children,
women ‘and men are all citizens of a free and sovereign
nation, respected and recognized by the entire intemational community.

apartheid.

90. In view of all this, we cannot accept the proposition
that the aggressive violence of South Africa against my
country and the liberation activities carried out by ANC
inside South Africa are in any way parallel or comparable
or to be condemned without distinction. To do this would
be deliberately to camouflage the truth.
8

98. Our party has just held its fourth congress. It reiterated the policy of peace of our State, which will resort to
force only in cases of leg$imate self-defence. The actions
and acts of aggression by South Africa will not make us
back down, because we are not just 12 million Mozambicans; with us are the 23 million black South Africans and
the millions of coloured, Indian and white South Africans
who oppose apartheid and desire freedom and peace for
our region; with us are all the front-line States constantly
threatened by apartheid; with us is the international community; because our strength lies in the reason and the
justness of our cause. For this reason we are not afraid of
the South African threat.

conflict of unpredictable proportions and repercussions.
With each day that passes, tension increases, the number
of deaths increases, the materials of war increase and the
field of tension is extended.
105. In 1969, it was the independence of Namibia that
was at stake. Today;it is Angolan territory that is occupied, it is Mozambique that is the object of aggression; it
is Zimbabwe that is the target of constant infiltration; it
is Zambia that is constantly threatened; it is Lesotho that
is bombed and asphyxiated; it is far-away Seychelles that
is the target of mercenary attacks. All these actions are
carried out by the Nazi, Fascist regime of Pretoria.

99. The fact that the international community reacted
with indignation to the recent attack perpetrated by the
South African Air Force against my country is in itself
significant and encouraging. Governmental
and nongovernmental institutions in all continents condemned the
apartheid r&me and expressed their solidarity with our
people and Government.
We thank all those who
unequivocally denounced and condemned this criminal
act of aggression. We reiterate here before the representatives of the international community our unshakable ‘sup
port for the people of South Africa in their just struggle
for the elimination of apartheid. We are certain that in this
struggle the people of South Africa and the international
community will be victorious and apartheid destroyed.
100. Allow me now to speak on the subject-matter
has brought us to these meetings.

106. It is South Africa that violates the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of our countries. It is South Africa
that endangers the peace, security and development of
our region, which could have serious consequences considering the explosiveness of the current international
atmosphere.
107. This is the rCgime that arrogantly and shamelessly
violates the decisions of the international community and
refuses to comply with the decisions of this body, which
has been mandated by the Charter of the United Nations
to be the guarantor of international peace and security.
108. What is at stake is not only the dignity of the
humiliated
people of Namibia, whose right to selfdetermination
and independence has been denied, but
also the dignity of each one of us present today as representatives of sovereign peoples who fought for their political emancipation. What is at stake here is the reputation,
the dignity and the prestige of the Council as the trustee
of Namibia.

that

101. In 1969, three years after the end of South Africa’s
Mandate over Namibia [General Assembly resolution 2145
(XX4 of 27 October 1964, the Council adopted its resolution 264 (1969), which, inter afia, considered that the continued presence of South Africa in Namibia was illegal
and contrary to the principles of the Charter and the
previous decisions of the United Nations and was detrimental to the interests of the population of the Territory
and those of the international community. By virtue of
paragraph 3, the Council called upon the Government of
South Africa to withdraw immediately its administration
from the Territory.

109. The Council, in its resolution 264 (1969), recognized in a clear and unequivocal manner, in paragraph 1,
that the General Assembly had terminated the Mandate
of South Africa over Namibia and had assumed direct
responsibility for the Territory until its independence.
Since the General Assembly terminated the Mandate of
South Africa in 1966; we have witnessed systematic violations of the relevant resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council by the apartheid
r&me.
The Council has .countless times been called
upon to consider the critical situation prevailing in Namibia. In all cases, this body has demanded the withdrawal .of South Africa’s forces and administration,
which are illegally occupying the international Territory
of Namibia.

102. The .demand for immediate withdrawal was reiter-’
ated more firmly in Council resolution 269 (1969), which
in paragraph 5 called upon the Government of South
Africa to withdraw its administration
from Namibia
before 4 October 1969-in
other words, withdraw
immediately.
103. ,Fourteen years have elapsed since then-14 years
of systematic violation of the decisions of the Council,
rendering this body a discredited and ineffective forum.

110. The obstinate refusal of the racist rggime of Pretoria has been-possible only because it enjoys the blessing
and support of certain permanent members of the Council. The cooperation of such countries with the hated
racist r&ime
extends to the military
and nuclear
domains, thus making them accomplices in the crime of
apartheid and, materially and morally, accomplices in the
continuing occupation of Namibia, the systematic massacring of the civilian population, the repeated acts of
aggression and destabilization directed against our coun-

104. The Council assumed responsibility for the Territory of Namibia, with the understanding that the problem
of Namibia was an issue that constituted a threat to inter-’
national peace and security. Today, more than ever, it is
evident that the situation prevailing in South Africa .is
indeed grave and explosive and prone to explode into a
9

tries and the acts of economic sabotage that undermine
our development efforts.

117. The realism that is now being urged upon us as
necessary by certain members of the contact group
means that Angola should, against its will and against
the most legitimate interests of its people, accede to
South African demands if we want to see the process of
Namibian independence moving forward.

111. All peoples that cherish peace and freedom, and the
international community as a whole, saw in resolution
435 (1978) the instrument which, since it represented a
universal consensus, would finally lead to the selfdetermination and independence of Namibia. SWAPO,
the African States and the non-aligned countries mobilized all their efforts with a view to ensuring the implementation of that resolution. To that end, we worked with
certain Western countries that maintain close relations
with South Africa. We did so in good faith, in a spirit of
openness and the desire for dialogue in order to solve a
crucial problem that affected the entire international
community.

118. From whatever angle the question of the presence
of Cuban internationalist forces may be considered, if we
continue to consider it a determinant in the process of
independence for Namibia we shall be establishing a dangerous precedent that violates the principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Moreover, we shall be
embarking upon a labyrinthine process which, far from
enabling us to find a solution to the Namibian problem,
will serve only to legitimize and institutionalize the arrogance and intransigence of the Pretoria rkgime in its
defiance of the international community and the most
elementary rules of the co-existence of nations.

112. Resolution 435 (1978) was the result of a common
effort by all of us. After its adoption, we developed joint
efforts to bring about its immediate implementation.
However, five years have already elapsed and we have, to
our frustration, achieved minimal progress.

119. The Council must resolutelv and unequivocally
refuse to link the independence of Namibia to-the withdrawal of the Cuban internationalist forces from Angola.
When we adopted resolution 435 (1978) Cuban troops
were already in Angola. At that time, none of the permanent members or any Member of the United Nations
established any linkage between these two realities,
because we were all aware of the reason for the presence
of such forces in Angola.

113. In the course of all those years, SWAPO, demonstrating political maturity and common sense and in a
constructive and exemplary manner, has made concessions that have gone even beyond acceptable limits. Now,
when the open and constructive debates in the General
Assembly’and within the Council show unequivocally and
unquestionably that all arguments plead for the independence of Namibia, and all manoeuvres to delay the independence of that Territory have been exhausted, we are
being confronted with new demands’ that are totally out
of context and inconsequent and only serve to complicate
and imperil the process of negotiations.

120. Angola is a sovereign country, a Member of the
Organization, upon which the Charter bestows the sovereign right to appeal to any and every State in defence of
its sovereignty and territorial integrity.
121. Thus. to make the indenendence of Namibia
dependent on the withdrawal of Cuban forces from
Angola would constitute more than mere interference in
the internal affairs of a sovereign State; it would be an
express act of complicity with South Africa, which persists in occupying Namibia illegally.

114. When everything seemed to have been discussed
and agreed upon, South Africa and the United States
brought the question of the presence of Cuban forces in
Angola to the negotiating table, arrogantly establishing
an unfounded and illogical link between the presence of
those forces in Angola, a sovereign State, and the independence of Namibia, an international
Territory illegally
occupied by South Africa.

122. We are certain that the Council will know how to
say “No” to this manoeuvre. Just as the international
community paid tribute to the United States when in the
Second World War its forces crossed the Atlantic and
contributed to smashing the aggression of Hitler’s Nazi
r&ime, we cannot but greet today the Republic of Cuba,
which has selflessly offered the blood of its best sons to
halt the advance of the Fascist South African forces of
occupation that were but a few kilometres from Luanda.
One might compare the talk about the withdrawal of the
Cuban troops from Angola with a demand for the return
of American troops to Washington at the time when
Hitler was decimating the European populations. When
one speaks of withdrawal, it is the South African troops
which should withdraw from Angola. It is they who are
sowing death and destruction in Angola.

115. Abusing the confidence placed in them, some
members of the contact group now claim that this is not a
question of linkage but rather a demand by the Souih
African r&me which we should accept in the name of
realism and in order to advance the process of
negotiations.
116. This paternalistic argument, typical of r&imes that
only recognize the supremacy of force as the basis of international relations, is a clear demonstration that for some
permanent members of the Council the question of Namibia has ceased to be a question of the liberation of the
peoples of Namibia; it has ceased to be a question of
illegal occupation by South Africa. For these Powers the
question of Namibia has become a pretext for attempts to
recover their lost economic and strategic hegemony in
southern Africa following the liberation of the peoples of
that region.

123. It is important for us to abandon the persistent
position of passivity and retreat in the face of Pretoria’s
arrogance. The administration
of Namibia does not
10

belong to South Africa: it is the resnonsibilitv of the
United Nations. We should shoulder&is respo&ibility if
we want to restore the reputation of the United Nations,
and particularly of the Security Council.

force; a clear and ‘unequivocal statement by the Council
invalidating and opposing any linkage or any pretext that
might otherwise impede the implementation
of resolution
435 (1978); and for the Secretary-General to carry out the
mandates of the General Assembly and the Council and
submit a report to the Council as early as possible before
the next session of the General Assembly.

124. In order to guarantee the implementation of resolution 435 (1978), the Council should take effective measures to define the system for the election of a constituent
assembly and to establish the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group (UNTAG) force.

130. The PRESIDENT
(interprerution from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Turkey. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

125. It is important that a clear time-table be established
for the implementation
of Council resolution 435 (1978).
The Council should provide the Secretary-General with
all the necessary powers so that, once and for all, the
delaying manoeuvres aimed at postponing the independence of Namibia to a distant tomorrow are brought to
an end.

131. Mr. KIRCA (Turkey): Mr. President, I should like
to congratulate you on your assuinption of the presidency of the Council for the month of May. My delegation is particularly happy to see this important debate on
the question of Namibia taking place under the distinguished presidency of an African member of the Council
and we are confident that under your guidance this
debate will have a successful conclusion.

126. Mozambique congratulates the Secretary-General
on the courage, objectivity and clarity of his report
[S/IS776J. In ,expressing his concern about the nonimplementation
of resolution 435 (1978), the SecretaryGeneral let it be known in his report that a future of peace
and prosperity throughout our region was profoundly
compromised with serious repercussions for international
relations.

132. My delegation also derives satisfaction from the
fact that the Council has taken up consideration of the
situation regarding Namibia at this particular moment.
As previous speakers have pointed out, the process of
bringing independence to Namibia is passing through a
crucial stage. All the-elements are present in this critical
stage to move events in either of two directions: either
towards the implementation
without further delay of the
independence plan for Namibia, approved in Council
resolution 435 (1978), or towards a further aggravation
of the political situation and the troubles in and around
Namibia.

127. In concluding his report, the Secretary-General
pleads with us for justice and peace to be established in
Namibia and throughout the southern zone of our continent. In this context, we hope that the Council will take
appropriate measures to terminate the illegal occupation
of Namibia, so that a free and independent Namibia may
emerge. That is our demand, as representatives of peoples
guided by the ideals of freedom, justice, peace and progress. It is not enough for the Council to limit itself to
condemning the illegal occupation and denouncing the
massacres perpetrated against the people of Namibia.

133. The Council is seized of this burning international
question at this particular moment because of the simple
fact that the Namibian problem is the responsibility of
the United Nations in more ways than one. Nearly.20
years have passed since the General Assembly terminated the Mandate of South Africa over Namibia and
established the United Nations Council for Namibia,
with direct responsibility for the administration
of that
Territory [resohtion 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 19671. Twelve
years have passed since the International Court of Justice
pronounced on the illegality of South Africa’s presence
in Namibia. Five years have passed since a tenable plan
for the independence of Namibia was adopted by the
Council with the concurrence of all the parties, including
South Africa. That resolution, 435 (1978), forms the
indisputable basis and framework for the peaceful settlement of the Namibian
problem; therefore it is only
appropriate that at this time the Council should evaluate
this situation.

128. The people and Government of Mozambique will
continue to support SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the people of Namibia. We endorse the struggle
of the Namibian people because we know the meaning
and the price of the struggle for freedom and independence, justice and progress. In supporting the liberation
struggle of SWAPO, we do so fully convinced that we are
widening the frontiers of peace and freedom, which the
peoples of the world cherish so much. As the Council is
the main guarantor of international peace and security,
we expect the decisions to be taken at these meetings in
order to end the occupation of Namibia and Angola, to
bring independence to Namibia and the end of the aggression against and destabilization of the front-line States
perpetrated by South Africa, so that a climate of freedom
and justice may prevail throughout our region.

134. In Namibia we are confronted with one of the last
but most important vestiges of colonialism: illegal occupation and social repression. This situation has aroused
the strong indignation of all the Members of the United
Nations. We see that everyone is united on which is the
party preventing the settlement of this question. There is
also unanimous agreement, as I have just mentioned, on

129. To sum up, Mozambique calls for the establishment of a definite date for a cease-fire; the speedy implementation of resolution. 435 (1978); the speedy establishment of a time-table for the election of a Constituent
Assembly; the immediate establishment of the UNTAG
11

the steps which should be taken to resolve this question.
Such agreement on a solution is also rare. The time when
this plan for independence should have been implemented
has passed. Paradoxically, it is still difficult to say that the
struggle for the achievement .of freedom and independence for Namibia is about to end.
135. We believe that when the Council decides on how
to proceed at this point the existing situation in Namibia
and the plight of the Namibian people should be taken
into consideration above anything else. Their suffering,
the denial of their basic rights and freedoms under the
deplorable apartheid policies and the exploitation of their
natural resources have continued for too long.
136. Confronted with such a prolonged and intolerable
foreign occupation, the Namibian people are engaged in a
rightful struggle for national independence under the leadership of SWAPO, their sole authentic representative. On
the other hand, the efforts carried out by the contact
group, particularly during the past year, have produced
an agreement which, we believe, will facilitate the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) in a short time.

141. We believe that it is the responsibility of the international community to exert every effort to ensure the
achievement of this goal in the shortest possible time.
The International Conference in Support of the Struggle
of the Namibian People for Independence, held in Paris
in April, demonstrated the solidarity. of the international
community and its determination to find an urgent solution to the problem of Namibia. We are confident ,that
this body will consider ways and means to set in
motion-final
motion-the
process of independence for
Namibia. In this respect, we should like to commend the
Secretary-General for his valuable and untiring efforts to
bring about the full implementation
without delay of the
United Nations plan. As a result of the detailed preparations undertaken, the United Nations is ready to go
ahead with carrying out the plan for the independence of
Namibia. We hope that the necessary conditions will prevail to enable the Secretary-General to continue effectively. his efforts in this direction.
142. My Government, for its part, is fully committed to
the efforts being exerted by the United Nations to ensure
the full sovereign independence and absolute territorial
integrity of Namibia and the unity of the Namibian
people. My Government has faith in the just cause of the.
people of Namibia and in the final victory of the national
independence struggle of the Namibian people.

137. It can justifiably be said that the successful conclusion of these negotiations was largely due to the conciliatory attitude shown by SWAP0 and the front-line States.
Their flexible attitude was undoubtedly motivated by the .
concern they felt about the consequences of the continuation of the sufferings of the Namibian people. The African
States and SWAP0 were able to maintain- their conciliatory attitude despite the evasive tactics of South Africa.

143. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Guinea. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

138. South Africa’s attitude during the recent history of
Namibia has been characterized by the dual policy that it
appears to follow. This dual policy consists in displaying
an interest in a negotiated settlement on the one hand and
obstructing progress on the other. We saw this happen in
1981 during the pre-implementation
meeting in Geneva,
as well as during the most recent efforts by the Western
contact group. Today, as this debate continues, we witness measures being taken by South Africa which are detrimental to the process of peace and to the process of the
implementation
of the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.

144. Mr. KABA (Guinea) (interpretation from French):
At the outset, Sir, on behalf of the Revolutionary People’s Republic of Guinea, I wish to express our great
pleasure at seeing you preside over the work of the Council for the month of May. Please accept the warm congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of this
important position. My pleasure is increased by the fact
that I am among those who hold you in the highest possible esteem for your great experience and, skill as a diplo-mat. My delegation is convinced that, under your inspired
leadership, the work of the Council cannot fail to proceed
in a spirit of equity and responsibility. I salute you as a
great statesman from a country with which my own has
the closest ties of friendship and fraternity.

139. South Africa must be made to see the wrongness of
its position and that it cannot continue totally to disregard world opinion and the dynamic developments and
progress taking place in Africa. It must realize that the
strands of colonialism to which it is still clinging belong to
an era long past.

145. I should also like to congratulate, through you,
your predecessor, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, the representative of
the United States, on the skilful way in which she guided
the work of the Council last month.

140. In the light of recent experience, it has become evi‘dent that only decisive sanctions as envisaged in the Charter of the United Nations will produce the necessary
effect. For only through the settlement of the Namibian
problem by the attainment of full independence by Namibians can progress be made in the reestablishment of
general stability in southern Africa. And only with the
emergence of a united, sovereign and independent Namibia can the prolonged suffering and sacrifices of the
Namibian people come to an end.

.146. At this crucial stage in the history of Namibia
there is a need for a practical contribution to the national
liberation .struggle of the Namibian people in the fight
that they are waging on our African soil at the very time.
when, as if to defy us, the Fascists of Pretoria are launching their tanks and their mercenaries, from the martyred
country of Namibia itself, against the rear bases of
SWAP0 in the front-line countries.
12

.

147. The most recent murderous raids carried out by the
mercenary forces of South Africa against independent,
sovereign Mozambique on 23 May provide a sinister illustration of South Africa’s brazen persistence in spuming
the constant appeals to reason from the international
community.

Aligned Countries, meeting at New Delhi from 7 to 12
March, and the International Confuence in Support of
the Struggle of the Namibian PeoM for Independence,
held in Paris from 25 to 29 April, imited the Council to
meet at the earliest possible date to consider further
action on the implementation
of the plan for Namibia’s
independence. In their decision, taken at the New Delhi
Conference, the Heads of State or Government again
called upon the Council‘to assume its primary responsibility for implementation
of resolutkm 435 (1978) [see
S/15675 and Cot-r.1 and 2, annex, sm. I, para. 491.

148. Thus, this serious situation is spreading to all southem Africa, becoming more complex, explosive and
threatening; the underlying purpose, undoubtedly, is to
intimidate, and thus to win concessions for the multinationals and the racists.

156. My delegation would like to place a great deal of
hope in the present series of Council meetings. We
should not like to despair of the international community’s ability to deal justly with a people, the Namibian
people, which did not ask to be handed over to South
Africa. It was the League of Nations which, by a simple
vote, decided the fate of that fraternal people. Who bears
responsibility for this situation if not the United Nations,
which succeeded the League of Nations?

149. As if this were not already enough, the racist
Government of South Africa instructed its representative
once again to thumb its nose at the international comniunity, including its protectors, by declaring at the outset of
his statement, with his customary cynicism:
“The time has come to remind the United Nations
that South Africa has never accepted the United
Nations view that South Africa’s presence in the Territory is illegal.” [2&&/i meeting, para. 71.1

157. Peace-loving and justice-loving peoples throughout the world, particularly the peoples of Africa, are listening with confidence and hope in their hearts that this
time the international community-and
in particular, the
representatives of the great Powers, the great democracies, staunch upholders of human rights and humanism
when that serves their interests-will,
at the end of these
debates, ensure a triumph for the right of peoples to
self-determination
and full control of their destinies.
Thus, we must do what we can to build a free, independent and democratic Namibia.

150. The African peoples for their part are quite prepared to meet this challenge so that all Africa can live free
and independent.
151. We should like to remind those who still entertain
any doubts on this score that there is no precedent in
history of aggressors being able to overwhelm peoples
that were motivated by a firm resolve to defend their
independence. That is particularly true in this century,
when world reaction is being rapidly overtaken by the
forces of progress.

158. The numerous resolutions that have been adopted,
the numerous plans for a peaceful settlement that have
already been drawn up, the innumerable talks that have
been started, the long and diflicuh meetings that have
been held in addition to the present series, demonstrate
that the time for hesitation and mere verbal condemnations is past. The question of Namibia has plagued us all
for too long. For 35 years now, Africa’s patience has
been put to the test. We believe it is now time to act, and
to act swiftly and with determination. The very least that
can be demanded, as we see it, is the imposition of mandatory economic sanctions, which must include a
strengthening of the embargo on all forms of trade with
South Africa.

152. We believe that it is important to have a clear grasp
of the Namibian situation since any undue pessimism
would simply favour the sinister designs of the imperialists and their racist lackeys.
153. Indeed, in October 1966 and May 1967 the General
Assembly, at the request of African and Asian countries,
adopted resolutions 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966 and
2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967, in which it decided that Namibia came under the direct responsibility of the United
Nations. At the time, it envisaged the immediate granting
of independence to Namibia and entrusted to the United
Nations Council for Namibia, in the interim, the functions of legal Administering Authority of the Territory
until it became independent.

159. Today, as in the past, the racist Government of
Pretoria, together with its allies, continues to evince bad
faith, arrogance and treachery, to stymie any negotiations on the question of Namibia and to defy the intemational community with complete impunity.

154. Unfortunately, since that date to the present, in a
series of events that included the regrettable preimplementation
meeting at Geneva in January 1981, the
Pretoria clique, supported by its protectors, has obstinately refused to implement both General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions, while putting forward unacceptable proposals of its own.

160. Guinea regards the new demands put forward by
Pretoria and its protectors as a pure delaying tactic, on
the thin pretext of some threat to the security of South
African frontiers posed by the presence of Cuban troops
in the free and sovereign land of Angola.

155. In the light of those successive failures, the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-

161. My delegation not only reaffirms its total adhesion
to the Paris Declaration on Namibia,* adopted by the
13

International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the
Namibian People, but also endorses the forthright condemnation of any attempt to establish any link what:
soever between the independence of Namibia and any
extraneous issue-in this particular case, the withdrawal
of Cuban forces from Angola. My country believes that
to be an underhand way of hampering the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) as well as an act of brazen
interference by South Africa and its protectors in the
domestic affairs of Angola.
162. In sum, may I say that, in the light of South Africa’s refusal to enter into any genuine dialogue with the
United Nations and SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people, and in the face of that
defiance, my delegation proposes: first, the imposition of
comprehensive sanctions, as provided for .in Chapter VII
of the Charter; and, secondly, stepped-up assistance to
Namibian refugees and to the front-line States, victims of
South Africa’s repeated acts of aggression, in order to
strengthen their defence capabilities.

166. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America):
I have already had the opportunity during this month to
express my Government’s and my personal congratulations to your Government,
Sir, concerning Zaire’s
assumption of the presidency of the Council and our
confidence in the fairness and skill of Zaire’s representative in the conduct of those affairs. May I simply reiterate, not only our Government’s general confidence in
Zaire’s ability and will to conduct the affairs of the Council with skill and fairness, but also our pleasure at seeing
you, our former colleague, and now Minister for Foreign
Affairs of your country, so experienced in the affairs of
the Council and of the United Nations, occupying the
post of President during these most important deliberations.
167. The events of this past week end in Pretoria and
Maputo are a bloody reminder, if any was needed, of the
consequences of violence and of the very real potential
that today exists throughout southern Africa’ for the
further escalation of violence. As is all too often the case,
the victims of these most recent tragic events include
many who were entirely innocent and blameless. The
United States deplores such acts of violence, from whatever quarters, whether perpetrated in the name of change
or in opposition to it. Violence cannot solve the pressing
problems of the region. On the contrary, by creating new
victims, new grievances and new grounds for anger and
hatred, such acts can only increase the danger of new and
greater violence in an ever-escalating tragic cycle. Ultimately, we must count among the wounded of these acts
all those who seek and hope for peaceful change through
negotiation and dialogue.

163. Convinced as we are that justice and democracy
will inevitably triumph in an independent Namibia, I
should like once again to proclaim the active solidarity of
the people of Guinea, its state party, its revolution and
particularly its leader, President Ahmed Stkou Tour-C, the
Supreme Leader of the Revolution, to the militant people
of Namibia and its vanguard, SWAPO, the sole representative of the heroic .Namibian people.
164. On this solemn occasion, we should like respectfully to welcome the presence in this hall of the foremost
freedom fighter of the Namibian people, our brother Sam
Nujoma, to whom the progressive forces of the world
have paid a tribute by sending to New York their Ministers for Foreign Affairs and eminent representatives to
participate in these important debates in the Council on
the question of Namibia.

168. My Government has for the past several years
been seeking to assist the Governments of the region to
find peaceful ways to address and to resolve mutual
problems. We have been encouraged by the purposeful
high-level dialogue between Mozambique
and South
Africa, a dialogue which the events of last week-end must
not be permitted to place in jeopardy. We have made
known both to South Africa and Mozambique-and
indeed to all Governments of the region-our
willingness
to help. We have stressed our conviction that the problem of cross-border violence, if allowed to go unresolved,
will seriously endanger prospects for both stability and
peaceful change.

165. One of the cardinal principles of the state party of
Guinea is its emphatic expression of the Guinean peoples’
active solidarity with all the forces throughout the world
that are struggling against injustice, imperialism and colonialism. It was in the name of that principle that President
Ahmed SCkou Tour& in his message to the International
Conference in Solidarity with the Front-line States, held
at Lisbon from 25 to 27 March 1983, expressing his complete confidence in the struggle of the southern African
freedom lighters, stated:

169. Le it be clearly understood that the United States
deplores violent cross-border activities in southern
Africa, in whatever direction and for whatever stated
goal. Similarly, we categorically reaffirm the principle
that all States have a duty to refrain from tolerating or
acquiescing in organized activities within their territory
by guerrillas or- dissidents planning acts of violence in the
territory of another State. There can be no double standard for southern Africa. Cross-border violence cannot be
condoned, whether it be in the form of a bomb placed in
a crowded square in Pretoria by externally based organizations or of the continuing violation of Angola’s territorial integrity by South African forces.

“Victory is on our side. In the struggle between
oppressors and the oppressed, there are reasons on the
side of the oppressed that ensure and guarantee them
victory-their
certainty that they are waging a just war,
their conviction that that is the only way the class
enemy has left open to them and the certainty that the
people will triumph, for history has always granted
victory in such cases to those upholding just causes.
That they also see public opinion on their side is
another propitious factor.”
14

170. The Council also bears a solemnresponsibility to uphold the principles of,non-violence and the settlement of
disputes by peaceful means. Those principles are especially
pertinent to the issue which this meeting of the Council
has been convened to consider.

days before the Reagan Administration,
of which I am a
member, took oflice in Washington. It became one of the
urgent tasks of the new American Government to assess,.
jointly tith its contact group partners, the reasons for the
failure of the Geneva meeting.

171. The United States welcomes the opportunity
afforded by this meeting to participate in a review of the
efforts that are being made to bring about the independence of Namibia, in accordance with decisions previously taken by the Council. As all are aware, the United
Nations, and in particular the Security Council, bears a
special responsibility for furthering the interests of the
people of Namibia and their aspirations for peace, justice
and independence. It has been two years since the Council
last met to examine the question of Namibia, and it is
therefore appropriate that it should wish to review what
has transpired in the intervening period.
:.

177. it would be fair to say that the nevi; American
Government was the recipient of a great deal of advice at
that time. I will be frank in telling the Council that there
were those who advised strongly against a continuing
United States role in pursuit of a negotiated settlement of
the Namibian problem. It was said by a good many that
the obstacles to a peaceful settlement were too great to be
overcome and that the interests of the United States in the
region did not justify the tremendous commitment of time
and energy that would be required. Needless to say, the
persons responsible for formulating the policies of this
Administration
did not share those views. Although they
were.mindful of the great difficulties involved, they were
also aware of the efforts that had already been made and
of the opportunity that existed to resolve through peaceful negotiations this pressing issue. They were, in this
regard, sensitive to the cardinal importance attached to
Namibia’s early independence by the nations of-Africa.
These goals more than justified a rededication to the
efforts which the contact group had first undertaken four
years earlier.

172. .The participation in this debate of so many distilguished ministers for foreign tiairs testifies to the importance and the urgency which the international community
as a whole attaches to the attainment by the people of
Namibia of their justly deserved and too-long-delayed
independence. I especially welcome the presence here of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the front-line States,
with which Governments of the contact group have
enjoyed an active, constructive and vital partnership in
our efforts to hasten Namibia’s independence.

178. At the same time, we were anxious in our renewed
approach to the problem to avoid, if at all possible, the
frustrations of the past. We sought an approach &at
would not result in the same disappointment so keenly
felt, above all by the people of Namibia, following the
failure of the Geneva pre-implementation
meeting. With
this firmly in mind, we undertook a fresh round of consultations, first with our contact group partners and then
with the other parties. concerned: the front-line States,
the South African Government, SWAP0 and the Namibian’ political parties that would also participate in
the United Nations-supervised
elections envisaged in
resolution 435 (1978).

173. Finally, I welcome this .opportunity to report to
you on the role that my Government, in partnership with
the other members of the contact group, has sought to
-play in helping to promote a peaceful, negotiated settlement for the earliest possible attainment of Namibia’s
independence.
174. Before doing so, however, I wish to pay a special
tribute to the Secretary-General. 1 know at first hand his
deeply felt commitment to the attainment of Namibia’s
independence. I have been impressed by his dedication
and objectivity and have full confidence in his ability to
carry out the responsibilities assigned to him under Council resolution 435 (1978). I am also aware of the efforts he
and his staff have made to ensure that all is in readiness
for the day when agreement is reached for implementation of the United Nations settlement plan.

179. In the course of these consultations several facts
became abundantly clear. First, we were assured of the
interest and the desire of all those directly concerned that
the negotiations should continue. Secondly, it was clear
that, in the absence of a peaceful negotiated settlement
leading to Namibia’s
independence, the situation of
armed conflict and instability in the region would only
worsen, with unacceptable consequences for all the
inhabitants of the region. Finally, we were assured by
those with the greatest stake iri the success of the negotiations that the contact group had a continuing and important role to play in helping to bring about a peaceful
settlement.

175. I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report [S/15776& which provides an accurate summation
of what has transpired since the Council last met on this
- issue in April 1981. It is not necessary to recapitulate what
he has already set out. I should, however, like to recall the
very different circunistances that prevailed at the time of
that last meeting.

180. On the basis of this assessment, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the contact group met in May 1981
and decided to redouble their efforts to bring about a
negotiated settlement. They reaffirmed their conviction
that only a .settlement under the aegis of the United
Nations would find broad international acceptance and
@at resolution 435 (1978) continued to provide the basis

176. The tone and the outcome of that debate were very
much a reflection of the widespread disappointment
over the failure of the pre-implementation
meeting at
Geneva, in January 1981, to reach agreement on a date
for the start of the cease-fire envisaged in resolution ‘435
(1978). The pre-implementation
meeting ended only a few
.I5

,.

for Namibia’s peaceful transition to independence. Bearing in mind the difficulties that had arisen at the preimplementation
meeting in Geneva, the contact group
Ministers for Foreign Affairs -further decided to develop
specific proposals that would address directly the con,cems that had thus far prevented the implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978). They considered that the purpose
of these proposals should be to give all concerned greater
confidence as regards the future of an independent Namibia.
181. Since the relaunching of their negotiating efforts in
the spring of 1981 the members of the contact group have
worked closely and intensively with all the parties concerned. It is a matter of the greatest regret -to us, as I
know it is to all of those here, that the promise.of Namibia’s independence has not yet been realized. At the
same time, however, I believe it would be a mistake to
discount the progress that has been achieved towards the
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) since the Council last met to review the -situation [22671h to 2277th

meetings].

182 First, it is important to note that all parties concerned have reaffied
their acceptance of resolution 435
(1978). That resolution and the settlement plan it
endorsed remain the only agreed and recognized basis
for an internationally
acceptable settlement of the Namibia question.
183. All parties have committed themselves to constitutional principles which will serve as a guide to the elected
Constituent Assembly in drafting a democratic Constitution for an independent Namibia. This agreement, which
was confirmed to the Secretary-General in July of last
year and which is noted in his report to the Council
[S/15776, para. aJ, has helped to reassure all those who
will participate in the United Nations-supervised
elections of the democratic future of an independent Namibia.
184. Substantial progress has also been made in resolving the issues which were responsible for the unsuccessful
outcome of the Geneva pm-implementation
meeting. In
particular, through intensive consultations which took
place in New York and Washington last summer, involving representatives of the front-line States, SWAPO,
South Africa and the United Nations Secretariat, understandings were reached that will assure all parties to the
elections of the fairness and impartiality
of the process
leading to Namibia’s independence.

remain to be resolved in preparation for the implementaA
tion of resolution 435 (1978). These are: the choice of the
electoral system to be employed inthe elections, which all
parties are agreed must be settled in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 435 (1978) and in a manner that
does not cause delay; and final technical matters concerning the composition
of the military component of
UNTAG.
187. While the United States is pleased with the record
of what has been achieved over the past two years, we are
by no means satisfied. Indeed, none of us can rest content
until the goal which we seek has been attained. But the
fact that much has been achieved justifies continued commitment to the course.
188. Apart from the specific accomplishments I have
just mentioned, there has been the development of an
atmosphere of confidence which we hope will make it
possible for the parties concerned to take the important
political decisions necessary to go forward with the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). We have been particularly gratified by the constructive and flexible attitude
displayed by the parties concerned, which has made possible the progress that has been achieved to date.
189. We share the concern that the factors relating to
the regional situation in southern Africa, which are, however, outside the scope of the mandate of the contact
group, have not yet permitted implementation
of the
United Nations plan. We believe that these issues should
be resolved rapidly, in a manner consistent with the sovereignty of all States concerned, so that the people of Namibia can exercise their right of self-determination. The
Ministers have accordingly decided that the contact group
should continue its work with all urgency.
190. We are convinced, now more than ever, that, with
the continued good faith and co-operation of a11 concerned, our shared objective of a negotiated settlement
leading to a stable, democratic, prosperous and independent Namibia will be realized.
19 1. Here I should like to say a word about the role and
objectives of my Government in these negotiations.
192. I wish to stress above- all that the United States
neither desires nor seeks any special advantage or position for itself in these negotiations.
193. It is not our intention, nor is it within our power,
to impose our own views or wishes on those whose interests and aspirations are most directly involved.

185. Finally, through their own consultations with the
parties concerned, the Secretary-General and his staff
have made substantial progress in resolving outstanding
questions concerning the composition and deployment of
the military component of UNTAG. Here I should like
once again to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for the determined efforts he has made to ensure
that all is in readiness for the implementation
of the
United Nations settlement plan.

194. We fully respect the fact that the political decisions
needed to proceed with the implementation
of the United
Nations settlement plan are sovereign decisions that can
only be taken by the Governments most immediately and
directly concerned.

186. Because of the substantial progress that has been
made over the past two years, only two major issues

195. Furthermore, we recognize that those who must
take those decisions will wish to assure themselves that
16

their own interests and security will be respected and
protected.

independence and anti*olonialism.
We are therefore
committed to the struggle for the self-determination
of
peoples, political and economic sovereignty and the
establishment of a- new international
economic order,
which will in turn promote the progress of the countries
of the third world and the establishment of more just
economic relations between the industrialized countries
and the countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America.

196. In the sometimes thankless role that we have assumed, our sole objective has been-to assist the parties in
overcoming the difficulties that have to date prevented the
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) and the attainment of Namibia’s independence.
197. Finally, I wish to assure all those here assembled
that the United States will continue to work for Namibia’s
transition to a stable and prosperous independence once
an agreement has been achieved. With other Members of
the United Nations, we are prepared to contribute a fair
share to ensure the effectiveness of UNTAG. We also
stand ready to cooperate with others in providing the
assistance that will be essential to giving all Namibians the
opportunity to lead peaceful and productive lives.

203. Five years have passed since the Council
approved, through its resolution 435 (1978), the United
Nations plan for the independence of Namibia. Yet the
Territory continues to be under the illegal occupation of
a repressive racist regime, in open defiance of the common will of the international community. The acts of
aggression, reprisal and destabilization directed by South
Africa against the independent States of the regionmost recently against Mozambique-pose
a continuous
threat to international peace and security.

198. I am keenly aware of the sense of frustration felt
by members of this body because the aspirations of the
people of Namibia have not been realized. We share that
frustration; we have sympathy for the people of Namibia
and the region who suffer from the continuing conflict.
We will not, however, allow our feelings of frustration to
lead us to despair. Our common efforts will succeed. The
only alternative to continued, vigorous pursuit of a
peaceful, negotiated settlement is a more dangerous and
more destructive escalation of the violence that the
people of Namibia and those throughout the region have
known too well for too long.

204. In the light of the tragic plight of the Namibian
people, the Council must, within the framework of its
responsibility to the United Nations and the States which
make up the Organization, conscientiously exert its political and moral authority to bring about action to ensure
the immediate, effective implementation
of the decisions
of the General Assembly, the International Court of Justice and the Council itself on the independence of Namibia.
205. Besides tackling the problem of the genuine inde.pendence of Namibia, the Council should state its position on other matters of political importance, such as the
full exercise by Namibia of its sovereignty over its wealth
and natural resources and over all its territory, including
Walvis Bay, the Penguin Islands and the other offshore
islands.

199. Those of us who are privileged to participate in the
decisions of this body have a special responsibility to do
all that we can to help achieve Namibian independence
peacefully and promptly. We are ready to work closely
with other members of the Council and with the parties
concerned to achieve such an outcome, which we know
will also enhance the prospects for peace, security and
economic development throughout the region.

206. Panama has unswervingly and incessantly condemned the vile policy of apartheid practised by the
Government of South Africa, as well as the Pretoria
regime’s contemptuous disregard of the advisory opinion
of the International
Court of Justice of 21 June 197L2
and General Assembly and Council resolutions aimed at
putting an end to the illegal occupation by South Africa
of the Territory of Namibia.

200. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretutiunfiom
French): The
next speaker is Mr. Jest Maria Cabrera, the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Panama, whom I welcome. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
201. Mr. CABRERA
(Panama) (Interprezuhm from
Spanish): In an earlier statement my delegation congratulated Mr. Umba di Lutete on his assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of May; nevertheless,
Sir, I should like to express personal pleasure at seeing
you preside once again over this important body; we are
sure that with your experience and your usual diplomatic
ability, the Council debate on the delicate question of
Namibia will go forward successfully and decisively.

207. Yesterday morningthe Council heard the representative of South Africa once again challenge the Council
and the United Nations, when he said:
“I trust . . . that the Security Council will not consider
any action or set any deadlines which might force
southern Africa in the direction of confrontation and
of an escalation of conflict. The Council should be
under no illusions as to who would suffer most . . . It
would be all the peoples of southern Africa, of all the
countries of our region.*** 12440th meeting, para. 102.1

202. The solidarity of Panama and Lati.n America in
general with the States which make up the OAU and with
the peoples of southern Africa is based on the shared
spiritual, ethnic and cultural ideals which have indissolubly linked our two continents throughout their history.
We also share with the African nations the desire to
maintain and promote the principles. of non-alignment,

208. This ‘brutal threat is totally inadmissible and is
unworthy of a modem-day State. What South Africa said
*Quoted in English by the speaker.
17

to the Council was that any action adopted by it with the
aim of hastening the independence of Namibia would be
blocked by direct confrontation and an escalation of the
conflict. South Africa has warned that from its point of
view the victims will be the peoples and the States of the
region. Such an attitude, announced publicly by South
Africa, should be rejected by all members of the intemational community, and deserves the harshest condemnation pronounced by the Organization against any country
since the black days of the Second World War.
209. The Government of Panama, as a State Member of
the United Nations and of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, reaff$ms its full support for sanctions against
the racist r&me of Pretoria for’ its criminal international
conduct. In this connection, Panama agrees that the
Council should impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions against South Africa for as long as it continues its
opposition to the independence of Namibia and its policy
of aggression and reprisal against the front-line States and
other States of the region.
210. The Council’s inaction does not prevent States, acting unilaterally or collectively, from applying economic or
other sanctions against the Pretoria r&me.

to use this as a pretext for opfiosing the early independence of Namibia.
214. No interest, strategic or of any other kind, can
prevail over the right to self-determination
of peoples
and their territorial integrity.
215. Panama therefore reaffirms its recognition of the
right of the Namibian people to self-determination, freedom and national independence, in a united Namibia,
under the leadership of SWAPO, its sole legitimate
representative.
216. On this occasion, I should like to express our particular gratitude for the efforts of the Secretary-General
to bring about the independence of Namibia. His personal interest in this question is well known, and we hope
that ,the Council will provide him with ail the necessary
support.
217. Finally, I have the honour to read out a message,
dated 23 May 1983, addressed to you, Sir, in your capacity as President of the Council, by the President of the
Republic of Panama, Mr. Ricardo de la Esprieiia, which
is related to this debate.
[The speaker read out the message contained in document S/15795.]

2 11. Faced with the negative attitude of South Africa, it
is up to the United Nations and the international community to adopt severe measures against that r&ime to put
an end to the oppression suffered by the people of Namibia and to the aggressive actions of the Pretoria r&me,
which persistently.commits breaches of the peace and carries out armed attacks against the neighbouring front-line
countries. Such measures are all the more necessary
because of the risk that the conflict could spread and
attain broader proportions, thus endangering intemational peace and security.

218. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
request the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Panama to transmit to the President of the Republic of Panama the thanks of the Council for the message he was
kind enough to send to it. The next speaker is Mr. Syed
Najmuddin
Hashim, the Minister ‘for Information
of
Bangladesh. I welcome him here and invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make’ his statement.

212. We believe that the obstinate and defiant stand
taken by South Africa against the highest principles of the
United Nations and of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries leaves the international community no other
option than the imposition of sanctions, the implementation of which will result in the isolation of the racist
r&me of Pretoria. This seems to be the only way to compel South Africa to comply with its unavoidable obligation to bring about the independence of Namibia and to
cease the illegal occupation of its territory,
213. In the discussions in the Council, we should not
allow Namibia’s independence to be made conditional
upon or linked to the policy of strategic interests or
national security of other States, or to the conclusion of
international
agreements under the doctrines of geographical proximity. The people of Panama, in connection with the Panama Canal; fought fdr several
generations against the applicability of such strategic poiicies and doctrines, and are fulfilling a historical and
moral duty in defending the primacy of the right of the
Namibian people over South Africa’s claims to control
the sea route around the Cape of Good Hope as a means
of access to the Indian Ocean and the South Atlantic and

219. Mr. HASHIM (Bangladesh): Mr. President, I wish
first of all to thank you and the other members of the
Council for having givea my delegation the opportunity
to participate in this important debate, affording us the
opportunity to voice the steadfast support of the Govemment and people of Bangladesh for the heroic struggle of
the people of Namibia for freedom and independence. I
should also like to congratulate you on your assumption
of the presidency of this body for the month of May. We
are confident that under the able and proven leadership
of such a distinguished representative of a fellow nonaligned country and of such an outstanding son of
Africa, the Council’s deliberations will achieve fruitful
and constructive results.
220. The Council, after a period of nearly two years, is
meeting again to discuss the situation in Namibia, at the
joint initiative of the members of the Movement of NonAligned Countries and the Group of African States. At
the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi in March,
those leaders, who represent more than two thirds of the
world community, once again unequivocally expressed
’ themselves in favour of the immediate implementation of
18

_

Council resolution 435 (1478). The ground for a successful resolution of the problem has .beenlaid at the recently
concluded International
Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held
in Paris in April.
221. We have thus travelled to join in this historic meeting in New York by way of the conferences at New Delhi
and Paris. We must therefore take due note of the outcome of the two previous meetings in our present quest.
At New Delhi, the Heads of State or Government called
for the present meeting of the Council “in order to consider further action on the implementation
of its plan for
Namibia’s independence thereby.. assuming its primary
responsibility for implementation
of Security Council
resolution 435 (1978)” [see S/15675, annex, sect. I, pura.
493.
222. It is because the Non-Aligned
Movement is concerned at the lack of progress in implementing that resolution, which should have led Namibia out of bondage into
freedom, that it called for the United Nations to assume
direct and full responsibility for every step to be taken
with a view to ensuring the decolonization of.Namibia.
,We are in agreement with the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia that the Security Council
should address itself to this specific goal of bringing the
talks on Namibia
back into the United Nations
framework.

223. Equally we are convinced by the lucid report of the
untiring Secretary-General in which he says that, since the
adoption of the Security Council resolution five years,
ago, the political situation in the region has deteriorated.
tie has reported “other ominous developments, including
acts of destabilization, which add to the political tension
in the area and impair the fragile economies of the countries of the region” [S/15776, para. ISJ. We agree with the
Secretary-General that “the settlement of the Namibian
question is of overriding importance for the future’peace
and prosperity of the entire region” [ibid, pura. 203, and
we agree with him when he regards “the independence of
Namibia as the essential and primary issue, which we
must now face up to without furth.er delay” [ibid].
224. We can no longer afford to listen to Aesopian
fables of alleged progress in implementation
of United
Nations decisions being made through efforts undertaken
outside the United Nations framework.
225. Bangladesh believes that the independence of Namibia can and niust be achieved in accordance with the
principles embodied in United Nations resolutions, particularly Council resolutions 385, (1976) and 435 (1978).
We are convinced that those resolutions constitute the
only viable basis for the peaceful transition of the Territory from colonial subjugation to independence. We cannot, therefore, accept any formula outside the framework
of the United Nations, and we wish to reiterate that the
United Nations resolutions, particularly the Council
resolutions, must be implemented in full without any
modification whatsoever. We reject all attempts to link

the independence of Namibia to extraneous issues. This
is so fundamental a right that it cannot be predicated
upon any other issue whatsoever.
226. In his statement to the ‘Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, the Head of the Bangladesh Government,
Lieutenant-General
H. M. Ershad, stated:
“The persistent presence of colonialism and racism
in southern Africa is an outrage to humanity. It continues to pose a dangerous threat to peace and security
in the region. Bangladesh is irrevocably committed to
the cause of the oppressed people of Namibia and
South Africa. ,:We pledge our unstinted support in
their legitimate struggle -for freedom, liberty and
human dignity. We are fully convinced that their
efforts will ultimately triumph.”
227. We cannot let cruelty and injustice go unchallenged. We cannot turn a blind eye to the endless ordeals
of the Namibians. The cause of peace is certainly not
served by the indefensible and mounting crimes of Pretoria, the latest example of which is the South African air
attack on the Mozambican ‘capital. South Africa’s usual
objective in such heinous actions appears to have been
achieved because reports published in The New York
Times say that two women, a child and a factory worker
were killed by aerial rockets and machine-gun fire.
228. The policies of the South African Government
pose a grave challenge not only to the peace and security
of Namibia but to the region, the continent and the
world at large. It is equally an affront to the international
community that the majority of the people of Namibia
continue to suffer domination, racial discrimination and
repression. The litany of South African crimes is long
and unending. That a reign of terror exists has been confirmed time and again by several fact-finding missions.
One such report, entitled Namibia-A
Nation Wronged,
published in February 1982 by representatives of the
British Council of Churches who had visited the Territory in Novembir
1981, confirmed that South African
forces stationed in northern Namibia were terrorizing the
local population. The report, inter ah, referred to a practice commonly resorted to by the South African security
forces: tying the bodies of the alleged terrorists they had
killed behind their vehicles and dragging them through
the villages. The.bodies are exhibited to the parents of the
dead, to villagers and even to young children in schools.
The organizers of such gruesome spectacles, however, get
away Scot-free since, under the law, civil servants,
members of the police and the army are indemnified
against any action taken in “good faith” in the opera-.
tional area.
229. Distiriminatory laws and practices also govern education, housing, health, employment and all other aspects
of the daily life of the Namibians. According to a 1982
study of the Africa Fund in New York, the life expectancy
for Namibian whites is from 68 to 72 years as compared
with between 42 to 52 for the blacks. Similarly, the infant

mortality rate is 145 per thousand for the blacks, compared to 21.6 for the whites. It was also said that of 152
doctors in Namibia 80 per cent practised in the urban
areas, where the majority of the whites live, compared to
the only 20 per cent who practised in the rural areas,
where half of the total population lives.
230. At the hearings on Namibian,uranium
conducted
by the United Nations Council for Namibia from 7 to 11
July 19803 and published recently, experts from the
United States, the United Kingdom and France described
the dangerous effects on health and environment of the
mining and processing of uranium. Great concern was
expressed over the unusually limited and racially diicriminatory health care given at the R&sing mine. Enormous
piles of ground-up ore, called “tailings**, which are dangerously radioactive, are being left unattended. This, the
report cautions, could remain a threat to the environment for 100,000 years.
231. In addressing ourselves to the question under consideration my delegation would like to underscore one fundamental premise-that
independence in Namibia can and
must be achieved in accordance with the principles embe
died in the resolutions of the United Nations, particularly
resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). The heart of the
Namibian problem is, as we all know, remarkable in its
simplicity: a people deprived of its right to national independence and self-determination, a Territory occupied by
brutal military force. Far from abiding by international
opinion as expressed in numerous United Nations resolutions, South Africa has progressively undertaken steps
designed to destroy the territorial integrity of Namibia. It
has occupied Walvis Bay, which is an integral part of Namibia. The logical extension of this policy has been the
systematic fragmentation of the Territory along ethnic and
racial lines exemplified by the system of bantustanization.
The holding of mock elections leading to the formation of
a so-called National Assembly has been declared null and
void by the Council [resolufion 439 (1978’1. The racist
regime has massively deployed its armed forces to police
the Territory and rule the people through terror and
repression. These troops not only are attempting to sup
press the struggle for liberation but have also extended
their acts of aggression into the neighbouring countries,
thereby threatening international peace and security.
232. Bangladesh is proud of its association with Namibia. We deeply value the trust and confidence reposed
in us in assisting and facilitating the work of the United
Nations Special Representative
in the context of
UNTAG. As a member of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, Bangladesh has concerted its actions with
like-minded countries to promote the cause of Namibia,
particularly
in connection with the exploration and
exploitation of its natural resources, both onshore and
offshore. Within our modest means, we have contributed
to the United Nations Fund for Namibia, as well as
offered training facilities in Bangladesh to students from
Namibia.
233. In the face of unbelievable intransigence and
unprovoked
aggression, our African brothers have
.20

shown commendable restraint and statesmanship. We
salute the leadership of SWAPO-the
sole authentic and
legitimate representative of the Namibian people-for its
readiness to 6ign a cease-fire agreement and for accepting
a target date for the arrival of UNTAG, which would set
in motion the electoral process under United Nations
supervision. Further evidence of the readiness of
SWAP0 to co-operate in all serious efforts to achieve a
negotiated settlement has been provided by its President,
Sam Nujoma, during the present session. We welcome
his far-sighted acceptance of the need to protect the white
minority and its property in an independent Namibia
and his agreement to consider the proposal containing
principles for the Constituent Assembly and the Constitution of an independent Namibia, We should like to
congratulate the leaders of the front-lineStates-Angola,
Botswana, Mozambique, Nigeria, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe-on
the courage and
fortitude they have shown and the invaluable support
they have extended to the cause of Namibia. In this hour
of trial, we renew our pledge to stand by them.
234. The international
community
can no longer
remain indifferent to all the inhuman crimes being perpetrated by the Government of South Africa. Nor can we
remain mute spectators of the endless travail and trauma
suffered by the Namibian people. In the name of that
same’people, whose rights have been trodden under foot
and whose land has been laid waste, the perpetrators and
usurpers must be called to account by the international
community. We should like to reiterate once again that
Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978) constitute
the only viable basis for a peaceful transition of the Territory from colonial subjugation to independence. We seek
nothing more than the complete, unconditional
and
expeditious implementation
of these two resolutions.
235. We are sitting atop a rumbling volcano of resentment, frustration and anger that is reaching boiling
point-not
only in Africa, but around the world, whereever freedom is considered a non-negotiable and inviolable
objective. The failure of the United Nations in the past to
act firmly and decisively has only encouraged the racist
Pretoria r&me to intensify its aggression and barbarity. In
the present circumstances, it is imperative that this body
proceed urgently, with all the authority at its command
and all the resources at its disposal, to secure the speedy
implementation
of its own resolutions.
236. My delegation sincerely hopes and believes that the
Council will take effective and concrete measures to bring
about the dawn of Namibian independence as envisaged
in the United Nations plan approved in Council resolution 435 (1978), which must remain the only basis, without the introduction of extraneous and irrelevant issues,
for the final and lasting settlement of the Namibian
problem.
The meeting rose at ZO.5 p.m.

NOTES

,’ See Report of the Internationnl Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence. Pa& 25-29 Aprtl 1983
(A/CONF.120/13),
part three.

‘* Legaf Cbnsequencesfor States of thk Continued Presence of South
Afria in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council
Resolution 276 (lj76). Advisor Opinion, I.C.J. Reports, 1971. p. 16.
’ Phtnder of Namibian Uranium: Major Findings of the Hearings on
Namfbian Uranium held by the United Nations Council for Namibia in
Jufy 1980. DP/715 (United Nations, New York, 1981).

:
.’

_

., .
>

,.

.I
’

.:*:

.’
‘,

~

1

.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous aupr&s de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC

I’lOJIYYHTb

M3AAHMI1

OPTAHH3AUMM

OF%E.UMHEHHblX

HAUIlfl

M3naHHr OpraHs3auHw 06aenHtietiHbtx Hamitt ~oxc110 xynarb a KmxcHbcs
Mara3HHax
HareHrcrBax B~B~~~~~~OH~XMH~~.~~B~~~~~~~~~K~~~I~~~~H~R~BB~III~MKHII~HOM
Mara3HHe HJW namare 130 anpecy: OpraHtt3auHn 06benuxeHHbIx Hartrift, CeKullR no
nponance H3itaHHR, Hbto-Mopx
mH xesresa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas estrln en venta en librerfas y casasdistribuidoras en
todas partes del mundo. Cons&e a su librem o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

oo4oiI

90-60205-March 1991-2.050
