A /67/PV.65

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

65th plenary meeting
Thursday, 21 February 2013, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Román-Morey
(Peru), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Agenda item 134 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations (A/67/693/Add.2,
A/67/693/Add.3, A/67/693/Add.4 and A/67/693/Add.5)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I should
like, in keeping with established practice, to draw
the attention of the General Assembly to documents
A/67/693/Add.2 to Add.5, in which the SecretaryGeneral informs the President of the General Assembly
that, since the issuance of his communications contained
in document A/67/693/Add.1, Cape Verde, Equatorial
Guinea, Gabon, Grenada and Kyrgyzstan have made
the payments necessary to reduce their arrears below
the amount specified in Article 19 of the Charter.
May I take it that the General Assembly duly takes
note of the information contained in these documents?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of
and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolution (A/67/L.55)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Members
will recall that the Assembly considered agenda item 14,

jointly with agenda item 9, “Report of the Economic
and Social Council”, at its 28th plenary meeting, on
22 October 2012.
Members will also recall that, under agenda
item 14, the Assembly adopted resolution 67/18 at
its 43rd plenary meeting, on 28 November 2012, and
marked the global launch of the International Year of
Quinoa at its 64th plenary meeting on 20 February
2013.
I now give the floor to the representative of Kenya
to introduce draft resolution A/67/L.55.
Ms. Muli (Kenya): I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/67/L.55, entitled “Organization of the
special session of the General Assembly on the followup to the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development beyond
2014”.
Twenty years ago, representatives of Member States,
civil society, academics and the private sector gathered
together in Cairo and adopted the most forward-looking
document in the world at that time. It trail-blazed and
set the stage for other international conferences, such
as the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action,
which built upon its success. The Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development is as relevant today as it was then.
Two years ago, my delegation was honoured and
proud to have facilitated resolution 65/234, which
extended the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) and
its key actions beyond 2014. As members may recall,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

13-23861 (E)

*1323861*

A/67/PV.65

the resolution was adopted by the General Assembly
by consensus. We are similarly honoured and proud
to have facilitated the current organizational draft
resolution, which sets out the modalities for the holding
of the special session.
My delegation wants to sincerely thank all the
delegations that participated in the consultations on the
present draft resolution. I thank them for their hard work
and the flexibility they demonstrated. We appreciate
the long hours that it took to arrive at this consensus
text. While it is not a perfect document for any specific
delegation, it reflects the various compromise positions
that were expressed by different delegations.
This organizational draft resolution has several
strong points. First, the high-level special session will
be held on 22 September 2014. That is about the time
that the high-level segment of the general debate will
be held. If it were held at another time, it would have
burdened delegations by requiring them to return to
New York to attend the special session.
Secondly, Member States will have the opportunity
to recommit themselves to the ICPD Programme of
Action and its key actions at the highest level, just as
was done in Cairo 19 years ago.
Thirdly, there will also be wider participation by
Member States. The high-level special session will be
held over a period of eight hours. With the extended
time period, more delegations will have the opportunity
to participate.
Fourthly, there will be participation by civil society.
The participation of non-governmental organizations
will be based on the principle of equitable geographical
representation, thereby giving each geographical region
an equal chance to be represented at the special session.
The Commission for Population and Development
has also been given a special place in the preparations
leading up to the special session. Although there will
be no outcome during the high-level special session,
the Commission’s forty-seventh session, in 2014, will
be open-ended, giving an opportunity to all Member
States to participate on an equal footing in the envisaged
interactive discussion and preparations for the special
session.
Finally, I would like to most profoundly thank the
secretariat of the consultations, whose staff was drawn
from United Nations Population Fund and the United
Nations Population Division. They worked tirelessly to

2

provide answers and explanations to delegations. They
also provided clarifications on the various proposals
and ensured the timely distribution of the draft texts
and other documents. That work would have been much
more difficult without them. I look forward to the
adoption of the draft resolution by consensus.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolution A/67/L.55.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): In connection with draft
resolution A/67/L.55, entitled “Organization of the
Special Session of the General Assembly on the followup to the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development beyond
2014”, I wish to put on the record the following
statement of financial implications on behalf of the
Secretary-General, in accordance with rule 153 of the
rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
In paragraphs 1 and 4 (a) of draft resolution
A/67/L.55, the General Assembly would decide that the
special session of the General Assembly on the followup to the Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development will be
held on 22 September 2014 in New York, in the most
efficient and cost-effective manner, and that the special
session will be composed of plenary meetings on
22 September 2014 from 1 to 9 p.m.
The special session of the General Assembly would
be composed of one day and three meetings in all six
languages, with all three meetings being proposed
for the afternoon of 22 September 2014, from 1 to
9 p.m. Therefore, the special session will constitute
an addition of three meetings, with interpretation and
verbatim records in all six languages, to the workload of
the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management. That would constitute an additional
requirement in the amount of $144,200 for meetings
in 2014. Furthermore, additional documentation would
be required, comprising 121 pages of pre-session
documentation in all six official languages in 2014.
That would constitute an additional requirement in the
amount of $236,600 for documentation services in 2014.
Consequently, additional requirements of $380,800
for the biennium 2014-2015 would arise under section 2,
“General Assembly and Economic and Social Council

13-23861

A/67/PV.65

affairs and conference management”, for meeting
servicing and documentation. Accordingly, should the
General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/67/L.55,
additional resources in the amount of $380,800 would
be required under the proposed programme budget
for the biennium 2014-2015 under section 2, “General
Assembly and Economic and Social Council affairs
and conference management”. That would require
additional appropriations of $380,800 to be included
in the proposed programme budget for the biennium
2014-2015.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to the speaker in explanation of
position, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote or position are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
United States would first like to thank the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Kenya, Ambassador Koki
Muli, for her remarks this morning. We would also
like to thank the Permanent Representative of Kenya,
Ambassador Macharia Kamau, and the very capable
Mr. John Mosoti for their tireless efforts in facilitating
the discussions of the modalities of the special session
of the General Assembly on the follow-up to the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD) beyond 2014.
The United States is pleased to join the consensus
on draft resolution A/67/L.55. We strongly support the
special session of the General Assembly, which will
assess progress to date on meeting the goals outlined
in the 1994 Programme of Action of the International
Conference on Population and Development.
The ICPD, along with its five- and 10-year
reviews and in many resolutions since 1994, provides
the foundation for our global efforts to provide
women and young people with access to sexual and
reproductive health services, including modern forms
of contraception. The ICPD mandate is based on
support for reproductive rights, which are essential to
empowering women and ultimately to the international
community’s ability to reach our global development
goals.
Throughout negotiations on the present draft
resolution, we have underscored the important role
that non-governmental and civil society organizations,
including those that do not have consultative status in
the Economic and Social Council, should play through

13-23861

their participation in the special session. The special
session should be open to all concerned parties,
including non-governmental organizations (NGOs) that
have subject-matter expertise.
Non-governmental and civil society organizations,
academic institutions and private-sector organizations
worldwide play a crucial role in population issues,
including by advocating on behalf of women’s
reproductive rights and by implementing programmes
to assist women. Such programmes include reducing
maternal mortality and morbidity and enhancing the
ability of women to make decisions for themselves
about when and if to have children. Their expertise is
essential to the success of the special session.
The process of admission for civil society
organizations, including non-governmental organizations,
to participate in the special session must be completely
transparent. Any concerns with an NGO’s potential
participation in the special session need to be addressed
openly and transparently, not behind closed doors.
Non-governmental organizations must not be denied
access to United Nations forums for political reasons.
In that regard, we understand paragraph 4 (d) and
footnote 2 of the draft resolution to mean that the list
of NGOs and other potential participants will be sent
to the General Assembly for its consideration, where
Member States will evaluate any possible objections
made by other States. The special session will have a
far greater value if all relevant concerned civil society
voices are heard without objection.
Each event and conference is a little different, so the
language in the draft resolution concerning civil society
participation should not be seen as a cookie-cutter
precedent for the next resolution. We should continue
our efforts to develop and refine clear and transparent
procedures to facilitate the full participation of NGOs
in high-level meetings. As we gain experience with
various formulas, we expect to refine and develop the
future language on that topic to provide for civil society
access more clearly.
The United States looks forward to continued
cooperation to make the special session a forwardlooking and productive session.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/67/L.55.

3

A/67/PV.65

I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
Panama has become a sponsor of draft resolution
A/67/L.55.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft resolution A/67/L.55?
Draft resolution A/67/L.55 was adopted (resolution
67/250).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to the speakers in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. De Léon Huerta (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Mexico attaches great importance to
resolution 67/250, as it concerns a topic that is relevant
to the international community, namely, the followup to the International Conference on Population and
Development beyond 2014. We are certain that the
special session of the General Assembly will enable
States to reaffirm at the highest political level their
commitment to implementing and launching the Cairo
Programme of Action.
One of the fundamental issues in organizing
special sessions of the General Assembly is that of the
participation of civil society and non-governmental
organizations. They have played a critical role in
promoting the goals of the Cairo Programme of Action.
The delegation of Mexico once again wishes to
reiterate its commitment to the broadest possible
participation of civil society representatives as essential
stakeholders in our deliberations. For that reason,
we regret the introduction, in paragraph 4 (d) of the
resolution, of the view seeking to limit the participation
of such organizations, submitting it solely to the
principle of non-objection by Member States without,
at the same time, respecting the crucial principle of due
process. Moreover, the supposed right of veto by States
regarding the participation of certain organizations is
professed to be acknowledged, ignoring the fact that it
is for the General Assembly to make such a decision.

4

During the informal consultations, we stated our
preference for the special session not to be held on
the same date as the World Conference of Indigenous
Peoples in 2014 in order to avoid possible logistical
complications. We hope, however, that the agreement
reached for the first plenary meeting of the session to
begin at the conclusion of the opening of the World
Conference on Indigenous Peoples will enable both
events, to which we attach the highest priority, to take
place in a coordinated way.
Finally, we would like to thank the delegation
of Kenya for the very efficient way in which it led
the negotiations on the resolution and the United
Nations Population Fund for its work in the context of
marking the twentieth anniversary of the International
Conference on Population and Development.
Mr. Vasiliev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation is committed to the
effective implementation of the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD) beyond 2014. We attach particular
importance to next year’s special session of the General
Assembly to review the status of the implementation of
the ICPD.
We welcome the consensus adoption of resolution
67/250 with regard to that session. We note the work
of the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the
United Nations in helping to coordinate the process for
reaching agreement on the resolution.
By adopting the resolution, it is clearly established
that the proceedings of the special session shall be
governed by the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly. We believe that the participation and
activities of representatives of non-governmental
organizations, as set out in paragraphs 4 (c) and (d)
of the resolution, will take place without prejudice to
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. The
President of the General Assembly drawing up the list
of representatives of non-governmental organizations
will be undertaken in accordance with the principle of
non-objection.
In general, we support the inclusion of
non-governmental organizations in the work of the
United Nations in the social and economic fields. The
Russian delegation believes that that should take place
without prejudice to the intergovernmental nature of
the Organization and its principal bodies.

13-23861

A/67/PV.65

Mrs. Furman (Israel): The 1994 International
Conference on Population and Development (ICPD),
held in Cairo, was a groundbreaking event in the history
of population and development, as well as of women’s
rights. The ICPD Programme of Action endorsed a new
strategy that emphasized the many linkages between
population and development and focused on the needs
of individual women and men. It has had a profound
impact on people around the world in both developed
and developing countries.
Israel attaches great importance to the ICPD and
therefore joined the consensus on resolution 67/250.
However, I would like to express my delegation’s
disappointment that during the informal consultations
some States insisted on limiting civil society
participation at the special session of the General
Assembly on the follow-up to the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development beyond 2014.
Israel strongly believes that the special session
should be a platform for all relevant stakeholders
to express their views and exchange best practices.
Non-governmental organizations operate on the ground
in all corners of the world and are crucial players in
the promotion and implementation of the Programme
of Action of the ICPD.
Israel appreciates the engagement and leadership
of the facilitator, Ambassador Kamau of Kenya, as
well as the tremendous efforts made by our colleague,
John Mosoti, and the rest of the team. We would like
to thank the facilitator for his constructiveness and
creativity, especially with regard to paragraph 4 (d) of
the resolution on civil society participation.
However, we are deeply concerned that the
participation of civil society and other important
stakeholders will be considered on a non-objection
basis, contravening the basic principles of due process,
fairness, transparency and accountability. As we
emphasized throughout the negotiation process, the
final decision of civil society participation rests with
the General Assembly, and that is how we interpret
paragraph 4 (d).
We call on all Member States to respect the
important role of all stakeholders, and we sincerely
hope that everyone who is interested and engaged in
the topic of population and development will be able to
join us in September 2014.

13-23861

Ms. Hentic (Canada): Let me take this opportunity
to thank Ambassador Koki Muli, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Kenya, for her very constructive
opening remarks.
Canada supports the important work of the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD) and is pleased
that we could reach consensus on the resolution. We
would like to express our sincere gratitude to Kenya
for the remarkable facilitation role it played during
the negotiation process. As I participated personally
in those long negotiations, allow me to warmly thank
Ambassador Kamau and my dear colleague John
Mosoti for their relentless efforts to get to a consensus
text of resolution 67/250.
Canada is disappointed that the General Assembly
has been slowly moving away from its past practice
in regard to the participation of non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) in United Nations events, such
as the special session of the General Assembly on the
follow-up to the Programme of Action of the ICPD
beyond 2014. While Canada agrees that Member States
be consulted in the selection process for NGOs without
consultative status in the Economic and Social Council,
Canada also believes that NGOs should participate in
United Nations events on the basis of their relevance
to the subject matter under consideration at the event.
The language in paragraph 4 (d) of resolution 67/250
is still based on an objection. Past practice allowed for
Member States’ involvement in the election process,
while also ensuring that NGOs’ relevance was the
primary criterion for their prospective participation. As
Canada believes that this balance is critical, we regret
that such balance is not adequately reflected in the
resolution before us.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of position
following the adoption of resolution 67/250.
I now give the floor to the observer of the European
Union.
Mr. Devanlay (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The acceding country Croatia; the candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro, Iceland and Serbia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania and Bosnia and

5

A/67/PV.65

Herzegovina; and the European Free Trade Agreement
country Norway, member of the European Economic
Area; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and
Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
We would like to extend our thanks and deep
appreciation to Ambassador Kamau and to our dear
colleague John Mosoti from the Mission of Kenya to the
United Nations, who personally made tireless efforts
to facilitate the discussions on resolution 67/250, and
for their outstanding work in conducting the process of
consultations in a very open and transparent manner.
First, the European Union and its member States
want to unambiguously reaffirm their commitment to
the full implementation of the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD) and its review conferences. We
wish to stress the importance we attach to the special
session of the General Assembly on the follow-up of the
ICPD beyond 2014.
The ICPD review process is a unique way of
deepening our appreciation of the importance of the
ICPD agenda. The ICPD in Cairo in 1994 was a groundbreaking event; placing human rights, individuals and
communities at the centre of population and development
issues represented a paradigm shift in development
policy. The special session of the General Assembly,
now scheduled for the afternoon of 22 September 2014,
will also come at a key moment of our discussions on
the post-2015 United Nations development agenda.
We are also looking forward to fruitful discussions
during the forty-seventh session of the Commission on
Population and Development in April 2014, which will
be open-ended in order to ensure maximum engagement
and ownership of all stakeholders ahead of the special
session.
However, when discussing this resolution’s
modalities, we were deeply disappointed by the
reluctance shown by some Member States to ensure
the full participation of civil society representatives
at the special session and to provide transparency in
the way that relevant non-accredited non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) would be allowed to participate
in the session.
We firmly believe that maintaining a strong and
open dialogue with genuine and relevant civil society
groups should be a key element in the high-level
discussion of the ICPD. For that reason, throughout

6

the consultations on the resolution we consistently
advocated, as we have in other instances, that the
process of admission of NGOs to participate in the
special session should be completely transparent and
should allow for the full involvement of the General
Assembly. Therefore, our interpretation of paragraph
4 (d) of resolution 67/250 is that, within the General
Assembly, Member States will be able to examine and
challenge possible objections made by other States to
the presence of civil society representatives or specific
NGOs in an open and transparent fashion.
We hope that a more constructive approach will be
shown by all Member States in future discussions on
civil society participation at the United Nations, and
the European Union and its member States will remain
strongly committed in ensuring an improved, more
open and more transparent process for the selection of
NGO participation in specific United Nations meetings.
We will continue to stay actively engaged in debates
on population and development and look forward to
successful and fully inclusive discussions during the
special session.
Mr. Fuchs (Switzerland): Switzerland would like
to commend the facilitators, Ambassador Kamau
and Mr. John Mosoti from the Mission of Kenya to
the United Nations, for their unwavering efforts in
providing guidance in the consultations on resolution
67/250 and leading it to a sound consensus.
Switzerland welcomes the purpose of the
resolution, and we reaffirm our commitment to the
full implementation of the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development (ICPD) and of the ongoing review process,
including its review conferences. The special session to
be held on 22 September 2014 will give key momentum
to renewing political will to promote the fundamental
principles on population and development agreed to by
Governments at the International Conference in Cairo
in 1994. We further welcome the fact that the fortyseventh session of the Commission on Population and
Development in April 2014 will be open-ended in
order to ensure maximum inclusiveness of all relevant
stakeholders.
With regard to inclusive stakeholder participation
at the special session itself, however, we are concerned
about the reluctance to fully support the principles
of transparency and due process in the selection of
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) without

13-23861

A/67/PV.65

accreditation in the Economic and Social Council and
the wider civil society. In Switzerland’s view, civil
society stakeholders contribute valuable perspectives
on matters relating to population and development and
should therefore be accorded a strong and appropriate
role in the ICPD special session of 2014.
Throughout the consultation process on the modality
resolution, Switzerland advocated a transparent and
open process in the selection of relevant NGOs and
civil society — a process that accords a role in the
consultation of the list proposed by the President of the
General Assembly, not only to the individual Member
States but to the General Assembly itself, to take a role
in the decision-making process.
We acknowledge that, with the formulation
attained in the resolution, a step in the right direction
towards transparency and due process — values that
are dear to Switzerland — has been taken. In that sense,
Switzerland understands the meaning of the language
in paragraph 4 (d) as follows. After the consultation of
Member States on the proposed NGOs in civil society
stakeholders, the General Assembly will have the
possibility to consider the list of relevant stakeholders
and possible objections made by Member States. We
understand that the General Assembly is the legitimate
body to take the final decision on the participation of
relevant stakeholders in the ICPD special session.
Switzerland will maintain its commitment to
supporting the important role we attach to NGOs and
the wider civil society in general and on this particular
matter. Switzerland will therefore continue to engage in
dialogue with Member States in developing appropriate
standards in that regard.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 14.

permanent members; seven members of the Economic
and Social Council, elected from regional groups;
five top providers of assessed contributions to United
Nations budgets and of voluntary contributions to
United Nations funds, programmes and agencies,
including a standing peacebuilding fund; five top
providers of military personnel and civilian police
to United Nations missions; and seven additional
members elected by the General Assembly, giving due
consideration to representation from all regional groups
in the overall composition of the Committee.
Members will recall that, at its 62nd plenary
meeting, on 24 December 2012, the General Assembly
elected Brazil, Malaysia and Peru as members of
the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning
on 1 January 2013. Regarding candidatures for the two
seats, I should like to inform members that the Group of
African States has endorsed Kenya and South Africa.
Members will recall that in resolution 60/261, the
General Assembly decided that the rules of procedure
and established practice of the Assembly for the election
of members of its subsidiary bodies shall apply to its
election of members of the Committee. For this election,
rules 92 and 94 shall be applicable. Accordingly, the
election will be held by secret ballot and there will be
no nominations.
However, I should like to recall paragraph 16 of
decision 34/401, whereby the practice of dispensing
with the secret ballot for elections to subsidiary organs
when the number of candidates corresponds to the
number of seats to be filled should become standard,
unless a delegation specifically requests a vote on a
given election. In the absence of such a request, may
I take it that the Assembly decides to proceed to the
election on that basis?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 110 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(c) Election of five members of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Members
will recall that, in accordance with paragraphs 4
(a) to (e) of resolution 60/180, of 20 December 2005,
the Organizational Committee shall comprise seven
members of the Security Council, including five

13-23861

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Since
the number of candidates corresponds to the number of
seats to be filled, may I take it that the General Assembly
decides to elect Kenya and South Africa as members
of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding
Commission for a two-year term of office, beginning
on 1 January 2013?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate Kenya and South Africa on their election

7

A/67/PV.65

as members of the Organizational Committee of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (c)
of agenda item 110?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 111 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
Note by the Secretary-General (A/67/107)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Members
will recall that, at its 62nd plenary meeting, on
24 December 2012, the General Assembly took note
of the President’s appointment of Côte d’Ivoire and
Senegal as members of the Committee on Conferences
for a period of three years, beginning on 1 January
2013 and ending on 31 December 2015. Members will
also recall that there remains one seat to be filled from
among the Asia-Pacific States, two seats from among
the Latin American and Caribbean States, one seat to
be filled from among the Eastern European States, and
one seat to be filled from among the Western European
and other States for a period of three years, beginning
1 January 2013.
Members will also recall that, at the sixty-sixth
session of the Assembly, one seat from among the

8

Asia-Pacific States and one seat from among the Latin
American and Caribbean States remained to be filled.
On the recommendation of the Chair of the Group
of Asia-Pacific States, Eastern European States and
the Western European and other States, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Iraq and Israel have been appointed
members of the Committee on Conferences for the
period beginning on 21 February 2013 and ending on
31 December 2015; and Sri Lanka has been appointed
for the period beginning on 21 February 2013 and
ending on 31 December 2014.
May I take it that the Assembly takes note of these
appointments?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Members
will recall that one seat from among the Latin American
and Caribbean States remains vacant for a period
beginning on the date of appointment and ending on
31 December 2015.
Members will further recall that one seat, also
from among the Latin American and Caribbean States,
has remained vacant since the sixty-sixth session, for
a period beginning on the date of appointment and
ending on 31 December 2014. I urge that regional group
to submit its candidature as soon as possible.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 111.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

13-23861
