UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY

:,COUNCIL

OF’FICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

'&pRQ~4'. !93
i .,

..

NEWYORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2549). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.............

Adoption of the agenda. ............................

.........

‘1

...........

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 6692) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SIPV.2549

1

1

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a,Umted
Nations document,
‘**--G..
-----r,*....
:
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2549th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 16 August 1984, at 3.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. LCandre BASSOLE

(Burkina

Faso).

the item on the agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China; Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,
United Kingdom
of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/2549)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ogouma (Benin), Mr. San Jose’ (Cuba), Mr. Nyamdoo (Mongolia),
Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. Alleyne
(Trinidad and Tobago) and Mr. SiloviC (Yugoslavia)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

’

of the agenda

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984 from the Permanent
Representative
of Algeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16692)
The meeting

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received a letter dated 16 August 1984 from the
Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, which reads as follows:

was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

“On behalf of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, I have the honour to request
to be invited, under rule 39 of the provisional rules
of procedure, to participate in the Council’s consideration of the item entitled ‘The question of South
Africa’.”

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 8 August 1984 from the Permanent Representative of Algeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
.
(S/16692)

4. On previous occasions, the Council has extended
invitations to representatives of other United Nations
bodies in connection with the consideration of matters
on its agenda. In accordance with past practice in this
matter, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure
to the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the
2548th meeting, I invite the representative of Algeria to
take a place at the Council table. I invite the representatives of Argentina, Czechoslovakia,
Nigeria, South
Africa and Thailand to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Sahnoun
(Algeria) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Muriiz
(Argentina), Mr. Cesar (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Onobu
(Nigeria),
Mr. von Schirnding
(South Africa) and
Mr. Kasemsri (Thailand) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

It was so decided.
5. The PRESIDENT
finterpretation
from French):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/16700, which-contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Burkina Faso, Egypt, India, Malta, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru and Zimbabwe.

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I should like to inform members of the Council that
I have received letters from the representatives
of
Benin, Cuba, Mongolia,
the Syrian Arab Republic,
Trinidad and Tobago and Yugoslavia in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of

6. Mr. CHIKETA
(Zimbabwe): Allow me to begin by
extending to you, Sir, my country’s sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Coun:

1

cil for the month of August. We are confident that your
personal qualities and undoubted diplomatic skills will
greatly facilitate the efforts of this body to deal justly
and effectively with all the issues that may be brought
before it this month.

cannot be wrong in making this deduction, because the
architects of apartheid themselves have told it to us. In
selling the proposals for the so-called constitutional
dispensation to their electorate, apartheid Ministers
emphasized the limited nature of these proposals, and
stressed that the new so-called constitution was not a
step towards integration, but would serve to entrench
apartheid and preserve white domination.
In other
words, the new constitutional dispensation is designed
to gain for apartheid some breathing space and some
respectability.
(,
12. If the initiators of this exercise themselves were at
pains to point this out to their electorate, who are we to
venture to think differently about those proposals?

7. I further wish to express my country’s appreciation
and admiration for the outstanding manner in which
your predecessor, Mrs. Jeane J. Kirkpatrick
of the
United States, guided the work of the Council in the
month of July.
8. Today the Council is called upon once more to
consider events taking place in South Africa. That is
justly so. The events currently under way in that country not only constitute a negation of the necessary
democratic process and thus become the legitimate
concern of all democratic and peace-loving nations, but
also threaten international
peace and security and so
come under the purview of this Council according to the
Charter of the United Nations.

13. We are of the opinion that this new so-called constitution is a nationalist party document being forced at
gunpoint down the throats of the majority of South
Africans, who are black and have been totally ignored
in the power-sharing exercise provided for by this document, which, in fact, now serves to de-nationalize
them and to make them strangers in the land of their
birth. Indeed, they are being made stateless people,
people without a passport that any country represented
at this table would recognize.

9. All of us here are aware of the provisions of the socalled new constitution in South Africa. For that reason
I do not intend to enunciate those provisions here.
What I intend to do is to bring to the notice of this
Council our understanding
of those provisions, our
interpretation
of them and our view regarding what we
believe they mean for South Africa in particular and for
our region and the world in general.

14. Moreover, the laws that apartheid is constructed
upon, such as the notorious Group Areas Act and the
laws on influx control, with the consequent forced removals from the so-called white areas to the poor,
overcrowded and barren homelands, continue to exist
and are now stringently and cruelly enforced. Separate
and inferior education for blacks will not be removed by
this new constitution;
that policy is, indeed, a necessary and logical part of it. And those Indian and Coloured parties that do take part in the so-called elections
will do so within the limits of apartheid, to rubberstamp the decision made without them, for their opinion did not count,did not matter and, of course, will not
matter even in the envisaged arrangement.

10. This latest attempt to deceive the world appears
on the surface to be sophisticated, but its substance is
elementary. The so-called constitution in South Africa
was conceived and formulated without the participation of the authentic representatives of the people of
South Africa. The constitution is, therefore, not of the
people, it is not by the people, and it is not for the
people. It is a product of--and, indeed, yet another plot
by-the Nationalist Party of South Africa and is aimed
at perpetuating the rampant exploitation and degradation of the majority black masses of that country.

.-

::.

::::
:
::: :
:_
.-_’

:.
:-._‘_’
:._ .
-_-.

15. Indeed, we are convinced that the so-called new
constitution
is nothing more than an extension and
rationalization
of South Africa’s bantustan policy. That
policy has always sought to segregate the people of
South Africa, using Pretoria’s shameless racial classification .of them, into separate nations which should
develop and run their affairs differently and with no
relation to the other racial groups: The constitution
pretends that the vast majority of South Africans have
been provided for already in the so-called homelands,
where they are supposed to exercise economic and
political rights, and seeks now to deal with the Coloureds and Asians, who were not provided for under
the bantustan policy, and so to round off the aim of
apartheid.

11. This alleaedlv new constitution
is still as unashamedly racist in both composition and function as the
1961 constitution.
It is nothing other than a consolidation of the 1948 nationalist party policy, which, as we
are all aware, was aimed in 1948 at the introduction of
apartheid, and now, in 198Aand it is interesting to see
that the only real change is in the substitution of “1984”
for “1948” -at its entrenchment in that country. The
racist regime’s methods are simple: divide the oppressed blacks by creating bantustans for the Africans
and by including the so-called Coloureds and people of
Asian origin in the so-called house of representatives
and house of delegates. The co-option of a few Coloureds and people of Asian origin-who
will, in any
case, according to the new constitution, be powerless
to affect the course of events-into
the ruling clique in
Pretoria does not constitute a dent in the machinery
of apartheid, but rather another cog in its wheel. We

16. It is our view, as we believe it is also the view of
the rest of the international
community,
that the socalled elections to be held in the racist Republic later
this month distract attention from the actual problem in

. .
_-_.
.‘.

-_
:.
::

2

South Africa and. therefore. also from the search for a
real and viable solution to that problem. The problem
in South Africa is the institutionalized racism that is
apartheid. The only solution to that problem is the
dismantling of that system and the ushering in of ajust
and democratic order in that country. Any other machinations, such as the exercise under consideration
today, serve to exacerbate the problem by complicating
it and. bringing extraneous and irrelevant issues into
play.

General Assemblv resolution 38/11 of 15 November
1983, has called upon the regime in Pretoria to abandon
apartheid, stop oppressing the vast majority of South
Africans and enter into negotiations with the genuine
representatives of the oppressed majority of South
Africans-negotiations designed to bring about a just,
lasting political settlement in South Africa.
22. The same logic as informed our decision to reject :
South Africa’s bantustan policy should inform our decision today to reject an instrument that seeksto perfect
that policy. This has already been done by the General
Assembly when it adopted resolution 3801, which,
inter aliu, rejected the so-called new constitutional
proposals in South Africa. There were no dissenters on
that decision of the General Assembly. We hope that
this time also, especially in view of the fact that the draft
resolution is almost identical to the one adopted by the
Assembly, the decision will be unanimous.

17. We consequently expect that today an unequivocal message will go forth from this chamber, and
from all fair-minded people in the world, assuring the
struggling people of South Africa that the Council, and
the world as a whole, cannot be hoodwinked by the
machinations of apartheid, and that we regard the elections as a retrogressive step designed to maintain and
strengthen apartheid rather than to dismantle it.
18. We further hope that the messagewill be the result
of a consensus decision of the Council so that the racist
regime in Pretoria is served notice that the international
community is at one in condemning the new so-called
constitution and the sham elections leading to its implementation. We indeed have an obligation to the
South African masses in particular, and to the peaceloving nations of the world in general, to reject unconditionally these recent Fascist outbursts, as they add
tension and are a contributory factor threatening international peace and security.

23. It is necessary that this be so, because apartheid is
a crime against the conscience and dignity of mankind,
and all mankind must rally together to combat it. We
should make it quite clear to the racist regime that only
the total elimination of apartheid and the establishment
of a multiracial democratic society based on majority
rule, through the full and free exercise of universal adult
suffrage by all the people in a unitary and united South
Africa, can lead to a just and lasting solution of the
situation in South Africa.

19. We say this because we believe that if there is
anything we share with the rest of the world, which
certainly the South African racist regime does not
share, it is the desire for peace, stability, racial equality
and racial harmony in our region in particular and in the
rest of the world in general. It is our desire to extend
to all citizens equal freedom and equal rights to participate in the decision-making process that goes on in
the .planning and charting of one’s destiny in one’s
country.

24. Mr. BORG (Malta): Sir, your assumption of the
presidency for the month of August coincides with the
change of your country’s name to Burkina Faso. This
double event gives me greater. pleasure in that I can
extend my warmest congratulations to you and to your
people on these two memorable events, so important to
your country, which you so admirably represent. I am
sure that your wisdom and diplomatic skills will assist
us in no small measure in making our tasks easier to
accomplish and ensuring that their accomplishment is
to the benefit of mankind.

20. It is the right of a citizen to demand equal justice
before the law and to expect protection from exploitation by ruthless profit-only-oriented multinational companies. In short and in simple terms, I speak of the
unquenchable love of freedom .and the desire to stay
free and freely to decide one’s destiny. Many people
have died in many parts of the world seeking this freedom, and many in this chamber, I suspect, would be
prepared to die for it. We should not be surprised when
we see in South Africa people prepared to die for this
freedom. This peace, this stability, and this racial harmony we all desire cannot exist-least of all in racist
South Africa-in and alongside the exploitative system
which the apartheid policy perpetrates and which the
so-called new constitution intends to reinforce.

25. I also express my sincere appreciation to your
esteemed predecessor, the representative of the United
States, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, for the excellent manner in which she presided over the affairs of the Council
last month. Her leadership and judgement were truly
remarkable.
“The actions of South Africa, its internal policies
of racism and oppression and its external policies of
aggression and domination constitute yet another
threat to international peace and stability. The cry of
anger, frustration and suffering emerging from southem Africa is urgent and persuasive. It calls for urgent
and effective remedies.“’
26. These opening words of my statement, taken from
the address given by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Malta at the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly, are a reflection of the harsh realities still con-

21. .The United Nations has always insisted on the
maintenance of a unitary South African State, and
through Security Council resolution 473 (1980) and
3

fronting the free world today. Instead of South Africa
altering its attitude in the face of world condemnation,
we are, unfortunately,
witnessing an intensification of
its defiance by persisting in applying its apartheid system, already denounced by the General Assembly as a
“crime against humanity” and by the Security Council
as “a crime against the conscience . . . of mankind”.

non-whites is overwhelming. The African blacks, from
the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC)
to the homeland leaders, are vigorously opposed. Many
Coloured, Asian and even white groups, including the
official opposition party, are taking a similar stand. It is
felt that only steady pressure and isolation will persuade the South African authorities to review their
options and deal seriously with all the people of South
Africa.

27. Under the disguise of reforming apartheid, the
new constitution would allow for the creation of separate chambers of parliament
for the country’s
800,000 Asians and 2.5 million Coloureds-an
act symbolic of the political separation conceived by the 1983
constitution, Although it would extend the franchise on
racially separate roles to these two minority groups,
22 million-or
72 per cent-of the indigenous African
population would be totally excluded, on the grounds
that a different constitutional
path has been provided
for them with the homeland system.

33. As a member of the international community and
as a member of the Council, Malta calls on South Africa
to desist from such acts, which bring irrevocable suffering and irreparable schisms to a population that has
been the witness of racist policies going against the
inviolable rights of human beings.
34. We all stand committed to protect and safeguard
our freedom. It is imperative that this freedom be also
enjoyed by the oppressed people of South Africa. We
join with other members of the Council and those
delegations which have so far participated in the debate
to condemn the acts of defiance of the South African
regime and call upon it to withhold the discriminatory
and repressive new constitution.

28. This new plan, backed by just two-thirds of the
2 million whites in an all-white referendum, ensures
that the whites’ built-in majority will still be decisive,
either directly or acting through the State President and
the President’s Council.

::
::
::
_’

.:. .
:.

29. This clearly and unequivocally shows that instead
of its being a step away from apartheid, as claimed by
the white South African authorities, the so-called new
constitution is but an instrument to entrench and consolidate even further the policies of apartheid. The
22 million black people are shut out more decisively
than ever before; they are being confined to their socalled homelands, or nominally independent nations.
They are denied South African citizenship, and, technically, any right to its future.

35. The Council has on numerous occasions appealed
to the authorities
in South Africa to restrain their
actions. However, time has shown all of us that our
appeals have gone unheeded. Our African brethren are
still awaiting the day when they will be free and equal
citizens. Let the Council lead the way by expressing its
solidarity with their aspirations. Let us once again appeal, with one voice, to the authorities in South Africa
to give the people-be
they Coloured, Asian or black
-the opportunity to say: “We are from South Africa,
our country is South Africa.”

30. The new constitution
will be implemented
in a
climate of continuing, if not accelerated, pursuit of the
essentials of apartheid. It is enough to state that in the
last 20 years over 3.5 million blacks have been physically uprooted from 87 per cent of the land which is
controlled by the apartheid regime. As the rate of resettlement quickens, 2 million more are slated to be
moved. However, the main props of apartheid, including residential, educational, social and sexual segregation, will remain in place.

36. Mr. OVINNIKOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) [interpretationjlkn
Russian]: Sir, may I at the
outset very warmly congratulate you, the representative of Burkina Faso, upon your assumption of the
responsible post of President of the Council. We wish to
voice our conviction that in ‘you the Council has a
reliable and highly qualified leader.
37. I should like to take this opportunity to express
our gratitude to the representative of the United States,
Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
for the skilful way in which she
guided the work of the Security Council last month.

3 1. The new constitution does not in fact provide any
reform in the sense that there is no real sharing of
power. It offers nothing substantial to the Coloureds
and Asians, who can always be overruled in the white
chamber, and it offers nothing at all to the blacks, the
majority of the people of South Africa, who have once
again been totally excluded from power-sharing and
political rights. The constitution
sanctifies the denationalization
of the vast majority of South Africans,
relegating them to foreign citizenship.

38. The urgent convening of the Council has been
motivated by the profound concern of the entire international community, particularly the African countries,
at the dangerous turn of events in southern Africa. The
new racist constitution
in South Africa, which was
approved last November exclusively by the white minority, and the so-called constitutional
reforms in
South Africa, which were also devised by the white
racists, are a mockery of the elementary rights of the
majority of the population of the country. This is also an
overt challenge to the numerous resolutions adopted by

32. During the current debate and in reports by the
international press, we have heard and read that opposition to the new constitution from the vast majority of
4

ritorial integrity of Namibia. It is waging an undeclared
war against independent African States, and it is carrying out acts of aggression, destabilization,
subversion
and terror in the territories of neighbouring African
States. This abnormal situation in southern Africa will
continue as long as the backbone of the South African
regime continues to be apartheid, a policy of brutal
repression of the majority of South Africa’s population,
a policy of diktat towards the independent African
States.

the Security Council and the General Assembly on the
question.
39. A new attempt is being made artificially and quite
deliberately to keep out once and for all, the overwhelming majority of the population of that country,
whose skin happens to be black-three
quarters of the
indigenous population-from
the political life of South
Africa. Further, the racist regime in South Africa is
trying to pursue a policy of divide and rule by granting a
semblance of rights in the South African Parliament to
certain Coloured people and people of Asian origin.
The obvious intention is that the white overseers will be
able to split the black and Coloured inhabitants of South
Africa into opposing camps. Thus they intend to maintain the inhuman apartheid regime, which has been
doomed by history. Therefore, what we are witnessing
here is an attempt to confirm in perpetuity the law of
the concentration camp in South Africa.

44. Of course the Pretoria regime could not behave
with such arrogant self-assurance both within the country and outside it if it did not enjoy the support of
kindred forces in the West. In this connection it is
important to note that over the last three and a half
years there has been increasingly direct and close cooperation between South Africa and the United States.
As early as March 1981 a statement was made at the
highest level in the United States to the effect that the
Administration
was anxious to assist South Africa. The
South African racists quickly reacted to the green light
that had been given by Washington.
South Africa’s
military budget was immediately
increased by 40 per
cent. In August 1981 regular South African troops invaded Angola. That was the precise moment chosen by
the United States to expound its new regional strategy
with reference to southern Africa. The Deputy Secretary of State, Chester Cracker, at that time frankly
stated that “the Reagan Administration
had no intention to destabilize South Africa to anyone’s advantage”. He also officially declared that the United States
“was endeavouring to build more constructive relations with South Africa, relations based on common
interests”. On the day following that policy statement,
the United States vetoed a draft resolution condemning
South Africa’s aggression against Angola.

40. The African States, as can be clearly seen from
their initiative and their statements here in the Council,
are fully cognizant of the significance of these fresh
manoeuvres on the part of the South African racists.
The Organization
of African Unity (OAU) had previously vigorously condemned and rejected the “constitutional proposals” in South Africa. The OAU declared that apartheid cannot be reformed and that it
must be eradicated.
41. In its resolution 38111 of 15 November 1983, the
General Assembly likewise condemned and rejected
the machinations of the racist minority regime in South
Africa since they were aimed at the further consolidation of the domination
of apartheid. Although, of
course, certain members of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization
(NATO),
particularly
keen on talking
about human rights, refused at the time to support the
resolution, it remains a fact that in the voting the vast
majority of Member States vigorously rejected the
manoeuvres of the South African racists. The General
Assembly emphasized that the imposition of the proposed constitution would inevitably lead to increased
tension and conflict in South Africa itself as well as in
southern Africa as a whole. For that reason the General
Assembly requested the Security Council to take all
necessary measures pursuant to the Charter of the
United Nations.
42. It is the duty of the Council to take such measures.
We cannot allow the manoeuvres of the South African
racists to succeed. The essence of the apartheid regime
would not be altered by such manoeuvres, just as a
snake does not change when it sloughs its old skin.

45. All of that ushered in a qualitatively
new stage in
the ongoing co-operation between the apartheid regime
in South Africa and the United States. Subsequently, in
March 1982, the State Department of the United States
declared that restrictions on trade with South Africa
had been removed. Immediately
thereafter the United
States proceeded to embark upon direct political cooperation with South Africa in blackmailing the African
countries. The essence of that co-operation consisted in
a division of labour: South Africa made every attempt
to break open, or at least threatened to break open,
other peoples’ back doors in southern Africa, while at
the same time diplomats from the United States stepped
in and sought to convince them that anyone who resisted South African aggression would suffer as a
result.

43. Furthermore, apartheid is not a purely domestic
affair of South Africa. Like a cancerous growth it
spreads, and it is spreading to the contiguous areas of
southern Africa. The racist Pretoria regime, which has
occupied Namibia, has obstinately refused to recognize
the right of the people of Namibia to self-determination
and independence; it has refused to respect the ter-

46. The entire policy of the racist Pretoria regime and
its protectors overseas not only flies in the face of the
interests of the freedom of the African peoples, but also
threatens the security of independent African countries. At the same time it creates a serious source of
tension in southern Africa. In this connection we
should like to draw attention to a note of warning that
5

was sounded in October 1982by the well-known American figure Mr. Robert McNamara. At that time he
warned that United States policies would make it impossible for there to be any changes in South Africa
except through revolutionary violence. Consequently
he concluded that “South Africa might become, and in
my opinion would become, the same sort of major
threat to world peace in the 1990s as the Middle East
was at present”.

melled racism in South Africa are not enemies but
allies. They are, as it were, two sides of the same coin.
This is the manifestation of two kindred ideologies and
the practice of misanthropy. This inexorable fact, the
embrace of South African racism, is something that the
United States can never evade.
52. Our policy with reference to apartheid is diametrically opposite. The Soviet people understand, appreciate and sympathize with the aspirations of those who
today are continuing to strugglein the southern part of
Africa for their liberation from racism, racial discrimination and apartheid. The great Clctober socialist revolution of 1917 in our country did away with all forms
of exploitation, including national oppression, and confirmed the equality of those many nationalities that go
to make up the Soviet Union. We are proud of our
national policies and as a direct consequence one of the
fundamental principles of Soviet foreign policy is support for those peoples which are struggling against colonialism, racism and apartheid in an endeavour to
achieve their independence.

47. It is no accident that we have dwelled on who it is
that is helping the South Africans from outside. This is
by no means an idle reflection. It is precisely the selfsame forces here in the Council that are thwarting the
adoption of effective actions against South Africa that
would force the racist regime to give up its apartheid. It
is they who, even if they in fact allow the Council to
adopt a new resolution, will bend every effort to block
its implementation. Sabotage to benefit apartheid is a
speciality of certain Powers, which leads us to a further
point.
48. Some people in the United States, as has now
become widely known, are itching to “outlaw” certain
countries. These people do not have the patience to
wait till the relevant unilateral acts of legislation can
be signed. The thinking of these people is essentially
that anyone who has been arbitrarily outlawed by the
United States can and should be bombed in the next five
minutes, with nuclear bombs at that. I am naturally
speaking of the attitude of the United States towards
the Soviet Union and to socialism as a whole. We for
our part reject as a matter of principle the “rationality”
and the possibility of resolving ideological conflicts
with the help of weapons, in particular nuclear weapons. This philosophy is alien to us. But the unprecedentedly hostile attitude towards the Soviet Union to
which I have referred just now is something that is a
danger to world peace.

53. We therefore hereby confirm our complete solidarity with the peoples of South Africa and Namibia and their national liberation movements. However
much this may be resisted by the racists and the neocolonizers, the day will inevitably dawn when those
whom today they dub “terrorists” will represent their
own liberated countries in the United Nations.
54. This is how it was in the past and how it will
continue to be in the future. There is no place for
apartheid in the history of civilized mankind.
55. Mr. Shah NAWAZ (Pakistan): I should like to
begin, Sir, by expressing our happiness at seeing
you presiding over the deliberations of the Council
during the month of August. I have had the privilege of
working closely with you and have the greatest respect
for your diplomatic skill and experience and admiration for your outstanding personal qualities. I wish you
every successin guiding the work of the Council during
this month on important issues, such as the one before
us today, which is of concern not only to Africa but to
all humanity.

49. Another aspect of United States policy in the international arena, apart from its pathological antiSovietism, is its unprecedentedly amicable attitude
towards the ill-famed system of apartheid in South
Africa.
In the case of apartheid in South Africa we are
dealing essentially with a regime that has been outlawed
not arbitrarily but deservedly, and not unilaterally but
by all civilized humanity. However, the United States
is doing everything it can in the Council to block the
legitimate punishment of these recognized international
criminals. In the Council the United States has obstinately blocked the adoption of any sanctions directed
against apartheid, sanctions for which the African
countries have long been clamouring, and which are
demanded by the conscience of all civilized mankind.

50.

56. I take this occasion also to express our gratitude
to your predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick of the
United States, for the competent and dignified manner
in which she conducted the business of the Council
during last month.
57. The Security Council is convened in an urgent
meeting today in response to a request made by the
representative of Algeria on behalf of the Group of
African States to consider the so-called constitutional
reforms promulgated by the Pretoria regime last year.
Elections for the Coloured and Asian population under
these so-called reforms are scheduled to be held during
the latter part of this month. This new manoeuvre by
the apartheid regime to provide limited and controlled

51. Why does the United States so stubbornly insist
on giving cover to the white racists? There is a-simple
answer to this question. The unrestrained anti-Sovietism and militarism in the United States and the untram6

representation to the Coloured and Asian population is
designed primarily to serve the objectives of the policy
of apartheid and needs to be firmly challenged and
opposed by the international community.

movement in and outside South Africa in
order-to bring to a speedy close a dark chapter in the
annals of human civilization.

anti-aoartheid

62. Pakistan, since its very inception, has remained
staunchly committed to the eradication of apartheid,
which is abhorent to the concept of universal brotherhood and equality enshrined in its Islamic ideology. In a
messageexpressing solidarity with the political prisoners of South Africa in October last, President Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq of Pakistan said:

58. It would .be naive to imagine that the new constitutional reforms betoken a step in the right direction and will culminate in the dissolution of the abhorrent apartheid system. The new constitutional reforms,
based as these are on racial discrimination, are as immoral as apartheid itself. Their political intent is even
more sinister. The reforms draw a distinction between
the Coloured and Asian population of South Africa, on
the one hand, and that Country’s black population
-which continues to be deprived of all its fundamental
human and national rights---on the other. These reforms are clearly designed to drive a wedge between
these two sections of the South- African population
which have consistently presented a united front
against the apartheid system in all its forms. Obviously,
the Pretoria regime entertains the hope that the measures it is about to introduce will break the unity of the
anti-apartheid forces, drawn from the black, Asian and
Coloured population of the country, and thereby end its
isolation within the country and its ostracization by the
international community.

“Belief in the eaualitv of man is the cornerstone of
the faith of the plople*of Pakistan and the policies
pursued by the Government of Pakistan. Racial discrimination is anathema to Islam and to Pakistan and
we have always considered it our sacred duty to
provide full support to all victims of the abominable
policies of apartheid and racial discrimination in all
its manifestations.‘*
In another message of solidarity with the struggling
people of South Africa in June this year, the President
said:
“In reafIirming their solidarity with the people of
South Africa, the Government and people of Pakistan renew their pledge to extend all possible assistance for the complete eradication of apartheid,
which constitute a crime against humanity and a
threat to world peace. We are convinced that the day
is not far when the valiant struggle of the people of
South Africa for freedom, equal rights and human
dignity will be crowned with successand apartheid
and racial oppression will be eliminated from the face
of the earth.”

59. The aim of the so-called constitutional reforms is
not limited to the creation of divisions among the black,
Coloured and Asian population of South Africa. The
strictly regulated association of the Coloured and Asian
population in the political process of the country clearly
stamps them as second-class citizens who would be
allowed to exist in a purgatory, somewhere between a
heaven for the racist white minority and a hell for the
black population.
60. Doubtless, the Coloured and Asian people of
South Africa will instinctively recognize- the trap
which has been set for them and, by refusing to step into
it, will frustrate Pretoria’s plans, just as the black majority population did, by refusing to be herded into arid,
poverty-stricken, segregated enclaves, for the benefit
of a white minority bent upon exploiting the rich resources of South Africa’s vast expanses, in order to
nourish and perpetuate the apartheid system. In opposing the excessesof the apartheid regime and conducting
a common struggle against the inhumanity and tyranny
of an anachronistic racist philosophy, the long-suffering Coloured and Asian people of South Africa are
the natural allies of the majority black population.

63. Having declared apartheid
a crime against
humanity and being committed to the dissolution of this
evil legacy of the colonial era, the international community must remain vigilant against its survival in new
political, legal or constitutional forms. It must convey a
clear message to Pretoria that the thin veil of the new
constitutional reforms cannot mask the ugly face of
apartheid, nor can it be expected to lessen the stigma of
international censure against it.
64. Last year, the General Assembly, in its resolution
38/11 of 15 November 1983, promptly rejected South
Africa’s new constitutional reforms and expressed the
determination of the Member States not to recognize
any results which might flow from them. Now that
South Africa has embarked on a new phase in the
implementation of the constitutional reforms and is
pushing for the elections to be held later this month, it is
the Council which is faced with a new assertion of the
policy of apartheid.

61. Neither the open pursuit of a policy of bantustanization nor the barely concealed attempt to achieve the
same objective through deceptive constitutional reforms will weaken the anti-apartheid movement inside
South Africa. Indeed the massive resistance by the
valiant people of South Africa to the racist regime has
gained in strength since the enforcement of the new
constitutional reforms. Similarly, these transparently
hypocritical measures can neither deceive the intemational community nor lessen its resolve to support the

65. Consistent with its past resolutions, in particular
resolution 473 (1980) afIirming its commitment to the
elimination of apartheid and its recognition of the legitimacy of the struggle of the South African people for
7

‘.

:
:
‘_
‘_
._
*..-_.
-_
-.
-_
-_

..

this objective, the Council must reject the new constitutional reforms and declare them null and void. It
must act with a sense of urgency to stop the further
consolidation and development of the repugnant dogma
of upartheid. It must also call upon all Member States
not to recognize the outcome of the scheduled elections
for the Coloured and Asian-origin population of South
Africa, and to continue their assistance for the oppressed people of South Africa in their just struggle for
a non-racial democratic society, in which all segments
of the population, irrespective of their colour or creed,
would enjoy equal and full political rights.

rather a trick aimed at providing apartheid with a legal
cloak so as to perpetuate the system. In addition, the
South African authorities are trying in doing so to sabotage the unity between blacks, Coloureds and people
of Asian orgin and escape from being condemned both
at home and abroad so that they may continue their
racist rule.
71 e The General Assembly adopted on 15 November
1983 resolution 38/l 1, in which it condemned the enforced implementation
of the so-called “constitutional
proposals”, which would aggravate tension and conflict in South Africa and in southern Africa as a whole,
and requested the Security Council to take all necessary measures to avert further aggravation of the situation there.

66. Mr. LING
Qing (China) [interpretation
from
Chinese]: Please allow me, Sir, to extend my congratulations to you on your assumption of the presidency
for this month. yith your talent and dedication to
United Nations activities, you will certainly make important contributions to the work of the Council. Burkina Faso and China enjoy amicable relations and we
are very glad to have friendly co-operation with you.

72. In defiance of the resolutions of the General Assembly, the South African authorities have decided to
hold elections in August and September of this year,
respectively, for the houses of the whites, Coloureds
and people of Asian origin, obdurately clinging to their
constitutional proposals which have met strong opposition both in South Africa and abroad.

67. I should also like to thank Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick
for the efforts she made during her tenure of presidency
of the Council last month.

73. The Chinese delegation strongly condemns the
South African authorities for their crime of pushing the
so-called new constitution and supports the draft resolution proposed by the non-aligned countries. China
holds that the Council should take all necessary measures to mob&e the international communityto
support
the just struggle of the oppressed people of South Africa
against apartheid and for racial equality.

68. Over the years, the South African authorities have
been savagely practising apartheid at home, a policy
that runs totally counter to the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. This policy has not only met with
resolute opposition from the broad masses of the black
and Coloured people in South Africa, but also aroused
strong condemnation by the African countries and the
international community in general. The South African
authorities are extremely isolated.

74. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is the Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.

69. In order to sustain their racist rule, the South
African authorities have stepped up their political in;
trigues while intensifying their armed suppression. On
2 November 1983, a so-called referendum was held in
South Africa with the exclusive participation
of the
white electorate which endorsed “constitutional
proposals”. Though seemingly providing limited participation for the Coloured and the people of Asian origin in
some affairs, these proposals in fact leave the power of
major decision-making
in the firm grip of the white
racists. The Coloured and the people of Asian origin
can only serve as subordinates and foils. Such constitutional proposals will completely deprive of all their
political rights the black majority, who make up over
70 per cent of the entire population in South Africa.
Furthermore, these proposals clearly provide that the
whole series of “laws” which protect apartheid will
retain their validity. These laws have driven a considerable section of the black people in South Africa,
who number over 20 million, into a few bantustans,
where they have completely lost their rights as citizens
of South Africa.

75. Mr. KOROMA (Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples): May I be allowed,
first of all, to proffer my congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the high office of President for the
month of August. It is fitting that you should be presiding over the affairs of the Council at this moment
when the issue of apartheid is being reconsidered by the
Security Council.
76. In the same vein, I should like to extend our
congratulations
to Mrs. Kirkpatrick
of the United
States for her presidency over the affairs of the Council
for the month of July.
77. In my capacity as Chairman of the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples, I wish to convey to
you, Sir, and to the other members of the Council, my

70. This trend of develoDment is continuing. It is obvious that such a step taken by the South African
authorities is by no means a “positive measure” but
8

appreciation
for the opportunity
of addressing the
Council on this all-important
matter which is before it
for its consideration.

83. The Security Council cannot accept these socalled constitutional
proposals as they not only represent a massive denial of the human rights of the people
of South Africa but are bound to further aggravate
tension and conflict in South Africa, seriously jeopardizing the peace and security in that area.

78. At its thirty-eighth
session, the General Assembly, by an overwhelming
majority, declared [resoletion 3Nll of 15 November
29831 the constitutional
proposals which had been enacted by the South African
Government
to be contrary to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, and that their enforcement would inevitably aggravate tension and conflict
in South Africa and in southern Africa as a whole. The
Assembly therefore rejected those proposals, not only
because they were intended to entrench apartheid and
the racist majority regime in South Africa, but also
because they represented an insidious and fraudulent
attempt to divide and rule the majority of the South
African people, and to isolate the 24 million black Africans from their fellow citizens. Furthermore,
the Assembly called upon the Council, as a matter of urgency,
to consider the serious implications
of the so-called
constitutional
proposals and to take all necessary
measures, in accordance with the Charter, to avert the
further aggravation of tension and conflict in south
Africa and in southern Africa as a whole, aggravation
inherent in the constitutional
proposals.

84. Not only will the further “constitutionalization”
of apartheid alienate the overwhelming majority of the
population, who will perforce increasingly resist the
regime in Pretoria; that regime will choose to look for its
adversaries outside the country, which will involve
frequent acts of aggression and State terrorism against
other African States, thus endangering international
peace and security.
85. In the view of the members of the Special Committee, the Council, in keeping with its traditional role as
repository of the conscience of the international community and as the custodian of international peace and
security, must reject the 1983 constitution as contrary
to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
for it is patent that its implementation
will inexorably
aggravate tension and conflict in South Africa and in
southern Africa as a whole, including Namibia, which is
a major colonial issue remaining on the agenda of the
Special Committee.

79. The Government of the Republic of South Africa,
true to form, has not only failed to comply with the
legitimate demands of the General Assembly but, by
attempting to implement those proposals which have
been declared null and void and contrary to the principles of the Charter and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, continues to pose a serious threat to the
peace and security of southern Africa.

86. The constitution should also be rejected, and rejected out of hand, for it leaves intact the existing reality
of the apartheid system in South Africa, namely that
the controlling principles of the State will continue to be
racial discrimination
enforced by a ruling minority upon
a majority more than five times as great. Eighty-seven
per cent of the land will continue to be reserved for the
16 per cent of the population which is white, and the
24 million blacks, who constitute some 73 per cent of
the population,
will continue to be relegated to the
remaining 13 per cent of the land-the
so-called bantustan homelands-which
for the most part are nothing
but poor, barren pieces of land scattered on the map
with hardly any regard for history, geography or logic.

80. The 1983 constitution,
as is well known, establishes a house of assembly with 178 members elected by
whites who represent 4.5 million whites; a house of
representatives with 85 Coloured members elected by
Coloureds to represent 2.5 million Coloureds; and a
house of delegates with 45 Indian members elected by
Indians to represent 900,000 Indians.

87. The Security Council, in rejecting this latest constitutional
chicanery, will leave the South African
authorities in no doubt that only the total eradication of
apartheid and the establishment of a non-racial democratic society based on majority adult suffrage in a
unified and non-fragmented South Africa can lead to a
just and lasting solution of the explosive situation now
facing that country.

81. That constitution is therefore unashamedly racist
in orientation and in substance; even worse is the fact
that it attempts to perpetuate the fallacious myth that
the 24 million Africans are foreigners in their own country and are not equal in dignity and worth as human
persons to their fellow citizens. If implemented,
the
constitution
will, at a stroke, deprive the 24 million
Africans of South Africa of their South African nationality or citizenship and further attempt to deprive them
of their civil and political rights.

88. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to make his statement.

82. It is against this background, and guided by its
mandate which reaffirms faith in fundamental human
rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person, in
the equal rights of men and women, that members of the
Special Committee join in the unequivocal denunciation of the so-called constitutional
dispensation.

89. Mr. EL-FATTAL
(Syrian Arab Republic) [irzterprefution from Arabic]: I take this opportunity, Sir, not
only to convey to you my congratulations
on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council at a time
when the eyes of millions of oppressed people in South
9

Africa are turned towards this Council, which bears the
responsibility for putting an end to the oppression perpetrated by the apartheid regime against the rights of
the South African people, but also to assure you that we
consider that the motto recently adopted by the people
of B,urkina Faso on the occasion of the anniversary of
the people’s democratic revolution,
“Fatherland
or
death; we shall triumph,” is one which crystal&es the
aspirations of all peoples struggling to free their territories from colonial tyranny in its new or old form and
to eliminate racism in all its forms.

tions; and to force the non-white minority groups to
take a path that leads to a widening of the base of
repression, oppression and spoliation of rights in South
Africa. We all know the underlying reasons for this
constitutional
manoeuvre: what is now termed “constitution” is merely a screen designed to cover up that
spoliation of the rights of the indigenous population.
Despite these internationally
known facts, some are
arguing that these movements represent a peaceful
trend towards a better society. The clear, unequivocal
answer to this fallacious allegation is to be found in an
article in the winter 1983 edition of Foreign Affairs,
under the heading “Revolution
in the Making: Black
Politics in South Africa”. It was written by an American diplomat who had previously worked at the United
States Embassy in Pretoria. He wrote:

90. The Security Council is meeting in response to the
urgent request of the representative of Algeria, current
Chairman of the Group of African States, and in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 38/l 1 of 15 November 1983, in which the Assembly, virtually unanimously, rejected the so-called constitutional proposals
and all the pernicious manoeuvres of the racist minority regime of South Africa. Those manoeuvres are intended to consolidate the white minority regime and
apartheid. They are intended also to sow division between segments of the South African population, particularly between the Coloured population
and the
Asian population on the one hand, and the indigenous
population on the other hand.

“The Reagan Administration’s
‘constructive engagement’ with South Africa carries grave risks for
the national interest of the United States. South
Africa is continuing in the direction it has been going
for over 35 years. Despite the enlargement of privileges for some urban Africans, Coloureds, and Indians, white supremacy is now more entrenched than
ever. Having been institutionalized,
it is about to be
constitutionalized.
To discern a ‘hidden agenda’ for
basic change, as does the Reagan Administration,
is
to engage in the wishful thinking that has characterized U.S. policy for far too long.“*

91. These meetings of the Council come just a short
time before the racist “elections”,
which are designed
to set up a three-chamber parliament in conformity with
the unlawful new constitution which is to go into force
on 3 September. The true meaning of these changes and
the aims which they pursue are well known to all members of the Council I shall merely quote from a recent
statement made by the representative of Nigeria, who is
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid;
it sums up perfectly South Africa’s crimes:

93. There is something which we regret but which
hardly. surprises us: the-electoral campaign conducted
by the Prime Minister
of the apartheid
regime,
Mr. Botha, not among the 72 per cent of the black
population-who
were overlooked by the pseudo-constitution as if they were non-existentbut among certain European countries in order to gain support for the
crimes committed under the provisions of this spurious
constitution.
I shall quote merely an extract from an
open letter addressed to Mr. Botha by Mr. Donald
Woods, the editor of the Daily Dispatch of South
Africa, who was thrown into prison for having divulged
information about the murder in prison of Steve Biko,
the freedom fighter. The editor is now living in Britain,
because he was obliged to flee the country. The editor
wrote:,

“The imposition of the racist constitution is a calculated conspiracy against the people of South Africa
and a challenge to the international community. The
racist regime is bent on breaking the historical unity
of the oppressed people of South Africa by creating
pseudo-parliaments
for the so-called Coloured people and people of Asian origin, by conscripting members of these two communities
into the apartheid
armed forces and by making the indigenous African
majority,
consisting of 72 per cent of the South
African population, foreigners in the land of their
birth.“*

“How ironic that you visited Britain and France
last week during commemoration
of the Normandy
D-Day landings, which insured the Allied victory in
World War II-during
which conflict you and your
colleagues in the Afrikaner Nationalist
party fervently hoped that victory would go to the Third
Reich.

92. Those words perfectly and unequivocally sum up
the goals pursued through the new manoeuvres in
which the Pretoria regime is now engaging. Those goals
are: to deny the majority of the population their right
to self-determination,
which is a right guaranteed by
the Charter of the United Nations; to drive a wedge
between the various parts of the population; to deny
them their rights by establishing new racial institu-

“Considering how bitterly you attacked Jan Christian Smuts’ Government for supporting the Allies at
the time, and how openly your party admired Hitler,
it was in character when you Afrikaner Nationalists
took power in 1948 to pursue your own Herrenvolk
theory of apartheid-and
today, under your leadership, the cause of racial purity flourishes more

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

10

strongly than ever before. Since January, more than
50,000 blacks have been arrested under the Pass
Laws, one of your thriving 317 racial statutes that
make apartheid first cousin to Hitler’s Nuremberg
Laws against the Jews.

force by the United States, applied through the puppet
regime installed in South Africa. The spurious constitution and the rigged elections are manifestations of the
United States support, which has enabled the Pretoria
rulers to follow their bloodthirsty dream. The subject
under consideration is the adoption of measures which
will enable the South African people to exercise their
right to self-determination,
in full freedom, with full
respect for their dignity, so as to enable the entire
people to enjoy equality and liberty and to establish a
regime which will secure the interests of the majority of
the indigenous population.

“Speaking of Jews, it is also ironic that your Government is so friendly with Israel, considering that in
1943 you were chief organizer in Cape Province of the
party that tried to stop General Smuts allowing Jewish refugees into South Africa.“*
94. The warm wefcome given to Mr. Botha when he
visited certain European States, notwithstanding
the
lively opposition of the peoples of those States to the
visit of this custodian of neo-nazism, confirms that
relations continue to be maintained in all spheres between certain North Atlantic Treaty States and Pretoria. It is highly disturbing to see that all these manoeuvres are conducted under the imperialist theory of
a “constructive engagement”. This is a policy pursued
by the United States Administration
in order to extend
its hegemony, through South Africa, over all the States
of southern Africa and to help Pretoria to commit ever
more crimes against the South African people, which is
being uprooted and deprived of its national identity and
has seen its land severely fragmented into zones of
poverty, disease and indigence.

97. It is ridiculous that 80 per cent of the indigenous
population should be the victim of policies of segregation and the establishment of bantustans designed to
deprive that valiant people of their essentiai rights, their
land and their national identity. While a usurping and
authoritarian
extraneous minority not only keeps the
fate of a whole people in its grip, but also threatens
the independence and sovereignty.of the neighbouring
countries by the use of force.
98. We realize that the United States and other Westem States members of NATO-which
have deeprooted interests in the resources and labour force of the
South African people-think
that it is still possible to
delude the black majority by suggesting that it can
obtain its rights through a step-by-step approach, while
waiting for a change in the colonialists’ attitude. This
procrastinative theory is naive, aberrant and, above all,
will not hold water. Certain resolutions may appear
inactive in the beginning but that does not mean that
they can be squelched. What is important is to eliminate
rapidly the causes for a revolution, A revolution is
brewing in South Africa now and its manifestations are
the daily struggles of the liberation movements in South
Africa and in Namibia. We are confident that this revolution will continue unabated and will triumph because its just cause has the support of the entire world.
On the other hand, the “constructive
engagement”
scheme will collapse, as was the case with the other
schemes that the imperialists tried to impose on our
region, the Middle East. But it seems that the reckless
regime of racial discrimination
is bent on self-destruction and the destruction of all those around it.

95. The non-aligned countries have always been faithful to principle, and have condemned Mr. Botha’s visit
to certain European countries. The Co-ordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, at
its meeting held at the United Nations Headquarters on
6 June 1984, adopted a communique [S/1660.5, annex]
condemning the visit and declaring that this was not just
an action hostile to the legitimate interests of the valiant people of South Africa and all peace-loving peoples
but also a flagrant violation of the resolutions and declarations of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries,
the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations. All those States called for the total isolation of the
apartheid regime. The Co-ordinating
Bureau also declared that such visits did not deceive the international
community
nor undermine the international
drive to
isolate that regime, which we believe to be--despite
appearances to the contrary-near
collapse as a result
of the strikes and uprisings of the national liberation
movements in solidarity with the South African people.
No matter what Mr. Botha or the United States may do,
no matter how much the regime of Pretoria may falsify
and distort facts, this Nazi regime will never be able to
secure a certificate of good conduct.

99. In the issue of 25 January 1983 of The New York
Times, under the caption “Pax Afrikaansa”,
Plot-a
Lewis stated the following:
“But as one South African official considered to be
among the most .open-minded put it:. ‘We want to
show that we want peace in the region, we want to
contribute and we can help a lot. But we also want
to show that if we are refused we can destroy the
whole of southern Africa.’ “*

96. The subject with which we are dealing goes beyond constitutions
and violations of human rights.
Rather, it relates to the need to adopt appropriate
measures-I
emphasize “appropriate measures”-before the situation deteriorates as a result of the use of

100. The Syrian Arab Republic, with the backing of
its historical experience, knows full well that colonial
regimes are regimes which by their nature, evolution
and interests ianno~ alter their policies, because those

* Quoted in English by the speaker.

11

independence of peoples will, I am convinced, greatly
contribute to the successful consideration of the matter
before us.

nolicies are designed to denationalize the inhabitants of
ihe occupied territories. There is an essential contradiction between the policy of colonization and the policy of
peace, as long as the ferment of racism, of oppression
and exploitation of the indigenous population continues
and as long as the territories of others continue to be
usurped and,racist societies are imposed. The activities
of the Zionist and South African regimes in their respective occupied territories are prime examples. The isolation in which Tel Aviv and Pretoria are living is thus
well illustrated. We must impose perpetual isolation on
those two regimes as a means of deterrence. The United
States is to blame for the deterioration of the situation
in southern Africa and we should draw attention to the
dangers of the policies of the United Staes in this region. Those policies are designed to manipulate the
problems of the front-line States--economic,
financial
and meteorological-to
diminish their ability to resist
the imperialist
schemes, to prevent them from preserving the gains they have made since their independence, to subordinate them to the American interests
and the transnational companies as well as to the racist
regime which has sought to become the gendarme of the
region thanks to the support of imperialism.

106. May I be permitted, also, to pay due tribute to
Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick,
representative of the United
States, for her distinguished and successful guidance
of the work of the Council during the month of July.
107. In the history of mankind apartheid is undoubtedly one of the most shameful phenomena. Regrettably, and in spite of the processes of emancipation
of peoples, breakthroughs
in various fields of social
and national development, and numerous technological
and scientific achievements, we have failed to rid the
world of this abhorrent negation of human dignity.
108. Much has been said about apartheid, which has
rightfully been proclaimed as a crime against humanity
and a threat to peace and security in the world. Much
has been said as well about the racist regime in South
Africa that established this system of discrimination,
repression and terror against the majority of the population in the country, as its “constitutional”
system and
as the basic principle on which its internal and foreign
policies are founded.

101. We therefore call upon the Council to impose,
under Chapter VII of the Charter, comprehensive sanctions against the apartheid regime and the States which
do not adhere to the arms embargo against South
Africa, particularly
the United States. It is also incumbent on the Council to declare the spurious constitution and its corollaries, including the so-called elections, totally null and void and representing a flagrant
violation of the Charter, a defiance to the international
community and a degradation of cultural and humane
values.

109. What, in that light, is the meaning of the constitutional changes and elections for the Assembly in
South Africa that are now under way, when the basic
premises of the system are founded on the obnoxious
policy of apartheid and bantustanization?
110. Obviously it is an attempt by the racist regime in
South Africa, made under pressure from the intemational community and internal dissatisfaction, to give
an illusion of change. However, it is aimed at prolonging and consolidating oppression and exploitation
of the black population in South Africa, which is completely deprived of its basic rights. It is also aimed
at strengthening the terrorism perpetrated against the
majority of the population by the minority. The racist
South African regime is trying to legalize and institutionalize the system at the internal level and, ironically, to present it as a democratic, constitutional
and
parliamentary
process at the external level.

102. In conclusion, we again reaffirm our country’s
total solidarity with the people of South Africa and
Namibia fighting against apartheid in South Africa. We
are sure that their national liberation movements will
triumph-I
refer to the Pan Africanist Congress of
Azania, the African National Congress of South Africa
and the South West Africa People’s Organization.
Faithful to our commitment
to the Charter, the resolutions of the United Nations, the Movement of NonAligned Countries and the Organization
of African
Unity, we shall spare no effort to eradicate totally the
odious system of apartheid.

104. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.

111. Apartheid is a threat to international peace and
security, a threat which should resolutely be eliminated. It has become evident that racism is an unprecedented evil and that the racist regime of South Africa
stops at nothing, including the most brutal methods
within the country and against its neighbours, in order
to protect its self-proclaimed
privilege of being the
exclusive arbiter and to impose its own distorted standards in that part of the world.

105.. Mr. SILOVIC
(Yugoslavia): At the outset, Sir,
I wish to convey to you our congratulations upon your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of August. Your acumen and wisdom,
and your known commitment
to peace, equality and

112. In November of last year, after the so-called
referendum on constitutional
proposals organized by
the racist regime of South Africa whose goal was the
further strengthening of racism and denial of basic human rights to the majority of the population,, including

103. From this forum we hail the struggle being waged
by these brave fighters, who will have the last word.

12

the right to citizenship,
the General Assembly

the problem wasconsidered
as a priority item.

greater part of public opinion in the countries he visited,
reacted so strongly against the reception extended to
Mr. Botha.

by

113. In the resolution which it adopted [resolurion
38111 of 15 November 19831, the Assembly declared
that the so-called constitutional
proposals were contrary to the principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, that the results of the referendum were of no
validity whatsoever and that the enforcement of the
proposed racist constitution
would inevitably aggravate tension and conflict in South Africa and in southem Africa as a whole.

120. The minority regime in South Africa, in conformity with its established practice, persistently and
in spite of the almost unanimous condemnation by the
international community, continues to exercise the evil
policy of racism and apartheid, carrying out elections
whose goal is the establishment of even more severe
repression, terror and lawlessness in that country.
121. Such behaviour not only constitutes a violation
of the most elementary norms of international law and
ethics; it is yet another direct challenge to the decisions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly that
call for discontinuance without delay of the policy of
apartheid, the policy that has turned South Africa into
an anachronistic medieval dungeon at the end of the
twentieth century, into a society lacking any protection
of human rights and human dignity.

114. Furthermore
the continued
malversation
of
South Africa’s regime was most widely condemned and
seen as being aimed at dividing the oppressed people
of South Africa, at instigating internal disputes and
at entrenching white-minority
rule and apartheid.
115. It is evident that one of the main goals of the
proposals is the adoption of legal provisions under
which the so-called Coloured people and people of
Asian origin would find themselves subject to obligatory conscription into the armed forces of the regime
of apartheid. Thus internal repression against the majority of the population, the illegal occupation of Namibia and the aggression against independent African
countries would be further increased and strengthened.

122. The seminar on the promotion and protection of
the human rights of national, ethnic and other minorities held in my country in 1974, which was mentioned
this morning in the statement of the representative of
South Africa [2548th meeting], was devoted to those
rights in countries where human beings, as individuals
and as groups, enjoy political and civil rights. It is in my
opinion, therefore, very cynical for the representative
of South Africa to mention the issue of human rights
since in his country they do not exist for the majority of
the population. Apartheid cannot be changed; it can
only be totally eradicated.

116. We are encouraged by the unanimous resistance
of the oppressed people of South Africa to such an
obvious charade. Yugoslavia,
together with nonaligned countries and the majority of the international
community, supports the legitimate struggle of the pop-.
ulation of South Africa for the elimination of apartheid
and the establishment of a society in which all people,
:regardless of race, colour, religious belief or sex, will
enjoy equal and full political and other rights and freely
participate in deciding their own destiny.

123. We expect the Security Council to take resolute
measures that will prevent the further violation of the
basic principles and provisions of the Charter. Elections based on racial discrimination
and segregation
ridicule the parliamentary
process and they, as well as
the constitutional
proposals and the referendum that
preceded them, should be proclaimed illegal and contrary to international
law.

117. The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New
Delhi in March 1983, condemned the introduction of the
so-called constitutional
reforms by South Africa as yet
another device to consolidate and perpetuate apartheid
and white minority rule [see S/1567.5 and Corr.1 and 2,
annex, p. 221.

124. In our view the Council should demand the most
urgent and full eradication of the shameful policy of
apartheid and undertake concrete measures against the
racist regime of South Africa in order to make it comply
with the decisions of the Council.

118. In November of last year the General Assembly
requested the Council, as a matter of urgency, to consider the serious implications
of the so-called constitutional proposals and to take all necessary measures,
in accordance with the Charter, to avert the further
deterioration of the situation in southern Africa [resolution 38111 of 15 November 19831.

125. The entire people of South Africa should without
delay be enabled to exercise the right to self-determination in a democratic society, free of racial discrimination and based on the will of the majority. Only thus will
a just and lasting solution of the problems in South
Africa and in the region at large be achieved.

119. The so-called changes, together with the visits of
the racist Prime Minister of South Africa to a number
of West European countries, were aimed at reducing
the isolation of South Africa, which has few friends
and allies in the world. That is why the African, the
non-aligned and many other countries, as well as the

126. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is Mr. Mfanafuthi Makatini, to whom
the Council, at its 2548th meeting, issued an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
13

neighbouring countries, some of which are today victims of unequal agreements secured at gunpoint.

127. Mr. MAKATINI:
Mr. President, I thank you
most sincerely for giving us the opportunity to make
known to the Council how and why the Pretoria r-Cgime’s decision to impose the unashamedly racist and
colonial constitution has provoked a wave of indignation among the millions of the oppressed majority in our
country. Our thanks also go to all the members of the
Council for making this possible. Your country’s deep
commitment
to the international fight against the neoNazi system of apartheid has always served as a source
of inspiration and encouragement to freedom fighters in
southern Africa. We seize this occasion to say how the
ANC greatly values the reaffirmation of this position
as conveyed to President Oliver Tambo by Captain
Thomas Sankara.at New Delhi two years ago and this
year when he visited our region. It is for that reason that
in congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month we feel confident
that under your guidance it will adopt decisions that are
pertinent and in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and the aspirations of our people as reflected in
the Freedom Charter.

131. This is but part of the larger background against
which the racist, colonial and Fascist constitution must
be examined. As a result of the inevitable developments
today beyond its control, the regime has to adapt or die,
according to its spokesmen.
132. What are these circumstances? They are, first,
the rising tide of black anger; secondly, the collapse of
the buffer that had protected apartheid South Africa;
thirdly, the regime’s acute shortage of white military
manpower resulting from its repressive army being
overstretched and failing to stem the ever-growing tide
of intensified armed struggle being waged by SWAP0
in Namibia and the ANC in South Africa itself; fourthly, the demands by some of the regime’s Western allies
for reforms that would give a human face to the apartheid monster in order to render possible its continued
diplomatic protection.
133. It is important to place South Africa’s 1983 constitution in its proper historical context. Without going
into details on how, in pursuance of settler colonialism,
racist South Africa adopted only those features of the
Westminster system that allowed it to practise racial
domination
and reject the principle of universal suffrage, we must make a brief examination of the 1961
constitution. What is the character and function of the
present constitution,
whose demise is due soon?

128. The attention of world public opinion is today
focused on the outcome of this meeting of the Council
with greater interest and more common expectation
than ever before. The reason is clear. It is that the
Council must be guided by the self-evident truth that
men are born equal and by the principle of government
with the consent of the governed. Consequently,
in
pursuance of its unshirkable duty, it is expected to
condemn, reject, tight and defeat racist South Africa’s
constitutional
manoeuvres aimed at the consolidation
of the universally condemned system of apartheid, that
offshoot of nazism and prescription for war.

134. It is unashamedly racist in composition and function. It comprises a single legislative chamber of
177 white members of Parliament elected by white voters only. Bills are passed by a simple majority vote
and become law when signed by a non-executive State
President. This is how the horrendous discriminatory
and repressive laws designed to secure and perpetuate
the black people’s enslavement, dispossession, exploitation and genocide are passed. Executive power is
vested in a Prime Minister and Cabinet-all
white and
Afrikaner-which
enjoy the undivided loyalty and support of 126 members of Parliament.

129. The expectations of the oppressed and struggling
people of South Africa, which they share with their
natural allies, the peoples of the world, lead me to an
important statement made by the then United States
Secretary of State George Marshall in Paris on 10 December 1948, when, three years after the defeat of
fascism, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
was ratified by the General Assembly. He declared:

,135. This is what has served as the so-called legal
basis for the practice of the apartheid policies which
stand condemned by the General Assembly as a crime
against humanity and a threat to world peace and international security.

“Governments
which systematically
disregarded
the rights of their own people were not likely to
respect the rights of other nations and other people
and were likely-to seek their objectives by coercion
and force in the international
field.“2

136. The question before the Council is whether, the
1983 constitution
marks the beginning of the longawaited departure from this position. Is it a step in the
right direction, responding to the General Assembly
and Security Council’s repeated calls on the South
African authorities to end the repression and oppression of the black majority and seek a peaceful, just and
lasting solution in accordance with the principles of the
Charter?

130. Racist South Africa’s record, not only in words
but in deeds as well, makes this statement truly prophetic. “In white South Africa, only the white man was
boss” -meaning
master-“and
the Nationalist
Party
would maintain this position forever-with
force if
necessary,” said Vorster on 16 March 1970, four years
before the P. W. Botha invasion of Angola, followed by
the regime’s extension of its so-called defence perimeter-to include all African countries south of the equator
and followed by the regime’s undeclared war against

137. The 1983 constitution is the creation of the architect of apartheid: the Nationalist
Party, whose lead14

et-s and spokespersons have often boasted of their Fascist commitment,
proclaimed an allegedly divinelyinspired right and resolve to ensure that South African
nationhood is for whites only where the black majority
can stay only as temporary sojourners for the purpose
of ministering to the needs of the whites. It is therefore
yet another and more effective instrument aimed at
maintaining the Nationalist Party and apartheid control
behind the fig leaf of reforms and power-sharing.

decision of the President’s Council is, in such cases,
deemed to be the decision of Parliament.
141. The regime’s spokesmen have given different
reasons to explain the failure of the constitution to deal
with the indigenous African majority. First, there was
the nakedly racist one given by the Minister of Constitutional Affairs, who said this was because the inadequate development of the Africans made them incapable of comprehending the complex democratic process.
Since this outburst, which embarrassed the regime’s
allies abroad, the now repeatedly declared position is
that the constitutional
development for the Africans is
already settled. They are to be deprived of South African nationhood and allowed to exercise their civil and
political rights in the bantustans. We humbly submit
that this alone is enough to clear the minds of the
members of the Council and make them condemn unanimously and reject this constitution, based on bantustan
policy, to which there is unanimous opposition. The
other reason is, in our opinion, the fact that no Member
State can fail to condemn the so-called constitution,
which seeks to perpetuate the disenfranchisement
of
the indigenous African majority and makes them foreigners in the land of their birth.

138. According to Johan Duggard, the Director of the
Johannesburg-based Centre for Applied Legal Studies,
the main feature of the 1983 constitution is its tricameral
structure: Parliament will consist of three legislative
chambers, located in separate buildings. There will be a
white house of assembly with 178 members elected by
whites to represent 4.5 million whites, a house of representatives with 85 “Coloured”
members elected by
Coloureds to represent 2.5 million Coloureds, and finally a house of delegates with 45 Indian members
elected by Indians to represent 900,000 Indians. Each
house will deliberate separately, and in case of disagreement the will of the majority party in the white
house of assembly will prevail. The State President,
enjoying far-reaching executive and legislative powers,
will be elected by an electoral college of 88, comprising
50 members designated by the white house of assembly,
25 members by the “Coloured”
house of representatives, and 15 members by the Indian house of deiegates. In practice, the 50 members of the electoral
college constitute the majority that-ensures the election
of its candidate.
139. Johan Duggard correctly
nario when he says:

characterizes

142. Some spokesmen of one Member State have
been reported as welcoming racist South Africa’s constitution as a step in the right direction. We want to
believe that the Reagan Administration
supports the
United Nations position calling for the establishment of
a non-racial, democratic society in South Africa. If that
is the case, South Africa’s 1983 constitution cannot be
welcomed as a step in the right direction.

his sce-

143. However, in fairness to the Reagan Administration, we must add that this reported statement of welcoming what has been rejected by the General Assembly, as well as by the summit conferences of the OAU,
the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Commonwealth
countries, has been contested by Mr. Chester Cracker.
That leads us to expect the United States to join the
international
community in condemning Botha’s constitution, which is obviously designed to entrench further white minority rule and the universally condemned
apartheid system.

“The State President will manipulate the tricamerai
Parliament like a puppet master, for to him is given
the power to decide which matters are to be disposed
of finally by each House on its own, and which matters are to be passed by all three Houses sitting
separately, or if necessary, by the dead-lock procedure.”
Duggard further elaborates

that:

“If the State President decides that a given matter is
an ‘own affair’ of a particular House, he will refer it to
that House for final legislative determination.
Should
he decide that a matter is not the ‘own affair’ of a
particular House, it becomes a ‘general affair’, to be
decided on by all three Houses and this presidential
decision is final and no court of law may question its
correctness.”

144. Therejs another reason why we think the United
States should have no problem in voting in favour of the
draft resolution sponsored by the non-aligned countries. It will be recalled that in his major policy statement last year, Mr. Lawrence Eagleburger, the American Under-Secretary of State for Political Affairs, said:
“Our policy is directed, therefore, not at whether a
non-racial order will be arrived at [in South Africa],
but how that non-racial order will be arrived at. Westem policy towards South Africa today must focus on
how various black groups acquire the basis and in?
fluence necessary to participate in a genuine bargaining process that produces changes acceptable to
all.”

140. Bills designated as dealing with a “general affair” passed by the three Houses-sitting separately will
become law when they have been assented to by the
State President. In the event of disagreement between
the Houses, the matter will be referred by the State
President to the President’s Council for resolution. The
15

145. It will be further recalled that P. W. Botha himself wasted no time to respond-angrily,
if I might
say-by reafftrming once again that there will never be
a system of one man one vote in South Africa. Botha’s
response clearly dismissed the idea often whispered by
some Washington spokesmen suggesting that the rtgime’s constitutional changes should be given a chance
since the regime might be having some hidden agenda
involving black participation in the South African political process.

together sworn enemies, Boers and Britons, because of
their common interest in the wealth of our country,
which they planned to extract with our labour. From
1910 to 1936, the process of harnessing our labour
through landlessness began. The 1913 Land Act which
prepared the ground for the present bantustans was
passed and complemented
in 1923 by the Urban Areas
Act, which spelt out that Africans could only remain in
the cities as temporary sojourners if they ministered to
the needs of the white man. In 1936, even that qualified
franchise was eliminated and replaced by the Native
Representative Council. Those Africans who lived in
the Cape could elect three white representatives. This
constitutional
fraud reached its demise after the 1946
miners’ strike and was finally eliminated when the Nationalist Party came to power in 1948, In 1956, the token
franchise of the Coloureds was also eliminated.

146. Pretoria’s clarity of purpose was further underlined during the November
referendum campaign.
Several South African newspapers have reported that:
“On repeated occasions, the regime’s spokesmen
emphasized that the new constitution would preserve
white domination, that the new constitution was not a
step towards integration, that the Group Areas Act
would be retained, and, if necessary, forcefully applied and that there was no place for representation of
Africans, who would have to exercise political rights
beyond the local level through the bantustans.”

151. It is clear to us that one of the reasons why the
regime that has in the past gone to great lengths to
eliminate the Coloured franchise and even attempted to
deport the Indians and is taking such a position today, is
to solve the acute problem of shortage of white military
manpower. By granting this limited parliamentary representation to the so-called Coloureds and people of
Asian origin, the regime aims at securing their conscription into the apartheid army for internal repression and
aggression against the neighbouring States. It hopes in
the process to divide the black people and weaken their
common struggle against white supremacy and for a
non-racial society based on majority rule in a united and
non-fragmented
South Africa.

147. The ANC sees and condemns Botha’s new constitution as the continuation of the 300-year-old policy
of conquest, enslavement, dispossession and genocide.
It is not a step towards change. Proof of this is that all
the repressive laws which constitute the main pillars of
the inhuman apartheid system remain intact. They are
in fact being consolidated by the draconian Koomhof
bills.
148. Even presented as reforms, those insidious manoeuvres have been seen for what they are by our
people. The strong opposition to this racist, colonial
and Fascist constitution
has united our people more
than ever before. The leadership of what has turned out
to be the most powerful non-racial coalition of all times
has come from Coloured, Asian and African community leaders. It is inspired by the eio.quent warning of
Nelson Mandela in a letter smuggled out from Robben
Island in 1980 and published in 1982, in which he declared:

152. The pressing appeal we address to the members
of the Council to reject racist South Africa’s 1983 constitution as null and void ‘is an appeal for support of the
position taken by the South African patriots who see
this manoeuvre as designed to further entrench white
minority rule and apartheid. It is an appeal for support
of the democratic mass organizations inside our country which have called for the boycott of the pseudoelections due to take place this month. This boycott
movement is co-ordinated by the United Democratic
Front (UDF) which was formed in August last year and
comprises 600 organizations whose common objective
and resolve is the rejection of the new constitution and
the Koomhof bills.

“Apartheid
is the embodiment of the racism, repression and inhumanity of all previous white supremacy
regimes. To see the real face of apartheid one must
look beneath the veil of constitutional
formulae, deceptive phrases and playing with words.”

153. Having launched the million-signature
campaign
for the rejection of the new constitution,
UDF has
issued an appeal for the boycott of the forthcoming
elections and the new constitution
because, first,
“whites will still be in control. For every four whites in q
the new system, there will be two Coloureds and one
Indian person. Coloureds and Indians will therefore
have no real say.” Secondly, Coloured adult males will
be forced to do border duty. Key Government offtciais
made it clear that if the constitution is accepted, border
duty will follow. Although conscription
and border
duty can be rejected by the Coloured and Indian people
in the new parliaments, whites will still have the final
say. Thirdly, African people are left out of the new

149. In examining the record of previous white supremacy regimes, we find that following the wars of
conquest in the nineteenth century, Britain imposed
a constitution
in its South African colony which entrenched white minority
power, Boer and British,
whilst giving the qualified franchise to the Coloured and
the small number of Africans in the Cape Province. In
the rest of the provinces, our people were excluded
from political participation.
150. Like the 1983 constitution, the Act of Union was
an act against the indigenous African people. It brought
16

on behalf of the United States, that the United States
Government deplores apartheid, condemns apartheid,
as we condemn all denial of full citizenship and of the
rights of full citizenship and of democracy to all citizens
of all countries, unequivocally.

constitution.
This will create greater tension amongst
the different race groups. The UDF is concerned that if
Coloureds and Indians accept the new constitution,
they will be seen as a party to the white man’s laws
against African people. Fourthly, nothing will change.
The high rents, rates, low wages and other problems
will remain. The Group Areas Act and other unjust laws
will not be changed.

159. Secondly, I should like to underscore that the
United States does indeed condemn the constitution
now before us for consideration,
and all constitutions
that do not provide full adult suffrage and free elections, as we deplore all constitutions
of all Govemments that do not feature democratic elections in which
all adult citizens may participate under conditions of
free speech, of access to media, of free assembly, of
majority rule, and of protection of minority rights. The
United States indeed deplores all Governments everywhere which are not governments based on consent
deriving from the right of all citizens to participate in the
processes of their Government. We do not approve of
any Government in which blacks are disenfranchised,
or, indeed, any other category of citizens whatsoever.

154. In his statement this morning [254&h meeting],
in which he rejected in advance any decisions that
may emanate from the Council, the representative of
the racist South African regime has displayed the type
and level of arrogance, defiance and intransigence that
must convince the justice-loving
members of this body,
first, that in the case of apartheid South Africa the
Council is dealing with an entity that will not be persuaded by reasoned argument-if
I may borrow from
his words; secondly, that, indeed, the Pretoria regime
and its apartheid policies constitute not only the obstacle to peace, stability and security in southern Africa
but also threaten world peace and international
security; thirdly, that the problem facing the Council today
in its resolve to help bring about the establishment of
a non-racial society based on majority rule in South
Africa can be traced to the unjust decision taken by the
United Nations in admitting as a Member a settler
regime founded on the denial of the right to self-determination for the indigenous majority; and, fourthly,
that racist South Africa’s suspension from the General
Assembly must be maintained while the Council takes
appropriate steps to expel this regime from the United
Nations.

160. We oppose-indeed,
deplore-all
Governments
which deprive any category of their citizens of full
rights. We especially deplore the keeping of political
prisoners, and we call on all Governments to release
their political prisoners. We wholly affirm the words
of a former Secretary of State, one of our most distinguished military and diplomatic
leaders of all time,
General George C. Marshall, when he said that Govemments which systematically violate the rights of their
own citizens are not likely to respect the rights of others
anyplace else in the world.

155. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
I call on the representative of the United States, who
has requested to exercise her right of reply.

161. I should like to assure the nrevious sneaker-and
indeed all the members of the Cbuncil-&at
the Council can count on United States support for any resolu
lion which espouses the rights of Member States under
the Charter of the United Nations, which is consistent
with the principles of the Charter, providing only that
the members of the Council are ready to apply those
principles and guarantee those rights to all other people
in all other societies represented here today.

156. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): I should like to thank the President and to congratulate him on the assumption of this high office. We
all have confidence that he will conduct the affairs of
this Council with fairness and effectiveness.
157. I have asked to speak in exercise of my right of
reply in order to address certain of the questions that
were raised in the form of assertions by the previous
speaker with regard to the views and values and conduct of the Government of the United States. I should
like to make just a few points, and very briefly, in order
to set at rest any questions which any member of the
Council may have concerning our commitments
relevant to the draft resolution in the matter before us.

The meeting

rose at 6.45 p.m.

NOTES
’ Official
Records
of the General
Assembly.
Thirty-seventh
sion, Plenary
Meetings,
32nd meeting, ‘para. 110.
’ Ibid., Third Session, Plenary
Meetings,
139th meeting,

158. First, I will affirm as clearly and unequivocally as
possible, as I have on many occasions in the Council,

17

Ses-

p. 37.

United Nations publications
ma> be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world.‘Consult
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaims du
monde entier. fnformez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adresser-vous
a : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
K.AK

lIO:lY’CMTh

H3LtAHHH

OPJ-AHHRAI~HH

OIi%EJZIHEHHI.lX

HAUHH

Fh&wwm
Oprazimaqrr~
06zenme~xb1s
Haunif
NOXHO ~ynwrb
B KHHXH~IS
SaraJWX~X w a~-‘BHTCTBBX BO ncex pafromx
wupa. Hason~~e
cnpaem
06 WJR~HHRX B
BAUD-M ~~HXHOM
iwaram~e
mn nirmme
no anpecy:
OpraHH3ar.vm
O&bemummbm
Haum?. Cexuwfl no nponame
mflaHxR.
HMO-Haps
mw Xenesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas. Scccion de Ventas.
Nueva York o Gincbra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00400

90-61313-February

1993-2.050
