UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1903’”

MEETING:

30 MARCH

1976

UN LMIRfwv

NEW YORK

OCT1 t-1;984

CONTENTS
Page

... ... . .. ... ... .. ... .. .. .. ... ... .. .. .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group of States at the United
Nations, concerning the act of aggression committed by South Africa against
the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Kenya
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12007) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l903)

S/PV. 1903

.

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

‘.’

1903rd MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 30 March 1976, at 10.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. Thomas

S. BOYA (Benin).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and North&-ir’ireland,
United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

agenda ,(S/Agenda/l903)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint
by Kenya, ,on behalf of the African
Group of States at the United Nations, concerning
the act of aggression Committed by South Africa
against the People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/12007).
The meeting

Mr.
Florin
(German
Democratic
Republic),
Mrs. Jeanne Martin Cisse’ (Guinea), Mr. Jaipal (India),
.Mr. Maina (Kenya), Mr. Rabetajika
(Madagascar),
Mr. Harriman
(Nigeria),
Mr. Jaroszek (Poland),
Mr. Blyden (Sierra Leone),. Mr. Hussen (Somalia),
Mr. Gyono (United Republic of Cameroon), Mr. PetriE (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Kamana (Zambia) took the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

of the agenda.

was called to order at 11.40 a.m.
Adoption

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decision adopted at the
1902nd meeting, I invite the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia and the members of his
delegation to take the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber on the understanding
that they will be invited to take places at the Council
table when it is the turn of the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia to speak.
At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Kamana
(President of the United Nations Council for Namibia)
and the members of his delegation took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted,
Complaint by Kenya, on behalf of the African Group
of States at the United Nations, concerning the act
of aggression committed by South Africa against the
People’s Republic of Angola:
Letter dated 10 March 1976 from the Permanent
Representative of Kenya to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12007)

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Furthermore,
I should like to inform the Council that
I have just received letters from the representatives
of Mali, the Syrian Arab Republic and Uganda in which
they ask to be invited, under Article 31 of the Charter,
to participate without the right to vote in the Council’s
debate. If I hear no objections, I propose, in accordance with the Council’s practice and with rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure, to invite these representatives to participate without the right to vote in the
debate.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions adopted earlier
[1900th to 1902nd meetings], I shall invite the representative of Angola to take a place at the Council
table and the representatives
of Cuba, Egypt, the
German Democratic Republic, Guinea, India, Kenya,
Madagascar, Nigeria, Poland, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
the United Republic of Cameroon, Yugoslavia. and
Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kant& (Mali),
Mr. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Mwangaguhunga (Uganda) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Luvualu
(Angola) took a place af the Security Council table and
Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),

5. Mr. KAMANA
(President of the United Nations
Council for Namibia):
The delegation of the United
Nations Council for Namibia is grateful for this op-

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The first speaker is Mr. Kamana, the President of the
United Nations Council for Namibia.
I invite him
and the members of his delegation to take places at
the Council table and I now give him the floor.

portunity to address the Security Council. Conscious
of our special responsibility for Namibia and realizing
the crucial importance
and relevance of the issue
before this Council to Namibia and its people, we
could not remain silent.

population of the Territory
tional community.

and those of the intema-

10. The situation that confronts the Security Council has a quality which is rare in political conflicts:
there is no ambiguity about the issue. South Africa
must be branded as an aggressor State which used
its illegal presence in Namibia to launch an armed
invaasion of a neighbouring country. The withdrawal
a
of its troops from Angola is not sufficient to reduce
the threat to international
peace and security in
southern Africa. The Council must condemn South
African withdrawal into Namibia as an attempt to
mislead world opinion. The militarization
of Namibia
is yet another dimension to the escalating contempt
that South Africa reveals for the common decency of
mankind.

6. The Security Council is today rightly considering
the aggression committed against Angola by the racist
regime of South Africa. Needless to say, its aggression
was launched from Namibia,
a Territory under the
direct responsibility
of the United Nations. The illegal
character of the presence of South Africa in Namibia
has been stated by the International
Court of Justice
and repeatedly reaffirmed by this very Council and the
General Assembly.
Therefore, in carrying out its
aggression against Angola from Namibia, South Africa
compounded
its defiance of the consensus of the
international
community against its illegal occupation
of the Territory and its abhorrent policies and practices
therein. In fact it committed
a double offence in
international law.

11. The existence of the Portuguese colonial empire
served many purposes for the South African racist
colonial regime. It provided not only an additional
barrier to protect its own brand of ruthless exploitation and colonialism but also was the condition for the
expansion of its policies of plunder in connivance with
Portuguese colonial authorities.
The exploitation
of
Angolan resources through such colonial contracts
must be defined as void of any legally binding commitments with respect to the Government of independent
Angola.

7. For some time now the Council for Namibia has
been gravely concerned at the militarization
of Namibia
by South Africa and the intensified acts of brutality,
oppression and repression of the Namibian
people.
Indeed, Namibians along the border with Angola have
experienced
immense
suffering,
humiliation
and
deprivation.
They have been uprooted from their
homes in order to give way to the aggression against
Angola and a savage so-called “hot pursuit” against
the gallant freedom fight of Namibia led by the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO). Fear of
SWAPO, because of its ever-growing support among
the Namibian people and its effectiveness in military
terms, was in fact the main reason for the South
African aggression against Angola. It was a desperate
and shameless attempt to stifle the efforts of SWAP0
and to suppress Namibian nationalism through savage
brutality.

12. It is in this light that the issue of the Cunene
hydroelectric
project must be considered by the
Council. The South African presence in Namibia
is illegal. Thus, it has no authority to negotiate new
contracts regarding the utilization
of the Cunene
river project. The legal authority with respect to the
Territory of Namibia rests with the United Nations
Council for Namibia.
13. * If it were possible for the reckless and blind
South African racists and exploiters to show wisdom,
they would heed the warning signals of outraged
humanity and cease their military adventurism
and
recognize the right to self-determination
of the Namibian people. If it were possible for such reckless,
blind racist exploiters to show wisdom, they would
renounce their uncontrolled
greed and proceed to
dismantle
the brutal apparatus of exploitation
by
apartheid. Indeed, if it were possible for such reckless,
blind racist exploiters to show wisdom, they would
have the foresight to perceive that pursuing the present
course will inexorably
bring untold misery and
suffering to the same people they assume to be
protecting by imposing inhuman conditions on the
African population of South Africa and Namibia.

8. South Africa is now reported to have withdrawn
from Angola, but the withdrawal is into Namibia.
Surely this is totally unacceptable, since Namibia is
not part of South Africa. The profound problem posed
by South African racist military adventurism must be
faced squarely. The United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular,
must not tolerate such withdrawal into Namibia. The senseless military buildup
in Namibia must not be allowed to continue.
9. The General Assembly has continually reasserted
its stand on Namibia and has, furthermore,
called
upon all Member States to assist in promoting the
withdrawal of South African forces and administration
from Namibia. The Security Council has on several
occasions reiterated its decision expressed in resolution 264 (1969) condemning the refusal of South Africa
to comply with the resolutions of the General Assembly
and considering
the continued presence of South
Africa in Namibia illegal and contrary to the principles
of the Charter and detrimental
to the interests of the

14. The bells of history are ringing. The hour of total
African liberation is at hand. No strategic, tactical or
personal opportunism will hold down the rising banner.
of the African peoples’ national dignity. No challenge
is too great for the realization of their national identity.
2

20. Yet, on a note of generosity to those founding
fathers, one cannot altogether rule out the possibility
that those 25 other decent and responsible members
of the international
community
that signed that
Declaration by United Nations may well have been
moved to include, rather than exclude, South Africa
from their ranks in the pious but naive hope that
through such association and through full participation in the work of the Organization,
South Africa
would be motivated by the lofty ideals and aspirations
proclaimed both in the Declaration and in the Charter,
and would inevitably veer away from its bizarre and
inhumane policy of apartheid as an instrument
of
government
in the twentieth century. How wrong
they were; how wrong they were. Time has shown
again and again and again how outrageously wrong
those founding fathers, with all their good intentions,
must have been over South Africa.

15. The crucial character of these issues must not
escape the attention of the Security Council. Clearly,
only decisive action by this body will convey to South
Africa the hopelessness of its stand.
16. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Sierra Leone.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
17. Mr. BLYDEN
(Sierra Leone): First, let me
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March, soon to end, and to say how proud and
pleased my delegation is over the distinguished manner
in which you have so far steered the affairs of the
Council-without
fuss, without megalomania,
without
fanfare. My delegation wishes you well for the next
day or so as you continue to wield the gavel with
the same Cclat and distinction
which has already
characterised your performance as you presided over
the debate on two of the thorniest issues with which
the Council has been concerned from its very
beginning.

21. The ink had scarcely dried on the parchment
at San Francisco than South Africa began to demonstrate its recalcitrance as a Member of the Organization. For although South Africa was not only a charter
Member but also one of the first seven Vice-Presidents
of the first sessionof the General Assembly, it remained
the only one of the then Mandatory Powers under the
League of Nations
Covenant
which flagrantly
challenged the authority of the Organization
it had
helped to create by its wilful refusal to transfer its
Mandatory power to the Trusteeship Council as called
for by the General Assembly, a point which the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia
so ably made a few moments ago. Indeed, it is the
view of my delegation that we are meeting here 30 years
too late to brand South Africa an aggressor. By the
forced imposition
of its political regime on Namibia
-formerly
the Mandated Territory
of South West
Africa-South
Africa was and still is committing
an
act of aggression which we did not take time to notice
because we were more concerned with observing its
practice of apartheid. For 30 long years South Africa
has been an aggressor against Namibia and is now
an aggressor against a second African territory, the
People’s Republic of Angola.

18. May I also seize this opportunity to extend to the
representative of the People’s Republic of Angola a
warm and enthusiastic welcome as he takes his seat
among us, thus presaging the occasion when we shall
have the opportunity of extending an official hand of
welcome to the Government and people of Angola as
a full Member of the Organization.
In his presence
here we are able to witness once again positive
evidence of the determined efforts of all Members of
the Organization
to fulfil the hopes and aspirations
of the founding fathers of the United Nations to make
the Organization
what it was originally intended to
become, an organization fully representative of all the
peoples of the world.
19. But when I have said that, I cannot resist the
temptation of reflecting upon what I judge to be the
unsound judgement
and unfounded optimism of the
founding fathers of the United Nations in including
among their ranks as a charter Member of the Organization the Union of South Africa, a supposedly
“Christian”
and “civilized”
State and hence deemed
capable of measuring up to the lofty standards and high
ideals espoused by all founder Members of the
Organization.
The irony of South Africa’s charter
membership lies in the fact that, although known to
the rest of the international
community of the day as
an avowedly racist Government,
it was not only to
become one of the original 51 signatories of the
Charter at San Francisco in 1945, but, what was worse,
it had been invited earlier to become one of the original
26 signers of the Declaration
by United Nations
proclaimed on 1 January 1942, three and a half years
before the United Nations was to come into being, a
declaration in which those States which were still
in the throes of a global war had felt compelled,
looking to the future, to express their resolve “to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”.

22. The Council of Ministers of the Organ&&ion
of
African Unity (OAU) at its twenty-sixth
ordinary
session held at Addis Ababa in February 1976 gave
the African Group at the United Nations a mandate to
call for an emergency meeting of the Security Council
to consider the act of aggression committed by South
Africa against the People’s Republic of Angola. In
order that members of the Council may be properly
advised and directed as to the expectations of the
OAU on this matter, and in order that there may .be
no further doubt as to where the OAU and the African
peoples as a whole stand vis-a-vis the apartheid
Government
of South Africa at this juncture of the
history of their countries, I consider it necessary and
useful to recite appropriate
passages of the OAU
.resolution, of which paragraph 5 is only a single item:
3

“The Council of Ministers of the Organization of
African Unity, meeting in its twenty-sixth ordinary
session in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
from’ 23 to
29 February 1976,

the territorial integrity or political independence of any
State...“. The General Assembly, in developing this
principle, has proclaimed over and over again and at
various times that a war of aggression constitutes a
crime against peace-peace,
that ultimate.goal
of the
United Nations.
2.
25. Under the Definition of Aggression, contained
in General Assembly resolution 3314 (XXIX), which
was approved and adopted after consideration of the
report of the Special Committee on the Question of
Defining Aggression, South Africa stands condemned
in the eyes of the world of aggression against the
sovereign State of Angola. There can be .little .doubt
about’it. Article 1 of the Definition defines *aggression
‘,.‘, .,”
as
.,
“the use of armed force by a State against the
sovereignty, territorial integrity or political independence of another State, ‘or in any other ‘manner
inconsistent with the Charter of the United:Nations,
“.
as set out in this Definition’?,
: *
while article 3 spells out in more specific terms those
“acts” which, “regardless of a declaration of war,
shall... qualify as an act of aggression”.
,.“,
I /I
26. In the view of my delegation this .is the ‘first
real occasion on which the Security Council may be
said to have met to implement, the report of the Speci,al
Committee
on the Question of Defining ‘Aggression
since its adoption by the General Assembly-a
task
which took the United Nations 29 of its 30 years to
accomplish. Forgive me, therefore, if, for the benefit
of the world community
which as yet is not too
familiar with the provisions of that document, I engage
in a cursory recital of a few of its relevant provisions
so as to enable the Council and its supporters to
address themselves to the task for which this body is
currently assembled, to wit, to consider “the act of
aggression committed
by South Africa against the
People’s Republic of Angola”.

‘6 . . .
“Considering
that the People’s
Republic
of
Angola, member State of the Organization of African
Unity, is at present a victim of an intolerable ag_. gression by the troops of the racist and fascist
Government
of South Africa who are occupying
.pait of its national territory,
“Conviuced that the aggression against Angola is
’ directed’at
all OAU member States,
:
“, . . .
“Recalling the numerous resolutions of the OAU,
..the United Nations and the non-aligned countries
condemning South Africa for its policy of apartheid
and its illegal occupation of Namibia,
“Conscious of the major role that the People’s
Republic of Angola should.play in the intensification
of the liberation struggle in southern Africa,
“1. Strongly condemns South Africa
unspeakable aggression against the People’s
lic of Angola.. . ;

for its
Repub-

“2. Demands the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of the South African forces of aggression;
“3. Urges all member States of the region to cooperate fully with the Government of the People’s
Republic of Angola in order to defend its independence...;“.
Then there is paragraph 5, under which we are meeting
here.

27. I have already referred to article 1 of the Definition of Aggression. Article 3 lists the following as
constituting acts of aggression:
L

23. I have taken the trouble to read out some of the
passages that are appropriate and related to the item
which brought us to convene this series of Council
meetings because I wish this Council and the world at
large to be aware of the underlying spirit behind the
call for these meetings to discuss South Africa’s aggression against Angola. It is not unrelated, as members
of the Council will see from some of the passages
I have read.out, to the inspiration which has guided
the continent and its peoples throughout
the last
half century or longer to seek total liberation not only
for their individual territories but for all territories in
Africa, since, as the passage says, aggression against
Angola is aggression against all the States members
of the OAU and against all African peoples.

“(a) The invasion or attack by the armed forces
of a State of the territory of another State, or any
military occupation, however temporary, resulting
from such invasion or attack, or any annexation by
the use of force of the territory of another State or
part thereof;
“(6) Bombardment
by the armed forces of a State
against the territory of another State or the use of
any weapons by a State against the territory of
another State;
“(c) The blockade of the ports or coasts of a State
by the armed forces of another State;

24. The Charter of the United Nations provides,
as we know, that States “shall refrain in their international ,relations from the threat or use of force against

..*
4

‘.

:,

“(g) The sending by or on behalf of a State of
armed bands, groups, irregulars or mercenaries,
which carry out acts of armed force against another
State of such gravity as to amount to the acts listed
above, or its substantial involvement
therein.”
Article

_’

Angola, has led to this momentous occasion when my
delegation, along with other delegations not only of
sister African States but also of other liberal and welldisposed States from other parts of the world, can
proudly proclaim our solidarity with the sister State
of Angola as it here and now presents its case as well
as its cause before this Council in search of justice
and fair play ’ in the conduct of relations between
States.

4 states:

“The acts enumerated above are not exhaustive’
and the Security Council may determine that other
acts constitute aggression under the provisions of the
Charter.”

32. My delegation is neither amazed nor amused by
the call for moderation,
tolerance and a spirit of
reconciliation
which has been emanating from certain
quarters of the advanced and industrialized
community in recent weeks, regrettably, from some of
those States which had long ignored pleas and appeals
from colonial peoples during the last quarter of
century to aid and abet the forces of moderation in
Africa during the nascent period of our nationalist
struggle and campaigns for independence.

28. The participation
of my delegation in this debate
is based not on considerations of political or ideological
sentimentality
nor of geographical
proximity,
linguistic or cultural affinity, nor even of the similarity
or identity.of political and ideological persuasions. The
interest of the delegation of Sierra Leone in the Angolan
question, both before and since that country’s accession to independence, is deeply rooted in ties of affinity
and consanguinity forced upon our two countries and
peoples by the circumstances of history.

33. Today, when our compatriots
in Angola find
themselves reluctantly compelled to seek the aid and
assistance of other and more positively well-meaning
States within the comity of nations, the cry goes up
in loud and stentorian tones from certain bastions of
inaction and reaction that the African peoples and their
leaders should listen to the voice of “reason’*,
“moderation”,
and “accommodation”
rather than
indulge in confrontation and violence. Indeed, it is no
laughing matter that this call for moderation, restraint,
negotiation
and conciliation
to get us out of the
Angolan impasse comes out louder than ever on an
issue that involves not one, not two, but three wellpopulated African countries which by accident happen
to share a common border with, or are within the
immediate
environs of, certain enclaves in which
protected, vested interests of friends of South Africa
happen to be lodged. This has not escaped our notice.

29. It is scarcely known and, where known, seldom
remembered that my country, Sierra Leone-originally
called Serra Leoa, a Portuguese name meaning Lion
Mountains-although
at no time a Portuguese colony or
dependency in the conventional usage of those terms,
can nevertheless be regarded as the “mother”
of
Portuguese-inspired
enclaves on the African continent
dating back over 500 years-to
1462, to be precise-to
a period in history which antedates that later and ugly
period of adventurism on the continent by Portugal
as a colonial Power, which we were fortunate to
escape.
30. As if marked by the hand of providence or destiny
to participate in the grand design of nation-building
long before the contemplation
of such a policy was
forced upon the European colonial Powers during
the past two decades, my country was as far back
as some 75 years ago already engaged in the positive
task of rendering technical assistance to a European
colonial Power-the
great Government of Portugal of
the day-as it sought trained and skilled manpower to
help it in administering
a colony, a task for which it
was inadequately equipped. Sierra Leone provided all
the skilled and trained professional manpower for the
technical,
administrative
and telecommunications
services of all the Portuguese
colonies without
exception-Angola,
Mozambique,
Guinea-Bissau,
Sao Tome and Principe. Hence our desire to participate in the debate is rooted in considerations
far
greater than just the sentimental one of being African.

34. My delegation
has, throughout
the 15-year
history of its membership in the Organization,
never
once ceased to raise its voice against all those forces
of repression, suppression and oppression without
regard to the quarters from which such ungainly and
inhuman acts of public policy may emanate. It is for
this reason that, as the record of the Organization will
show, not only in the General Assembly and in the
Security Council but in all the specialized agencies,
my delegation’s
stance has invariably been on the
side of liberty with restraint, justice for all peoples
without discrimination
or oppression. Yet, painfully,
very painfully, with all my country’s known commitment throughout the years to the cause of peaceful
negotiation and persuasion as the only means for the
solution of difficult and impossible conflicts, we have
been compelled to the unhappy and inescapable conclusion reached by an African poet more than a
century ago that those who would be free must,
themselves, strike the blow.

31. Happily for us and our brothers and sisters of
Sao Tome and Principe,
Angola,
Mozambique,
Guinea-Bissau
and so on, the opportunity
provided
for my fellow-countrymen
of earlier generations to
live, to work and even to fertilize our blood with that
of our compatriots
in those countries, especially

35. My delegation is at one with all the other delegations that have preceded me here or that will follow
5

me which have called for a clear and unequivocal
denunciation
of the aggressor State of South Africa
for its daring, if misguided, attempt to encroach upon
the sovereign territory of the People’s Republic of
Angola and to deprive that country and its people of
their lives and fortunes.

especially to those aspects bearing on the freedom
and dignity of our part of the world, for we all know
and have read about the liberal ethics that have
dominated
the political
activities
of Ambassador
Scranton in this country.
42. Although my country is not a member of the
Security Council, permit me also to say how much,
during the debate on the question of Angola, my delegation misses the presence of Ambassador Malik,
who, I am told, is still ill in hospital.

36. My delegation remains resolute in its stand that
aggression of whatever shape or form is a crime against
humanity and against the conscience of mankind. Let
us therefore during this meeting not only denounce
this despicable phenomenon in the world community
but act with firmness to put an end to it once and
for all and put to shame and lay down a denial of the
language and words of one of the world’s greatest
statesmen of this century, that great American citizen
Adlai Stevenson, who himself once sat in this chamber.
Adlai Stevenson, writing about what he called “our
broken mainspring”
in the West in his book, Putting
First Things First,
published some 15 years ago,
states-and,
indeed, I hope that in citing this we can
prove him wrong by the action which we take in the
Council:

43. Allow me to congratulate the Council for having
opened this forum, in spite of the limited reservations
stated, to Ambassador Luvualu, the representative
of the Government of the People’s Republic of Angola.
There is no doubt that Angola has the right to be
heard in the Security Council, in accordance with
Article 32 of the Charter. Its presence in the Council
is a signal light indicating that other oppressed Africans
in the rest of southern Africa will one day win their
freedom, although human dignity continues to sink to
an abysmal level that was not even contemplated
by
David Livingstone
when he implied that Africans
should continue to be hewers of wood and drawers of
water, and although they are driven to fight with
their backs to the wall.

“I come back to the painful fact that the Communists show a world-wide concern which is largely
lacking among the men of the West. The whole
human race is their horizon. Their ‘brotherhood’
is materialist, collectivist, atheist, and we dislike it,
but it embraces everybody, and it is the framework
of policies which take the missionaries of their new
order to the end of the earth. I say with all the
emphasis that I can command that we have no
corresponding commitment
to our fellow man.“’

44. The interest shown by the quantitative
and
qualitative range of participation in this debate reflects
the consciousness of the international
community
in general. It underlines the significance of the problem
of Angola, which is only a landmark and the beginning
of greater struggles by the black man in Africa to
extricate himself from the remaining shackles of white
domination,
which continues to be characterized by
acts of human degradation by the white community in
southern Africa. The people of Angola have also
demonstrated to freedom fighters in southern Africa
that what is build by blood can only be brought down
by bloody struggle. It is left for the racist South
Africans to see the writing in blood on the wall and to
prevent the situation from reaching these undesirable
levels.

37. I want to say publicly that I do not believe,
I do not agree with Mr. Stevenson, for I was brought
up in the Christian tradition handed down by the
majority of States Members of the Organization-that
we are our brother’s keeper. The Security Council
stands at the crossroads of its own destiny to prove
Mr. Stevenson right or wrong.
38. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative
of Nigeria.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and
to make his statement.

45. The Nigerian delegation understands perfectly
why we are here. It is to condemn in no uncertain
terms the intolerable aggression by racist South Africa
against sovereign Angolan territory.

39. Mr. HARRIMAN
(Nigeria): Mr. President, allow
me to thank you and the members of the Security
Council for inviting me to participate in the discussion
of the question of South Africa’s aggression in Angola.

46. There are two aspects which I wish to underline.
First, it has been claimed that Angola was not independent on 28 October when South African forces
joined hands with local puppet elements to penetrate
about a thousand miles into the heartland of Angola in
so:called hot pursuit. The legality of this action was
said to lie in the acquiescence of the Portuguese
colonial Government. Luckily, Portugal has clearly and
publicly stated that at no time did it have any agreement with South Africa to assist in protecting the
Calueque hydroelectric
complex, as claimed by the
South African Government according to its usual habit
of distorting the facts.

40. Before I proceed, I should like to congratulate
you on the assumption of the presidency of this Council. You come from a sister African country which
has excellent relations with Nigeria.
41. I should also like to welcome among us Ambassador Scranton of the United States. I am quite certain
that he will be able to contribute usefully to the work
of the Council and of the United Nations as a whole,
6

-

at the January Addis Ababa summit, must now understand that the OAU has been and will continue to be
firmly united against racism, fascism and inhumanity
to the black man in Africa and against the usurping
powers of white minority regimes in southern Africa.
At the OAU summit it wasclear that nobody supported
the cause of those who collaborated with South Africa.
Those who failed then to support the recognition of
MPLA
[Popular
Movement for the Liberation
of
Angola],
which was a crucial aspect of the Addis
Ababa meeting, took that position not because they
supported either FNLA [National Frontfor the Liberation of Angola] or UNITA
[National
Union for the
Total Independence
of Angola] but because they
thought that the options for reconciliation
of the three
parties had not been fully explored. However, those
of us who gave support to MPLA did so from farsighted
judgement and after weighing the options, not in the
interest of our own countries but in the interest of the
Angolans in particular and Africa in general. We have
been proved right. Permit me to salute those in the
Western world who promptly appreciated this and have
since joined with the OAU in its attempt to work
towards the reconstruction
and rehabilitation
of
Angola. I select the Western world not because we
do not appreciate the great contributions
of the rest
of the third world and the socialist world but because
we are always assured of their support.

47. The second aspect is that after independence was
achieved on 11 November 1975-T repeat: after independence was achieved-the
forces of the racist South
African Government
continued their aggression and
made efforts to pull out only over the past week-end,
after five months of an occupation characterized by
destruction, murder, pillage-and
I need not go into
details, because that was undoubtedly
done earlier
by the representative of Angola. In addition, under
armed coercion
and intimidation,
thousands
of
Angolans have been herded into Namibian territory.
It is probable that the objective of this exercise is to
hold them hostages to provoke a dialogue between the
racist regime and an African Government.
In their
retreat the South Africans blew up over 100 bridges,
large and small. In spite of these provocations,
the
Angolan Government
forces have avoided military
confrontation
along their borders, all their borders,
on which they should be congratulated.
48. We cannot help but cast our minds back briefly
to five centuries of slavery, brutal extractive colonialism, racism and fascist Governments
until the
advent of the wind of change that has been blowing
over Africa during the last decade. Africa and all other
lovers of freedom are aware that this wind inscribes
a message of hope clearly on the wall of decolonization. It is in the interest of all of us that this wind
should not be allowed to become one of despair,
manifesting itself in a hurricane sustained by centuries
of bitterness over oppression and darkness.

52. I believe that the Secretary-General,
within the
constraints of his terms of reference, is also already
doing his best to help salvage something from the
disaster created by the wanton acts of destruction and
pillage by the South African army. I believe that there
is a general rethinking in the United States, at least
in some circles, towards the solution of the Angolan
tragedy in all its aspects. I would venture to suggest
that the right objectives to pursue in Angola would be
those that promote progress, peace and unity and
access by the international
community
to Angola’s
immense natural resources and markets, and not red
herrings about military
aid sent out by the Soviet
Union and Cuba.

49. The Angolans have had no opportunity
to
articulate options in their domestic, and even less in
their external, policies. We all recall that the colonialist Government scuttled Angola, in the dawn of its
independence,
with the threat of usurpation by the
minority racist regime in South Africa. The Portuguese
had for five centuries sat snug in their ivory tower,
as the white racists continue to do, oblivious of the
impending change. They refused to develop their territories towards independence. They refused to accept
the inevitable.
When it came, they pulled out
unceremoniously.

53. I hope that nobody here will attempt to pull wool
over the eyes of the Council. Aggression grows beyond
the presence of troops in Angola, and I am very happy
that my colleague from Sierra Leone went into the
entire legal framework that backs our political request
now before the Council. Whether we reason, in addition, from the moral or the political point of view,
the legal issues being clear, the international
community should be just in its decisions. In that regard
let us support the request for compensation and urge
South Africa to make reparation and restitution,
as
demanded by Angola and as supported by the sponsors
of an important paper to be submitted to the Council
on the foregoing lines. That is the only way that
Angola could obtain a measure ofjustice in this matter.
The Angolans have suffered for too long.

50. As the Portuguese pulled out, the South African
regime promptly attempted to fill what they thought
would be a vacuum by exploiting the weaknesses of
some of the leaders of Angola in regard to achieving
their objectives. These local leaders thus lost their
credibility,
for they joined forces with the declared
enemies of Africa to wage war against their own
brothers in Luanda through military
collaboration
with South Africa, thereby betraying Africa.
51. This is the first time that we have discussed
Angola directly in the United Nations. I crave the
Council’s
indulgence,
therefore, for having made
such a long preamble and also for taking this opportunity to underline that those who spoke and wrote
with glee about the division in the ranks in the
Organization of African Unity on Angola, especially

54. Other aspects bearing on this issue that worry
my delegation are a number of assumptions that con7

tinue to impose constraints on the policy options
available to certain Western countries,. leading to their
inability
to tackle the problem of Angola in the
interest ofworld peace. The first is that the situation
in Angola is a super-Power contest of strength and
influence and is a test of detente. Secondly, the direct
interests of the United States in the crisis hinge on the
misconception
that the super-Powers have priority
influence over and above,,the interests of the people
of Angola. The relevant ideological
slogans have
therefore been manipulated to becloud the issues-procommunist,communist-backed,
and so forth. As I
said before, .I feel certain that we are all ,aware here
that the Angolans have not been given the opportunity
to assess the options in their domestic and external
policies. And let me warn that the longer they are
frustrated, ‘the more the external Powers will themselves circ,umscribe the spectrum of options
available
I
to them.

titularly
the United States. We are capable of determining our own policies. And may I add here that it
is dangerous to threaten Cuba and to mislead the’world
by allowing an impression, to be created that these
Cuban forces are poised to invade certain territories
in southern Africa. Even then, as long as the presence
of Cuban forces in Angola can promote the’ siege
mentality fast escalating in the ranks of. the ,racist
Government in Rhodesia and can weaken the effect
of its treasonable unilateral ‘declaration
of’independe.nce, why urge their exit when they are helping to
further the objectives of the]Security Council and the
i
United Nations?
59. On a less serious note, we’have read in the press
of how an American spotted Cubans fighting- on the
Golan Heights. I do not know whether’ he used
Telstar, or whether from U-2planes one can’distinguish
between Portuguese, Angolans and Arabs; but, Nigeria
not being so technologically
advanced, I might not
have an answer,to that. We hope, however, that these
threats against Cuba for helping -African liberation are
as serious as the reports of the phantom Cubans
fighting on the Golan Heights. The extension of panAmerican,
ideological
squabbles to becoming
a
determinant
in United
States policy in Africa is
certainly’s matter that clearly requires urgent review.

55. Another misconception
is that the MPLA represents only a fraction of the Angolan people. The irony
of this argument is ,too obvious to warrant discussion
here:The dignity of the Angolan leaders, their demonstrated h,umanism, their good political judgement and
sense and all their other traits are self-evident in their
statements during the current meetings of the Council
and in other international bodies. No group, after such
bitter experience as theirs, could have spoken with
more stoical mildness1 It is on record that so far there
has been no victimization
of followers of known traitors
who,‘on the. basis of tribalism, misled certain people
of Angola. into supporting them. .Angolans have not
been acrimonious,
and the ,Angolan leaders, who in
fact represent the intellectual and leadership cadres of
Angola, have been very magnanimous. We in the OAU
have often been surprised at this magnanimity.
The
international
community
encourages them to remain
magnanimous.

60.. Another aspect which.1 wish to examine is the
contention
that the presence of Cuban troops and
Soviet advisers is a threat to white minority regimes in
southern Africa. This aqprehension on the part of
certain,Western
countries reflects the greater concern
which they have for the white minority regimes than
for the’ very democratic values, basic freedoms and
great ideals’ of Western democracy which are the
raison d’&tre for their Western policy against Cuba
and which have been trampled underfoot by these
racist Governments in southern Africa. It is remarkable
that in spite of protestations,
which are only recent,
at no time have these southern African regimes been
encouraged,
much less coerced, blustered at or
threatened, to change their policies, as the Angolans,
the Soviets and the Cubans are today being subjected
to pressure, by the United States in particular.

56. Another misconception
is that Cuba has carried
out a policy of intervention
and communist expansion in Africa. This, as’everyone knows, is not true.
Cuba -has only acted in prompt response to the
sovereign action of the ‘legitimate
Government
of
Angola in defence of its territorial
integrity, which
had been violated by South Africa. If’apartheid
and
racism had succeeded in their northward thrust into
Angola, we. would have been debating a different kind
of problem here today.

61. -It is the hope of my- delegation that the definition of aggression will be a universal one, that reparation will be made in accordance with the practice of
civilized society and that the Security Council will
urge South Africa to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola and,
in accordance with the principles inspiring declarations of the Council and the General Assembly, not
to use the Territory of Namibia for aggression against
African States.

57. We in Africa have no quarrels with the Cubans.
There are filial links between Cuba and Africa in
general, apart from the basic Afro-Latin cultural and
blood relations between Cuba and Angola. This is the
basis on which Angola turned to Cuba. In, the spectrum
of those who have recognized Angola we also noted
the great and,quick response of Brazil ’in recognizing
Angola on similar grounds.

62. Finally; my delegation hopes that the generosity
with which guns were rushed to the war in Angola will
be reflected in the generosity with which assistance is
given to Angola for its rehabilitation
and reconst.ruction.

58. Pan-American
conflicts should not be extended
to policies in Africa by Western Powers, and par8

63. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Yugoslavia.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
make his statement.

12 years later, it was underlined that more than half
the member States of the international
community,
representing the majority of the world’s population,
took part in that conference, and it was stated that
non-alignment
was continuing to grow in scope and
acquiring ever wider acceptance by expressing at the
international
level the aspirations of an increasing
number of States, of the national liberation movements
and of all the forces for emancipation
and progress
throughout the world.

64. Mr. PETRIC
(Yugoslavia):
May I first of all
extend my most cordial welcome to the representative
of Angola, Ambassador Pascal Luvualu. His presence
at the United Nations symbolizes the success of the
liberation struggle of his country and, at the same
time, heralds its early participation
in the work of the
Organization in the capacity of a full Member.

69. The success of the people of Angola in winning
and defending its independence,
together with the
previous victories of Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique,
Cape Verde, and Sao Tome and Principe and with
the major advances in the struggle of the peoples of
Zimbabwe and Namibia,
represents in addition to
everything else a most telling answer and rebuff to all
those who view with pessimism the activities of the
United Nations.

65. My delegation believes that the question which
the Council is presently considering at the request
of the African Group, namely, South Africa’s act of
aggression committed against the independent People’s
Republic of Angola, is a very important one for the
maintenance
of peace and security in Africa and
elsewhere., The United Nations and the Security
Council should lend full assistance to the independent
People’s Republic of Angola, victim of aggression by
the racists of South Africa. My delegation is taking part
in the work of the Security Council in order to express,
on this occasion also, the full support of non-aligned
Yugoslavia for the Government
and people of the
People’s Republic of Angola and for every resolute
action undertaken by the Council to combat the aggression committed by South Africa against Angola.

70. Of course, the victories that I have just mentioned
are, first and foremost, the result of the terrible
sacrifices in lives and blood that the peoples of those
countries were ready to make in their liberation
struggle. At the same time, every effort to support
them that we have made here, every resolution, every
measure and every concrete step that we have been
pursuing year in, year out have been of real help and
by their accumulation and growth over the years have
also constituted
a major contribution.
Everything
that we have ever done in and through the General
Assembly, the Security Council, the Committee
of
24* or the United Nations Council for Namibia,
the
work of the Secretariat, various funds, missions and
all the myriad ways of helping liberation movements
-from recognizing their fight as being in accordance
with the Charter to all kinds of direct aid--all have
borne results in the end.

66. My country,
after lending full support and
assistance to the long and heroic national liberation
struggle of the people of Angola, recognized the
Government
of the People’s Republic of Angola,
headed by Agostinho Neto, immediately
after the
proclamation
of its independence last November. We
note with satisfaction that 94 countries have already
recognized the Government
of Angola, a fact which
represents world-wide recognition of the struggle and
victory of the Angolan people.

71. The United Nations and the international
community have been coping with the aggressive policy
of the South African racist regime and its system of
apartheid
and racial discrimination
for more -than
three decades. For a decade the United Nations has
been endeavouring
to free Namibia from the illegal
occupation
imposed on that African Territory
by
South Africa, although international responsibility
for
the administration
of Namibia has been vested in the
United Nations. For more than a decade the United
Nations has been making efforts to get rid of Ian
Smith’s illegal minority regime by imposing economic
and other sanctions against it.

67. As we all know, the People’s Republic of Angola
has incorporated
its adherence to the policy and
posture of non-alignment
in its Constitution as one of
its fundamental principles. That is a great contribution
to world peace and security that Angola is making,
together with all the newly liberated countries which,
as a rule, opt for the non-aligned movement.
68. At their first summit meeting, at Belgrade in 1961,
the non-aligned countries proclaimed that the further
extension of the non-aligned area of the world constituted the only possible and indispensable alternative
to the policy of total division of the world into blocs
and the intensification
of cold-war policies. At that
summit it was also prophetically
stated that the
emergence of newly liberated countries would further
assist in narrowing down the area of bloc antagonisms
and thus encourage all tendencies towards strengthening peace and promoting
peaceful co-operation&+
among independent and equal nations. At the most
recent non-aligned summit meeting, at Algiers in 1973,

72. In spite of all the efofrts and decisions of the
United Nations, South Africa has intensified its racist
policy against the 18 million Africans of South Africa.
It has strengthened
its illegal military
and other
presence in Namibia, stepped up its terror against the
.-people of$?la.mibia
-used
terr$ory
for
,-+<,<K
*-.,+.:i‘.2 and
*I;i “$%
._T‘..A‘;.Namibian
,*.. jy.;- _)..i:,y
1
aggkession against Angola. It has ‘gtven full’ support
to Ian Smith and has repeatedly threatened the security
9

of neighbouring
African countries. Because of all
that, the South African rkgime was universally condemned and at the twenty-nith session of the General
Assembly was even deprived of the right to take part
in the work of that body. However, the uprtheid
regime has ignored the United Nations and the intemational community by resorting ruthlessly to aggression
by its regular military forces in Angola.

Democratic Republic. I invite him to take a place a
at the Council table and to make a statement.
77. Mr. FLORIN
(German Democratic
Republic)
(interpretation from Russian): I should like to thank the
members of the Council for giving the delegation of the
German Democratic
Republic
the opportunity
to
take part in the debate.

73. The aggression in Angola constitutes a desperate
attempt to stop the liquidation of racist positions and
interests in southern Africa. Thus it has been confirmed once again that it presents an open threat to
independent Africa and to peace and security on that
continent and beyond. Therefore, the responsibility
of the Security Council, and of every one of its
permanent members in particular, is all the greater.
The need for the Council.and all countries to condemn
South Africa’s premeditated
aggression in Angola is
ever more acute and of ever greater significance for
the process of the final liquidation of colonialism and
racism in southern Africa. My delegation believes that
by its attitude towards racism there and, concretely,
towards South Africa’s aggression in Angola, every
country actually determines its position with regard
to Africa and its struggle for the final liquidation
of
colonialism.

78. Mr. President, permit me, on behalf of the delegation of the German Democratic
Republic,
to congratulate you whole-heartedly
on your assumption of
the extremely important
post of President of the
Security Council. Between the German Democratic
Republic and the People’s Republic of Benin there
exist cordial and friendly relations within the context
of which the citizens of my country have had the
pleasure of welcoming you personally in the capital
of the German Democratic Republic, Berlin. The fact
that the discussion of the aggression of South Africa
against the People’s Republic of Angola is taking place
now under the presidency of a representative
of
Africa is in itself of special significance.
I would
therefore express my delegation’s hope that under your
leadership the Council will conclude the discussion
with an appropriate document.
79. Permit me also whole-heartedly
to welcome, for
the first time in the history of the United Nations, the
delegation of the youngest member of the Organization of African Unity, the independent
People’s
Republic of Angola. I should also like to express my
conviction that very soon we shall be able to welcome
the People’s Republic of Angola as a full Member
of the United Nations.

74. We have no faith in any statement made by the
racist South African regime, nor in its intentions.
The danger of South African aggression against Angola
is till very much present, even if the withdrawal of
its troops has really taken place, because the South
African army is still in Namibia.
Consequently,
the
Security Council should call upon South Africa to
commit itself to respecting the independence of Angola
and its territorial integrity. In this regard, the only
genuine guarantee is the withdrawal of South Africa
from and the cessation of its illegal occupation of
Namibia. The Council should condemn that occupation as aggression against the people of Namibia and
as forcible prevention of the United Nations, which is
directly responsible for the administration
of this
Territory, from taking over its administration
on the
very soil of Namibia.
In accordance with its obligations and powers, the Council should compel South
Africa to return all the property plundered by its
troops in Angola and to pay compensation to Ango!a
for all the damage inflicted by the aggression of South
African armed forces against its territory.

80. On 4 February, on the occasion of the ffiteenth
anniversary of the beginning of armed struggle by the
people of Angola under the leadership of the MPLA,
the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Socialist Unity Party of Germany, Erich Honecker,
and the Chairman of the State Council of the German
Democratic Republic, Willi Stoph, assured the President of the MPLA and the President of the People’s
Republic of Angola, Comrade Agostinho Neto, that:
“The German Democratic Republic, side by side
with the Soviet Union and the other socialist States
and all anti-imperialist
forces, will continue in the
future to offer solidarity and support to the people of
Angola in its heroic struggle.”

75. We support the appeal addressed by the People’s
Republic of Angola to the United Nations and to all
the specialized agencies requesting them to lend full
material and other assistance to that young and independent African country so as to enable it, in the first
days of its independence, to consolidate its economic
and social life, which has been so seriously affected
by age-long Portuguese colonialism and the aggression
of South Africa.
76. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
The next speaker is the representative

81. In accordance with the proposal of the African
Group, based on the relevant decision of the Council
of Ministers of the OAU, the Security Council is dealing
with a question of aggression by the South African
apartheid regime against the independent sovereign
State of the People’s Republic of Angola. This problem
on our agenda is, in the view of the delegation of the
German Democratic Republic, a matter of principle
and one of the utmost importance to ensure peace and
security in southern Africa. This is a problem which

from French):
of the German
10

without any doubt is very closely connected with the
implementation
of the resolution adopted more than
15 years ago on the initiative of the Soviet Union,
the well-known resolution 1514 (XV) on the granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples.

and squares are named after such well-known fascists
and war criminals as Goebbels and Goering. These
facts speak for themselves.
86. In spite of all the facts which demonstrate the
clear aggression of Pretoria against Angola and the
criminality
of such actions, one permanent member
of the Security Council at the beginning of this debate
virtually undertook to defend the policy of aggression
of the illegal apartheid
regime and to divert the
attention of the Council from the question of the
criminal character of that regime, thus demonstrating
once again that its policy is entirely in keeping with
the darkest forces of reaction. It is quite natural that
the senseless distortions of history should have been
challenged by Africa. In this connexion I believe any
further comment on my part would be gratuitous.
There is an old African proverb which runs as follows:
“He may say he loves you, but wait and see what
he will do for you.” When a policy is based solely
on ferocious anti-Sovietism
which at the same time is
anti-Communism
and which the, German humanist,
Thomas Mann, once called the supreme folly of our
times, then facts are distorted and a point is reached
where racist intervention
on the part of the Vorster
regime in Angola can be justified. That is detrimental
to the interests not only of the Angolan people but of
others.

82. Permit me to remind the Council that from the
very beginning of the aggressive actions of Pretoria
against Angola the German Democratic
Republic,
together with other States, has, in the United Nations
and elsewhere, exposed the criminal actions of the
South African regime and has indicated the need to
resist aggression and to provide assistance to the
Angolan people. Today, the occurrence of the aggression is virtually common knowledge, and this creates
even more favourable circumstances for preventing a
continuation
of the aggression of the fascist regime
of South Africa.
83. The armed aggression of the apartheid regime
against the People’s Republic of Angola is part and
parcel the futile efforts to deprive the peoples of
southern Africa of their right to self-determination
and of fundamental
human rights and to continue
oppressing and exploiting
them by the methods of
racism, colonialism and neo-colonialism.
84. As a European I should like to make the following
point. More than 30 years ago in Europe, thanks to
the heroic and selfless struggle of the peoples, primarily
those of the Soviet Union,
Hitlerite
fascism-an
inveterately racist regime-was
defeated. Its offshoots
in other continents will also be thrown on to the
scrap-heap of history. The balance of forces in the
world is changing increasingly in favour of the forces
of peace and progress. The map of Africa has changed
radically, and it is becoming ever clearer that the
days of the last bastions of racism and colonialism in
the southern part of Africa are numbered.

87. It is time that those States which, in spite of the
clear decisions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council, have been providing the Pretoria
regime with political, economic and military assistance
were energetically forced to face up to their responsibilities. On 21 March this year the Chairman of the
Council of Ministers of the German Democratic Republic, Horst Sindermann,
said on the subject of the
International
Day for the Elimination
of Racial
Discrimination:

85. The peoples of the world will not resign themselves to seeing such international law-breakers as the
illegal apartheid regime threaten peace and security.
The People’s Republic of Angola had to wage an
arduous struggle against these forces, which attempted
to prevent the African peoples themselves
from
determining their own fate and the course of their own
development
and becoming
masters of their own
natural resources. A whole array of opponents
organized a plot against the lawful rights of the people
of Angola. The South African racist regime once
again, quite clearly, has displayed its hatred of
mankind. The troops of the illegal Vorster regime,
equipped with the latest weapons from the arsenals of
a number of members of NATO [North Atlantic
Treaty Organization],
have spilled over to the north.
As we know, a propaganda campaign was launched
in favour of open violation of the integrity of the
territory of young African States and armed intervention in Africa as far as the Equator, and there were
shameless attempts to find a legal basis for that. In
Namibia, illegally occupied by South Africa, streets

“The Government
of the German Democratic
Republic believes that it is indispensable
for the
Security Council to take a decision with regard to
effective measures in accordance with Chapter VII
of the United Nations Charter for the final elimination of the policies and practices of the racist regimes
in South Africa and Southern Rhodesia which are
inbumane in their character and which flout all the
principles of international law, and also to call a halt
to the illegal occupation of Namibia. Those members
of NATO which, in disregard of decisions of the
United Nations, co-operate with the racist regimes
in the political,
economic,
military
and nuclear
fields and do everything they can to support them
are ‘promoting the further pursuit of the policy of
racial discrimination
and are becoming accomplices
in the policies of those regimes, which represent
a threat to peace.“3
88. The German
Democratic
Republic
wholeheartedly supports the lawful demands for the immediate, unconditional
and total cessation of aggres11

90. The peoples of the world are increasingly mobilizing their efforts in the struggle against the illegal
regimes in the southern part of Africa. The glorious
struggle of the people of Angola against the racist
neocolonialist
aggression has given further stimulus
to that cause in the United Nations. History shows
that the peoples of Africa, in close alliance with the
Soviet Union and other socialist States, have been
able to foil the criminal plot against the People’s
Republic of Angola. The greater our solidarity the
better it will be for the cause of safeguarding our
common interests.

sive actions against the People’s Republic of Angola
which have been made here by the representative of the
People’s Republic of Angola in agreement with the
Group of African States. We cannot permit the Vorster
regime to violate the sovereignty
and territorial
integrity of independent and sovereign African States.
Any people, any State, has the right to strengthen
its independence and the right to make a free choice
of the path of its development in accordance with the
principles of the Charter of United Nations. We must
force the apartheid regime to answer for the damage
done CO the People’s Republic of Angola and fully
compensate that damage. The apartheid regime must
leave Namibia, which it is illegally occupying, so that
the people of Namibia itself finally can determine its
own fate and begin to build a happy life without
oppression or fetters and so that peace can reign
in southern Africa.

The meeting

rose at 1.15 p.m.

Notes
1 Putting
First Things First:
A Democratic
View, New York,
Random House, l!XO, p. 38.
* Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.
3 A/AC.llS/L.430,
p. 15.

89. The delegation
of the German
Democratic
Republic hopes the Council will take due account of
the lawful demands of the People’s Republic of Angola
and adopt an appropriate resolution.

.

12

,

-.,..

_’

~.

:
.._,.

I

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

L&PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente darts les librairies et les agences dtpositaires du
monde entier. Informs-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des vents, New York ou Gentve.
KAIC

COMO

HOJIYPHTb

CONSEGUIR

ElBAAHMIi

OPI-AH&i

PUBLICACIONES

SAULIll

OB-hE~RHEHHhIX

DE LAS NACIONES

HAUHH

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas est&n en venta en iibrerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes dei mundo. Cons&e
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebm.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

00300

83-60801-August

1984-2,200
