United Nations

S/PV.5490

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5490th meeting
Saturday, 15 July 2006, 3.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De La Sablière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Wang Guangya
Mr. Gayama
Ms. Løj
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mrs. Papadopoulou
Mr. Ito
Mr. Ruiz Rosas
Mr. Al-Sulaiti
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Mlynár
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Bolton

Agenda
Letter dated 4 July 2006 from the Permanent Representative of Japan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2006/481)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-43152 (E)

*0643152*

S/PV.5490

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 4 July 2006 from the Permanent
Representative of Japan to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2006/481)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Korea, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pak Gil Yon
(Democratic People’s Republic of Korea) and
Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea) took seats
at the Council table.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in response to the
request contained in a letter dated 4 July 2006 from the
Permanent Representative of Japan addressed to the
President of the Security Council, document
S/2006/481.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/488, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council’s
prior consultations.
I wish to draw the attention of the members to
document S/2006/482, containing a letter from the
Permanent Representative of the United States, and
document S/2006/493, containing a letter from the
Permanent Representative of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.

2

Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America
The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1695 (2006).
On behalf of the members of the Security
Council, I warmly welcome Mr. Shintaro Ito, ViceMinister for Foreign Affairs of Japan.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
Mr. Ito (Japan): The Council has just taken a
very significant decision on the question of peace and
security on the Korean peninsula and North-East Asia.
Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution
1695 (2006).
With the adoption of the resolution, the Council
has acted swiftly and robustly in response to the
reckless and condemnable act of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea in launching a barrage of
ballistic missiles on 5 July, local time. Through the
resolution, the Council has, in unity, sent, on behalf of
the international community, a strong and unmistakable
message to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
and agreed on a set of binding measures that both the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and Member
States are obliged to comply with in order to deal
appropriately with the situation created by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The launching of missiles and other related
activities conducted by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea have been a matter of very serious
concern for the peace and security of Japan. Those
missile launches in and of themselves pose a direct
threat to the security of Japan and other countries, but
the nature of the threat is far more serious, particularly
in the light of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s claim that it has developed nuclear weapons.

06-43152

S/PV.5490

The well-known behaviour of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea as a leading proliferator of ballistic
missiles and related technology, among other
unacceptable behaviours, should not escape our
attention.
To initiate an appropriate and swift Council
response to the event, Japan and other concerned
members of the Council prepared a strong draft
resolution the next day after a series of consultations.
The original draft resolution was presented on 7 July
and sponsored by eight members — Denmark, France,
Greece, Japan, Peru, Slovakia, the United Kingdom
and the United States.
Subsequently, China and Russia presented the
text of a presidential statement and later submitted a
draft resolution. We welcomed the move on the part of
China and Russia, both neighbouring countries of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and important
members of the six-party talks. However, their draft
was considered to be weak in the message and
measures it proposed and insufficient to deal
adequately with the issue of peace, security and
stability at hand — indeed, with the threat posed by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s defiant and
unacceptable act.
After the series of intensive consultations that
ensued to breach the differences between the two texts,
members have been able to reach agreement on a text
that is strong in its message and binding on Member
States under the United Nations Charter on measures
related to the maintenance of international peace and
security.
It is important that, in today’s resolution, the
members of the Council have acted in unity. The
resolution clearly states that the Council is acting
under its special responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security and demands that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea suspend all
activities related to its ballistic missile programme and
re-establish its pre-existing commitments to a
moratorium on missile launching.
The resolution also strongly urges that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea return
immediately to the six-party talks without
precondition. Japan strongly urges the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to comply with the
Council’s demand and to sincerely respond to all the

06-43152

other provisions addressed to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.
Japan also urges the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to cease all its work on nuclearrelated activities, with the aim of the complete,
verifiable and irreversible dismantlement of all its
nuclear programmes.
We believe that it is essential, as the resolution
just adopted requires, that Member States that have not
yet done so exercise vigilance and prevent missile and
missile-related items, materials, goods and technology
being transferred to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s missile or weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) programmes.
It requires Member States to exercise vigilance
and prevent the procurement of missile-related
materials and technology from the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the transfer of any financial
resources in relation to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s missile or WMD programmes.
I would like to state my Government’s intention
to implement, in accordance with this resolution, those
measures that are necessary to achieve the objectives
set out in the resolution, in accordance with domestic
laws and procedures.
My Government has already taken a number of
measures against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea on a unilateral basis that include the
continuation of the strict implementation of exportcontrol measures on missiles and WMD-related goods
and services against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea.
Japan also expects that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea will respond quickly to the calls
from the Council to return to the six-party talks and
work towards the expeditious implementation of the
19 September joint statement and return also to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) and International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) safeguards.
This is an important milestone in the world’s
community’s fight against the proliferation of missiles
and WMD. Today marks an important step forward in
the promotion of peace and security on the Korean
peninsula and in North-East Asia. All the countries in
the region must work together in keeping with the
spirit and the letter of this important resolution.

3

S/PV.5490

Finally, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
having guided us through these difficult deliberations,
and I thank all members of the Council, in particular
the eight sponsors of our draft, for their cooperation
and unstinting support in the process of bringing days
of hard work to fruition.
Mr. Bolton (United States of America): Eleven
days have passed since the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea brazenly defied the international
community and fired seven ballistic missiles, including
a Taepo Dong 2 intercontinental ballistic missile, into
the waters surrounding its neighbours, notably Japan.
Despite intense diplomatic efforts by a number of
countries prior to those launches, North Korea chose to
recklessly disregard the collective will of its
neighbours and, indeed, that of the world.
In so doing, it violated several international
commitments it had entered into, most recently the
joint statement of the six-party talks from September
2005. Since the words of the North Korean leadership
and the agreements it signs have consistently over time
been shown to hold little value, it is only appropriate
for the international community and the Security
Council to evaluate North Korea based on its
actions — actions which have been deeply disturbing.
It would be dangerous for the Council to look at
these missile launches in isolation from North Korea’s
unrelenting pursuit of a nuclear-weapons capability.
When North Korea launched a missile over Japan in
1998, we were not aware at that time that Pyongyang
was pursuing a covert uranium-enrichment programme,
in violation of the 1994 agreed framework.
In the intervening eight years, North Korea has
withdrawn from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), kicked out inspectors of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and
declared not just that it is pursuing a nuclear-weapons
capability but that it already possesses them.
We are pleased that the Council has taken clear,
firm and unanimous action in adopting this resolution.
The launching of seven ballistic missiles by North
Korea constitutes a direct threat to international peace
and security and demanded a strong statement from the
Council in the form of a strong resolution. The past 11
days have witnessed intense diplomatic activity here in
New York, in a number of capitals around the world,
and notably in Pyongyang itself, where a high-level
delegation from the People’s Republic of China made

4

one last attempt to make the North Korean leadership
see reason.
It was appropriate for us to show this flexibility
on timing and allow diplomatic efforts a chance to
succeed. Those efforts are now exhausted, however,
and the continued intransigence and defiance of the
North Korean leadership demanded a strong response
from the Council. The resolution we have just adopted
does just that. It also sends a much stronger signal than
the weak and feckless response of the Council in 1998,
which issued only a press statement.
In condemning the multiple launches of these
ballistic missiles, the Council is affirming in this
resolution that these launches threaten international
peace and security. It is not just launching of these
missiles that poses a threat but the propensity of North
Korea to proliferate this technology. North Korea is the
world’s leading proliferator of ballistic missile
technology, so it was entirely appropriate for the
Council to reaffirm its resolution 1540 (2004), whose
first preambular paragraph states that the
“proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, as well as their means of delivery,
constitutes a threat to international peace and
security”.
This resolution also demands action. It sends an
unequivocal, unambiguous and unanimous message to
Pyongyang: Suspend your ballistic missile programme.
Stop your procurement of materials related to weapons
of mass destruction, and implement your September
2005 commitment to verifiably dismantle your nuclear
weapons and existing nuclear programme.
It is not just Pyongyang, though, that must act.
The resolution also requires Member States to do what
they can to prevent the transfer of resources to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s missile
programme and cease procurement of missile-related
items and items relating to WMD programmes from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The United States expects that North Korea and
all other States Members of the United Nations will
immediately act in accordance with the requirements of
this resolution.
This is the first Security Council resolution on
North Korea since 1993, reflecting the gravity of this
situation and the unity and determination of the
Council. We hope that this resolution will demonstrate

06-43152

S/PV.5490

to North Korea that the best way to improve the
livelihood of its people and end its international
isolation is to stop playing games of brinkmanship and
restore its missile moratorium, return to the six-party
talks and implement the terms of the joint statement
from the last round of those talks.
We look forward to North Korea’s full,
unconditional and immediate compliance with this
Security Council resolution. We hope that North Korea
makes the strategic decision that the pursuit of
weapons of mass destruction programmes and
threatening acts like these missile launches makes it
less, not more, secure. We need to be prepared,
however, that North Korea might choose a different
path. That is why it is important that, if the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea does not comply with the
requirements of the resolution, the United States and
other Member States have the opportunity at any point
to return to the Council for further action.
In closing, I would like to thank all members of
the Council for their efforts in helping us to secure a
strong and unanimous resolution. In particular, I would
like to thank my friend and colleague, Ambassador
Kenzo Oshima, for his work in leading the effort to
bring the resolution to finality.
Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the draft resolution
on the launching of missiles by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, unanimously adopted by
the Security Council earlier.
On 5 July 2006 local time, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea launched a number of
missiles without adequate advance notification, which
caused extensive concern in the international
community. Many countries have expressed their grave
concern at that negative development. They are afraid
that it will have a negative impact on peace and
stability in North-East Asia, especially on the Korean
peninsula.
As a close neighbour of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, China is gravely concerned about
the newly emerged complicating factors on the Korean
peninsula. China has always been committed to
maintaining peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula and has insisted on resolving the relevant
issues through peaceful dialogue and negotiations. We
oppose any acts leading to tension on the Korean
peninsula. We hope that all the parties concerned will

06-43152

keep in mind the overall interests and make a greater
contribution to peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula. The Chinese side is ready to make joint
efforts with all the parties concerned to overcome
difficulties, create the right conditions, promote the
six-party talks and jointly maintain peace and stability
on the Korean peninsula and in North-East Asia.
Ever since discussions started in the Security
Council on the launching of missiles by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, China has acted in a
persistent manner to achieve two major objectives,
namely, to maintain peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula and to keep the Security Council united. We
have consistently advocated that the Council respond
in an appropriate manner as soon as possible, send a
unified message to the international community,
reactivate a new round of diplomatic efforts and bring
about the early resumption of the six-party talks.
China has adopted a responsible attitude and is
firmly opposed to forcing through a vote on a draft
resolution that is not conducive to unity and that would
further complicate and aggravate the situation, cause
grave consequences for peace and stability on the
Korean peninsula and create enormous obstacles for
the six-party talks and other important diplomatic
endeavours.
At the same time, China and Russia put forward
elements for a draft presidential statement and,
subsequently, for a draft resolution. We made
constructive and vigorous efforts to seek consensus on
this issue among Security Council members.
Under the current circumstances, China urges all
the parties concerned to exercise restraint. We are
opposed to any acts leading to further tension on the
Korean peninsula. We hope that the resolution that has
just been adopted will help all the parties concerned to
act in a calm manner and to continue diplomatic
endeavours aimed at the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula and the normalization of relations
between the countries concerned. Maintaining peace
and stability on the Korean peninsula is in the common
interests of the international community and the NorthEast Asian countries and is the fundamental starting
point for China in handling Korean peninsula affairs.
China will continue to make steadfast efforts to that
end.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom has made clear its grave concern

5

S/PV.5490

about the missile launches by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea on 5 July. Many other countries
have done the same. Those missile tests were carried
out despite the urgings of the international community.
The choice to conduct those launches took place
against a particular backdrop: a stated intention to
withdraw from the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, a statement of possession of nuclear
weapons and a commitment to a moratorium on missile
testing that was reaffirmed as recently as September
2005.
Since the launches, the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has maintained
that they were part of a military policy that the
Government of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea intends to continue to pursue. Against that
backdrop, those launches were, as has been widely
said, provocative, and have served only to raise
tensions in the region. In our view, it is important that
the Council react robustly and coherently. The United
Kingdom is therefore delighted that the Council has
unanimously agreed the resolution, and the united
signal sent by the Council in this strong resolution is
powerful and welcome.
The requirements of the resolution are clear, and
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and all
States concerned must now comply with these
obligations.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): From the very outset, the Russian Federation
has stressed the importance of a speedy agreement by
the Security Council in its response to the missile
launches by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. Moscow expressed serious concern about those
actions by Pyongyang, taken without advance notice
and in contravention of the Pyongyang moratorium
established earlier.
We have consistently believed that the reaction of
the Security Council must be firm, but at the same time
carefully calibrated and weighed. We have always seen
the main objective as being not to heighten emotions or
threaten isolation and restrictive measures against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, but, rather, to
try as soon as possible to return the country to the
regime of a moratorium on ballistic missile testing and
to ensure that it resumes its participation in the sixparty talks aimed at a peaceful diplomatic settlement of
the nuclear problem on the Korean peninsula.

6

Guided by those principled considerations, Russia
participated actively in the harmonization of a
response. We believe that an official statement by the
President of the Security Council would have been the
optimal format. Nevertheless, we and our Chinese
partners met several other Security Council members
halfway in their wish for agreement on a resolution and
jointly submitted the relevant draft. In this respect, we
based ourselves on the fact that the draft resolution
distributed earlier by the delegations of Japan, the
United States and other sponsors did not fully meet the
requirements. Consultations in the Security Council
were protracted and complex. It is significant that all
Security Council members showed political will and
responsibility. As a result, we managed to reach
agreement and prepared the draft resolution, which we
have just adopted and which was introduced by the
President of the Security Council.
It is, of course, a compromise. But we believe
that the decision sends an appropriate signal to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on the need to
show restraint and to abide by its obligations regarding
missiles. At the same time, it should work in favour of
continuing the negotiating process in the interests of
strengthening security and stability in the region of
North-East Asia.
The adoption of the resolution by consensus
clearly confirms that the Security Council, as the body
with the primary responsibility under the Charter for
the maintenance of international peace and security, is
able to react effectively to complex international and
regional challenges on the basis of the unity of its
members.
Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
shall be brief.
Argentina would like to express its satisfaction at
the Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1695
(2006), which condemns the launching of missiles by
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea on 5 July.
We believe that the message that the Security Council
has sent today to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is a strong one. Argentina hopes that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will return to
the negotiating table and the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and that it will
henceforth stop developing its nuclear weapons.
In that context, we would like to thank the
countries of the region that are primarily affected by

06-43152

S/PV.5490

the launching of these missiles for their understanding
and cooperation in making it possible for the Security
Council to adopt the resolution. They were able to act
wisely and to give priority to the promotion of
international peace and security over certain domestic
policy concerns.
Finally, on behalf of my delegation, I would also
like to thank the Ambassador of the United Kingdom
for his intervention to achieve agreement. I also wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for your tireless work and
talent in the search for a fair solution acceptable to all.
Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): The
United Republic of Tanzania voted in favour of the
resolution we have just adopted, bearing in mind the
gravity of the circumstances arising from the missiles
launched by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. It is therefore our hope that the message being
sent by the resolution will be one that engenders a
spirit of dialogue and cooperation in order to allow for
an environment of peace and security in the Korean
peninsula and in North-East Asia. That course of action
is in the interests not only of that region alone, but of
the international community at large.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
France welcomes the fact that the Security
Council has unanimously adopted resolution 1695
(2006). That action by the Security Council is an
appropriate response to a serious situation. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s development
and testing of ballistic missiles capable of carrying
weapons of mass destruction seriously endanger
security in North-East Asia and beyond for several
reasons.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
asserts that it has developed nuclear weapons, and it
has not joined the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. Those
ballistic missiles are able to carry such weapons. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is attempting
to increase the range of its missiles. It sells such
weapons and is today the main ballistic proliferator in
the world, particularly in areas of tension.
The combination of those factors makes the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s recent

06-43152

ballistic tests an event that endangers the security of
the entire international community. The Security
Council has a duty to condemn those tests and to
ensure that the international community mobilizes to
prevent the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
from developing its missile and weapons of mass
destruction programmes. That is the meaning of
today’s resolution, which, among other things, requires
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea return
to a responsible stance. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea must cease its ballistic activities and
reinstate its moratorium on testing. It must return to the
six-party talks, implement the commitments it entered
into in the joint statement of 19 September 2005 and,
in particular, renounce all of its nuclear weapons and
its existing nuclear programme with a view to
achieving the verifiable denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula.
The resolution is perfectly clear. It contains
provisions to which all parties must adhere. France will
seek to implement it through the non-proliferation
mechanisms to which it is a party and the European
Union. I would recall that the European Union is
implementing a rigorous policy of non-proliferation,
including in its relations with other States. It expects
all States to do likewise.
Finally, the unanimous adoption of the resolution
constitutes a significant development in the Security
Council’s efforts to combat proliferation. France
believes that the Council must act in a united and
robust manner in that area. The Council has carefully
weighed the words of the message it has formulated
today. It has taken into account the responsibilities
incumbent upon it to combat proliferation, as affirmed
in the presidential statement of the 1992 summit and as
recalled and extended by resolution 1540 (2004). The
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery is a threat to international peace and
security.
Throughout the negotiations, France has
endeavoured to ensure unity in the Security Council,
for the Council’s unity considerably increases the
effectiveness of its efforts. Today’s unity is an
indication of the shared will to act resolutely in the
upcoming stages of the fight against the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

7

S/PV.5490

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.

People’s Republic
Declaration in 2002.

Mr. Pak Gil Yon (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July.

In that Declaration, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea expressed its intention to extend
beyond 2003 the moratorium on missile firing, in the
spirit of the Declaration. That step was taken on the
premise that Japan would move to normalize its
relations with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and redeem its past. The Japanese authorities,
however, have abused the good faith of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. They have not honoured
their commitment; indeed, they have internationalized
the abduction issue, pursuant to the United States
hostile policy towards the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, although the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea had fully settled the issue. Such
behaviour has brought overall relations between the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and Japan to
where they were before the publication of the
Declaration. It is a manifestation of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s broad magnanimity that,
in this situation, it had put the missile launch on hold
for so long.

It is unjustifiable and gangster-like for the
Security Council to debate the missile launch exercise
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, both in
view of the competence of the Security Council and
under international law. The delegation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea resolutely
condemns the attempt by some countries to misuse the
Security Council for the despicable political aim of
isolating and pressuring the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and totally rejects the resolution
adopted earlier at this meeting of the Security Council.
The latest successful missile launches were part
of a routine military exercise staged by the Korean
People’s Army to increase the nation’s military
capacity for self-defence. The Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s exercise of its legitimate right as a
sovereign State is bound neither to any international
law nor to bilateral or multilateral agreements, such as
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea-Japan
Pyongyang Declaration and the joint statement of the
six-party talks.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is
not a signatory to the Missile Technology Control
Regime and therefore is not bound to any commitment
under it.
As for the moratorium on long-range missile test
flights, which the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea agreed with the United States in 1999, it was
valid only when the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea-United States dialogue was under way.
The Bush Administration, however, scrapped all
the agreements that the preceding United States
Administration had concluded with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and totally scuttled the
bilateral dialogue. The Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea had already clarified, in March 2005, that its
moratorium on missile test firing had lost its validity.
The same can be said of the moratorium on long-range
test firing which the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea had agreed with Japan in the Democratic

8

of

Korea-Japan

Pyongyang

The joint statement of the six-party talks of 19
September 2005 stipulates the commitments to be
fulfilled by the six sides to the talks to denuclearize the
Korean peninsula. However, no sooner had the joint
statement been adopted than the United States applied
financial sanctions against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and, through them, escalated
pressure on it in various fields. The United States, at
the same time, has totally hamstrung efforts to
implement the joint statement through such threats and
blackmail as large-scale military exercises targeted
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
It is clear to everyone that there was no need for
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
unilaterally put on hold the missile launch in such a
situation. That being a stark fact, it is a far-fetched
assertion, grossly falsifying reality, for them to claim
that routine missile launches conducted by the Korean
People’s Army for self-defence have strained the
regional situation and blocked the progress of the
dialogue. It is a lesson taught by history, and a stark
reality of international relations proven by the Iraqi
crisis, that upsetting the balance of forces is bound to
create instability and crisis, and even spark a war. But
for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
tremendous deterrent in self-defence, the United States

06-43152

S/PV.5490

would have attacked the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea more than once, as it has listed my country as
part of an axis of evil and a target of pre-emptive
nuclear attack. Peace in the Korean peninsula and in
the region would have been seriously disturbed. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s missile
development, test firing, manufacture and deployment
therefore serve as a key to keeping the balance of
forces and to preserving peace and stability in NorthEast Asia.
It is also preposterous for them to term the latest
missile launches a provocation and the like for the
simple reason that the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea did not send prior notice of them. It would be
quite foolish to notify Washington and Tokyo of
missile launches in advance, given that the United
States, which is technically at war with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, has been threatening for a
month to intercept the latter’s missiles, in collusion
with Japan. We would like to ask the United States and
Japan if they have ever notified the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea of their ceaseless missile
launches in the areas close to it.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
remains unchanged in its will to denuclearize the
Korean peninsula in a negotiated, peaceful manner, just
as it committed itself in the 19 September joint
statement of the six-party talks. The latest missile
launch exercises are quite irrelevant to the six-party
talks.
The Korean People’s Army will go on with
missile launch exercises as part of its efforts to bolster
deterrence for self-defence in the future, too. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will have no
option but to take stronger physical actions in other
forms should any other country dare to take issue with
the exercises and put pressure upon it.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic of Korea): On 5
July, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea fired
one Taepodong-2 and six Scud and Nodong missiles
from its eastern coast.

06-43152

Since early May, my Government has been
closely following the activities of North Korea with
regard to its missiles. Pointing out the inevitable
consequences to follow, my Government repeatedly
warned the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea not
to conduct any missile launches. Despite our repeated
warnings, however, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea proceeded with a series of missile launches.
My Government has expressed its profound
regret over that unacceptable act. It undermines peace
and stability in North-East Asia and adversely affects
inter-Korean relations, not to mention deepening
Pyongyang’s isolation from the international
community.
In that regard, my Government appreciates the
efforts of the Council members that resulted in the
resolution just adopted unanimously. We fully support
that resolution. We urge North Korea to refrain from
any further provocative actions, to return to the sixparty talks and to comply with international efforts for
non-proliferation.
The President (spoke in French): The
representative of the United States has asked for the
floor to make a further statement. I give him the floor.
Mr. Bolton (United States of America): This has
been a historic day. Not only have we unanimously
adopted resolution 1695 (2006) but North Korea has
set a world record in rejecting it within 45 minutes of
its adoption.
I could also say in the light of some of the
comments made by the representative of North Korea
before he left the Chamber, that I could exercise the
right of reply on behalf of the United States; but on the
other hand, why bother?
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

9
