UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1996/14
29 March 1996
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3646th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 March 1996, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Tajikistan of 22 March 1996 (S/1996/212).
"The Security Council regrets that insufficient progress has been
achieved during the continual round of the inter-Tajik talks in Ashgabad
towards the solution of fundamental political and institutional issues. It
calls upon the Tajik parties to accelerate substantially their efforts to
reach agreement on the basis of the Protocol on the fundamental principles
for establishing peace and national accord in Tajikistan of 17 August 1995
(S/1995/720, annex). It urges them to negotiate constructively and in good
faith and to search for solutions on the basis of mutual concessions and
compromises.
"The Security Council is deeply concerned about the violations of the
Tehran cease-fire agreement of 17 September 1994 (S/1994/1102, annex I),
and in particular about the ongoing fighting in the Tavildara region. It
appeals to the Tajik parties to comply strictly with all their obligations
undertaken under this agreement. It reminds them that the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) is subject to the
proviso that the Tehran cease-fire agreement remains in force and the
parties continue to be committed to an effective cease-fire, to national
reconciliation and to the promotion of democracy. The Council notes with
concern that the ongoing military operations and other violations of the
cease-fire create doubt regarding the parties’ commitment to an effective
cease-fire.
"The Security Council acknowledges the extension of the cease-fire by
the parties for a further three months until 26 May 1996. It is concerned,
however, that the cease-fire has only been extended for this short period.
The Council fully supports the appeal by the Secretary-General to the Tajik

96-07686 (E)

290396

/...

S/PRST/1996/14
English
Page 2

opposition contained in his report (S/1996/212) to agree to the extension
of the cease-fire agreement for the duration of the inter-Tajik talks.
"The Security Council reiterates the importance of direct political
dialogue between the President of the Republic of Tajikistan and the leader
of the Islamic Revival Movement of Tajikistan (IRMT) for the peace process
and encourages them to hold the next meeting as soon as possible.
"The Security Council welcomes the position of the Majlisi Oli
(Parliament) of Tajikistan which at its special session on 11-12 March 1996
expressed its strong support for the efforts to achieve national
reconciliation and for the search for compromise at the Inter-Tajik talks
held under the auspices of the United Nations. It regrets that the leaders
of the IRMT declined to participate in the special session of the Majlisi
Oli.
"The Security Council expresses its deep concern over the kidnapping
on 24 February 1996 of the opposition co-chair of the Joint Commission and
calls on the Tajik Government to intensify its investigation into this
incident. The Council joins the Secretary-General in calling on the
Government to provide the necessary security guarantees to allow the Joint
Commission to function safely and effectively.
"The Security Council expresses its hope that the Agreement on social
accord in Tajikistan signed on 9 March 1996 in Dushanbe by the leaders of
Tajikistan and of political parties, social movements and ethnic
communities (S/1996/187, annex) will contribute to national reconciliation.
"The Security Council expresses its serious concern at the
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Tajikistan. It calls upon
Member States and others concerned to respond promptly in support of the
humanitarian relief efforts of the United Nations and other international
organizations.
"The Security Council welcomes the positive role played by UNMOT under
difficult circumstances. The Council expresses deep concern over recent
incidents in which UNMOT personnel were harassed and threatened and
reiterates its call to the parties to cooperate fully with UNMOT and to
ensure the safety and freedom of movement of the personnel of the United
Nations and other international organizations.
"The Security Council is concerned about delays in the establishment
of a liaison post of UNMOT at Taloqan (northern Afghanistan) and encourages
the relevant Afghan authorities to facilitate its opening.
"The Security Council welcomes the creation of the office of an
independent ombudsman for human rights in Tajikistan with the help of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and expresses the hope
that his activities will contribute to a lessening of tensions.

/...

S/PRST/1996/14
English
Page 3

"The Security Council commends the tireless efforts of the SecretaryGeneral’s former Special Envoy in Tajikistan Mr. Piriz-Ballon. It
understands that his successor will be appointed promptly and expresses the
hope that the new Special Envoy will begin without delay the preparation of
the next phase of the continual round of the Inter-Tajik talks which should
be convened as soon as possible."

-----
