S/2020/912

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
17 September 2020
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Sudan and the activities of the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan
I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2524
(2020), is the first 90-day report on the implementation of the mandate related to the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS).
The report covers political, security, socioeconomic, human rights and humanitarian
developments in the Sudan from 3 June to 8 September 2020 and contains an update
on the planning process for the establishment of the Mission. The suggested structure
and geographical deployment of the Mission and the 90-day report on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) are included as
annexes to the present report.

II. Significant developments
Political situation
2.
During the reporting period, the transitional Government continued to pursue
ambitious political reforms, make progress in the peace process and tackle the rapidly
deteriorating economic situation, while faced with rising pressure from the Sudanese
population to meet its demands rapidly. The transitional Government largely
implemented key transition benchmarks laid out in the August 2019 Constitutional
Document, despite competing priorities and the added challenge of responding to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Its achievements included amendments
to the penal code, which will improve the protection of fundamental rights, the
appointment of interim civilian governors in all 18 states and reaching a
comprehensive peace agreement with some armed groups in Darfur and the Two
Areas.
3.
Amid continuing tensions between the military and civilian components of the
Government, deepening divisions also emerged within the Forces for Freedom and
Change (FFC) and the Sudanese Professionals Association (SPA ), further fracturing
the political landscape. SPA, the trade union umbrella organization prominent
throughout the protests and during the country’s ongoing transition, split from FFC
in June and has itself divided into factions. For FFC, the inability to reach a consensus
has affected its influence and ability to make decisions. The resistance committees,

20-12062 (E)

230920

*2012062*

which had initially struggled to turn their public support into political influence,
emerged as a key political actor as demonstrations reignited across the country.
4.
Marking the start of a period of increased protests, on 3 June, hundreds of people
demonstrated in Khartoum on the first anniversary of the violent raid against peaceful
protesters at the sit-in site outside the military headquarters. Protesters were critical
of the body investigating the events of 3 June 2019 because of its repeated delays in
releasing the findings. On 29 June, on the eve of mass protests, former National
Congress Party leaders, including Ibrahim Ghandour, former Minister f or Foreign
Affairs of the Sudan, were arrested. On 30 June, hundreds of thousands of people
demonstrated throughout the Sudan demanding faster reforms and greater civilian
rule in the country’s transition towards democracy. While protesters’ demands varied
in different areas of the country, they all renewed their calls for the transitional
Government to speed up the implementation of the key political benchmarks of the
Constitutional Declaration.
5.
The demonstrations of 30 June were led by resistance committees, grass-rootslevel neighbourhood groups linked through a national network, which have come to
the fore as a new brand of political organization beyond traditional political parties.
The main demands included the completion of the formation of the tra nsitional
Government, the appointment of civilian governors, the designation of the members
of the legislative council and independent commissions, the conclusion of an
agreement on a comprehensive peace, the conduct of defence and security sector
reform, the carrying out of transitional justice and economic reforms that bring
equality and justice, and the development of a roadmap for recovery and pro -poor
development. On 9 July, in response to popular demands and following a performance
assessment, the Prime Minister, Abdalla Hamdok, asked seven members of his cabinet
to resign. Acting ministers were immediately appointed to serve until the appointment
of new ministers, which was slated to happen after the signature of the peace
agreement, scheduled for 2 October.
6.
On 22 July, the Prime Minister appointed interim civilian governors for all 18
states, including two women, pending full appointments, which were expected to take
place after the signing of the peace agreement in October. The interim appointment s
of several governors were contested including in Kassala, Gedaref, East Darfur and
Northern Kordofan states. While the Sudanese Revolutionary Front (SRF) had
initially agreed to the appointment of interim governors, it later criticized the
appointment process, which, it stated, would lead to divisions and communal tension.
7.
On 17 August, the one-year anniversary of the signing of the Constitutional
Declaration, the resistance committees launched a new campaign of demonstrations
in Khartoum with similar demands to those voiced at the protests of 30 June. The
protesters clashed with police, which used tear gas and reportedly arrested 77 people.
The protests themselves marked a more visible approach on the part of the resistance
committees to voicing their dissatisfaction with the pace of the transition. Since
17 August, protests and daily marches have continued across the Sudan. In a speech
delivered on his first anniversary in office, 21 August, the Prime Minister
acknowledged that there were difficulties regarding the transition, including
differences between the civilian and military components of the governing institutions
on key reforms, particularly with regard to security sector reform, measures to deal
with the economic crisis and the transfer of military-owned businesses to the Ministry
of Finance and Economic Planning.
8.
On 29 August, a peace agreement was reached between the transitional
Government, the SRF alliance and the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA) -Minni Minawi
faction, concluding nearly a year of negotiations mediated by the Government of
South Sudan. Signatories under the SRF umbrella included the Justice and Equality
2/16

20-12062

Movement (JEM), the Sudan Liberation Movement/Transitional Council and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N) Malik Agar faction. The
agreement includes a number of protocols and covers key issues related to security
arrangements and the integration of combatants into the Sudanese army, land
ownership, transitional justice, power-sharing and the return of displaced persons.
The SLA-Abdul Wahid al-Nur faction did not participate in the Juba-based
negotiations and has rejected the agreement.
9.
On 3 September, the transitional Government and SPLM -N Abdelaziz Al-Hilu
faction signed a joint agreement on, inter alia, principles for maintaining the cessation
of hostilities throughout the peace process until security arrangements were agreed.
In the agreement, the parties also affirmed that the future constitution should be based
on the principle of separation of religion and State, in the absence of which the right
to self-determination in the Two Areas must be respected. Mr. Al-Hilu himself has
made it clear he remains committed to the Juba process as set out in the agreement on
negotiation issues of 18 October 2019.
Security situation
10. During the reporting period, the security situation was marked by increased
intercommunal tensions including in the east, west and south of the country. In the
western region of Darfur, several incidents occurred between nomadic and fa rmer
communities in the context of seasonal migration and harvesting, compounded by the
unresolved issues of land ownership and access to natural resources. In Western
Kordofan, clashes between members of the Misseriya and Nuba communities
occurred in June in Lagawa, reportedly leading to several deaths. Following the
violence, representatives of both communities signed a cessation of hostilities
agreement. Tribal clashes also occurred in Sennar state. In Gedaref, the threat of
conflict persisted between the Sudanese Armed Forces and armed “Shifta” militias
from Ethiopia, starting in May and ending in June. On 24 June, the Sudan and Ethiopia
formed a joint ministerial committee to look at the issue of border tensions. In Eastern
Sudan, intercommunal clashes between members of the Bani Amir and Nuba
communities as well as between the Bani Amir and Hadanduwah resulted in more
than 30 people being killed and over 100 injured. On 13 July, Bani Amir and Nuba
communities signed an agreement in the presence of Sover eign Council, FFC and
state government representatives.
11. Following the finalization of the transitional Government’s civilian protection
strategy, the Prime Minister announced the formation of a joint army and police force
to be deployed in areas of increased volatility. The decision was backed by the
Security and Defence Council. Meanwhile, security forces have been deployed and
the transitional Government has intervened in response to protection-related incidents
throughout the country. Following clashes, a curfew was imposed in Port Sudan and
the Rapid Support Forces was deployed in response to the violence. In Kassala, a
reconciliation agreement between the Bani Amir and Nuba communities was renewed
to forestall intercommunal conflict. Localized peace processes in Darfur are an
avenue for increasing stability; they are being replicated throughout the country.
Socioeconomic situation
12. The socioeconomic situation, which remained dire and was compounded by the
pandemic, continued to fuel instability. Currency depreciation and sharp reductions
in bread and fuel subsidies continued to create inflation in excess of 140 per cent in
July. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects the gross domestic product to
decline by 8 per cent in 2020, with a concomitant increase in poverty levels.

20-12062

3/16

13. Budgetary pressures have been exacerbated by a lockdown and other pandemic related restrictions, resulting in a growing public deficit and a drop in revenues by 39
per cent since mid-April at a time of increasing public expenditures. Given the need
for structural adjustment, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning prepared
an amended 2020 budget in August to reflect the removal of fuel subsidies while
maintaining support for cooking gas and wheat. A floating exchange rate regime was
adopted and is to be implemented in a phased manner over two years. The 2020 budget
amendments were strongly contested by FFC.
14. Women, children and elderly people in low-income households, as well as
refugees, asylum seekers and internally displaced persons have been
disproportionately affected by the socioeconomic crisis. Despite the existence of a
direct cash transfer scheme under the Sudan Family Support Programme, the
country’s social protection schemes are still scattered, wh ich increases the need to
assess the existing social security schemes and safety nets and lay the foundations for
an equitable and integrated social protection system that includes minimum social
protection.
15. On 25 June, a high-level partnership conference was hosted online by Germany
and co-hosted by the United Nations, the European Union and the Government of the
Sudan, that was attended by 40 countries and 15 international organizations. The aim
of the conference was to secure political and financial support for the transition in the
Sudan. Participating delegations pledged a total of $1.8 billion for, in particular,
economic reforms and for mitigating the social impact of reform measures. Of that
amount, close to $500 million was pledged in support of the Sudan Family Support
Programme, designed by the World Bank, to mitigate the impact on the majority of
the population that the removal of fuel subsidies has had. While the conference was
focused on both political and financial support to the transition , the financial pledges
were primarily aimed at enabling economic reforms that hinge on the concurrent
launch of the Sudan Family Support Programme and the IMF staff -monitored
programme. These two programmes are, in turn, aimed at reviving the country’s
economy and pave the way for much-needed debt relief. The Sudan Family Support
Programme is currently at the pilot stage, with a launch anticipated in October. The
Government and IMF agreed on a staff-monitored programme, the implementation of
which will accelerate during the final quarter of 2020 and beyond. The Friends of
Sudan group, comprising a number of Member States and multilateral organizations,
provided support to the partnership conference and continued its regular meetings in
support of the transition in the country. Their latest meeting was held on 12 August
and was hosted online by Saudi Arabia.
16. During the reporting period, a population census was announced for April 2022.
It will be carried out together with an agricultural census and a hous ehold budget
census. The budget census is expected to shed light on the levels of poverty and
inequality within the country. Since the Sudan is moving from a paper-based to a
digital census process, the United Nations Population Fund and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations have begun work with the Sudan
Central Bureau of Statistics to plan, implement and manage the new process.
Human rights situation
17. Since 3 June, the human rights situation in the Sudan has been marked by
communal clashes in Eastern Sudan and increased popular demands for the reform
and restructuring of government institutions. Reports indicate that in Khartoum, the
Sudan Police Force may have used excessive force on 18 August to disperse rallies
and protests at which demands were voiced for reform and for accountability for gross
human rights violations under the former regime and for the killing of civilian
protesters on 3 June 2019. Following the upsurge in protests, the transitional
4/16

20-12062

Government took positive steps towards meeting the demands of the Sudanese
population and improving the protection of fundamental rights, including by
amending some controversial and discriminatory laws and taking several steps to
strengthen democracy and the rule of law and to promote human rights.
18. In upholding its commitment to improving the justice system and reforming
national laws in compliance with international standards, the Joint Council – the
current transitional legislative body in the Sudan – in July adopted several
amendments to the penal code of 1991. The adoption constituted significant progress
towards achieving the goals of the transition until a new penal code could be adopted
as indicated in the Constitutional Declaration. The latest amendments improved the
legal protection for the most vulnerable categories of people, including by
contributing to the eradication of harmful cultural practices against women and girls
by prohibiting female genital mutilation, abolishing the death penalty for children
below 18 years of age, combating discrimination and promoting respect for the
freedom of religion and belief by decriminalising apostasy. Although amendments
were made to the cybercrime prevention act, including the abolition of corporal
punishment, the Joint Council doubled the custodial penalties for certain online
activities by journalists and media workers, thereby impinging on the civic space and
the protections of the freedom of expression, the right to access information, the right
to privacy, and due process, all of which are crucial to a democratic transition. Policies
that eased freedom of movement for Sudanese citizens were also enacted by revoking
the need for exit permits and eliminating the requirement for women travelling with
children to obtain the permission of a guardian.
19. On 23 August, the national committee on the dismantling of the former regime,
the countering of corruption and the recovery of looted funds issued a decis ion to
reshuffle the board of commissioners of the National Human Rights Commission of
the Sudan and requested that the Government appoint new commissioners.
Commissioners appointed by former President Al-Bashir were dismissed. The
Constitutional Declaration provides for the formation of a new independent national
human rights commission in conformity with the Paris Principles as one of 12
independent thematic commissions.
20. In related developments, the International Criminal Court announced on 9 June
that Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-Al-Rahman, an alleged leader of the Janjaweed militias
during the conflict in Darfur, had voluntarily surrendered in the Central African
Republic and had been placed in the custody of the Court. Arrest warrants issued by
the Court against four other Sudanese individuals, including former President
Al-Bashir, are outstanding. The transitional Government has expressed its readiness
to cooperate with the Court.
Humanitarian situation
21. The global COVID-19 pandemic has compounded deep-rooted poverty, the
ongoing economic crisis and climate shocks and has generated rising humanitarian
needs in the Sudan. Hunger has increased across the country and over 9.6 million
people are severely food-insecure, an increase of 65 per cent compared with the same
period in 2019.
22. As at 3 September, over 13,100 people had tested positive for the coronavirus
and more than 820 had died. The increasing number of transmissions has put pressure
on the country’s fragile health-care system at a time when the Sudan is facing its first
polio outbreak in more than a decade, affecting nine states across the country. The
federal Ministry of Health, with the support of United Nations Children’s Fund, the
World Health Organization and the World Food Programme, is currently preparing a
mass vaccination campaign to reach every child under the age of 5 – nearly 9 million
20-12062

5/16

children – and to resume or cover gaps in the routine vaccination compromised during
the COVID-19 pandemic.
23. Heavy rains and flooding have affected nearly 400,000 people since the start of
the rainy season in July. By the end of August, more than 37,000 homes had been
destroyed, and 34 schools and more than 2,600 health facilities had been damaged.
The flooding has further compromised food security and affected access to clean
water. The Government, United Nations system agencies and their partners had
prepositioned supplies to respond to the needs of 250,000 people before the rains
started, but stocks are rapidly being depleted and additional resour ces will be
required.
24. Pockets of violence in Southern Kordofan, Kassala and Red Sea states in July
and August led to displacements, loss of life and damages to houses, markets and
other key infrastructure, increasing humanitarian needs.
25. Nearly 5.4 million people received life-saving assistance in 179 of the country’s
189 localities between April and June – an increase from 2.3 million in the first
quarter of 2020. The scale-up of the response was especially visible for the food
security and livelihoods, and water, sanitation and hygiene sectors. However, the
implementation of education and protection activities, including services related to
violence against children and gender-based violence, have been indirectly affected by
COVID-19 containment measures. Only 120,000 people have been reached with
support related to gender-based violence between April and June, 100,000 fewer than
in the first quarter of the year, while the pandemic and the worsened economic
situation may have exacerbated the risk of gender-based violence for women and
girls.

III. Planning process for the establishment of the Mission
26. Given the stated intention of the Security Council to establ ish a follow-on
presence to UNAMID in its resolutions 2495 (2019) and 2517 (2020) and its request,
in resolution 2524 (2020) that I swiftly initiate the planning for and establishment of
UNITAMS, a team of Secretariat staff was constituted in April 2020 under the
guidance of my Special Adviser on the Sudan, Nicholas Haysom. The team advanced
the planning by means of an inclusive and consultative process. Owing to the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic and related mitigation measures, online means were used to
convene relevant entities from across the United Nations system, including the United
Nations country team and UNAMID, as well as the World Bank. External partners, in
particular the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the European Union, were also actively consulted. The critical importance of both
gender equality and the empowerment of women and youth were kept at the centre of
the planning process.
27. On 5 July, the transitional Government established the Executive Committee for
Coordination with UNITAMS. The Committee includes 16 members of the
transitional authorities, security institutions and civil society. It is mandated with,
inter alia, direct coordination at the federal and state levels between the transitional
Government and UNITAMS on the Mission’s areas of work and with negotiating the
draft status-of-mission agreement and following up on its implementation.
28. The planning team visited the Sudan from 26 July to 11 August. In Khartoum,
the team met with many Sudanese stakeholders, including government and security
officials, women’s and other civil society organizations and political groups. In
Kassala, Kadugli, El Fasher, Nyala and Zalingei, the team also met with the newly
appointed civilian governors or their representatives and visited four camps for

6/16

20-12062

internally displaced persons, including the Kalma camp. The team also met with the
diplomatic community, including the Khartoum-based Friends of Sudan group and
ambassadors of African countries. The planning team worked closely with the United
Nations country team, given the integrated nature of UNITAMS, as well as with
UNAMID given the importance of coordination in Darfur between the two missions.
29. The planning team finalized a Mission concept for UNITAMS, which translated
the four strategic objectives outlined in the Mission mandate into the following nine
strategic priorities to be pursued during the Mission’s expected lifespan: (a) support
political stability; (b) support the constitution -making, electoral and census
processes; (c) support institutional reforms and the promotion and protection of
human rights; (d) support the conclusion of an inclusive peace p rocess; (e) support
the implementation of the peace agreement or agreements; (f) support the
strengthening of the protective environment, in particular in conflict and post -conflict
areas; (g) support the achievement of peaceful coexistence and reconciliation between
communities; (h) support international resource mobilization and national socio economic reforms; and (i) support the establishment of a national architecture for
development planning and aid effectiveness.
30 In addition, the team outlined a provisional structure and geographical footprint
for UNITAMS that will serve as a basis for the ongoing preparations for the
submission of the 2021 budget (see annex II). The structure provides for the capacity
necessary to support the political transition, national efforts for the protection of
civilians and the prevention of conflict, and peacebuilding and development
coordination. It is envisaged that UNITAMS will be headquartered in Khartoum, with
field offices in Darfur, the Two Areas and Eastern Sudan.
31. Operational support arrangements for UNITAMS will be characterised by two
key elements: collaboration with the United Nations country team and a commitment
to transitioning from the drawdown of UNAMID. In line with the directions given by
the Security Council that the United Nations presence in the Sudan be integrated, the
United Nations country team has been included in mission support planning from the
outset with the intent of establishing joint support arrangements through a
combination of common services arrangements, including co-location where feasible.
The continued presence of UNAMID provides an opportunity to temporarily leverage
existing support capacities while the UNITAMS support model, comprising common
services, a service centre and remote support, is implemented. The anticipated
withdrawal of UNAMID, which has long provided capacity in Darfur for the United
Nations country team, presents an urgency to move forward in this area and ensure
that there are no gaps in support capacity that could have adverse effects on the startup of UNITAMS. In that context, it is envisaged that the new unified United Nations
presence in the Sudan will benefit from assets and other capacities that can be
transferred from UNAMID following its drawdown and eventual closure.
32. As with all field missions in Africa, UNITAMS will also benefit from a full suite
of transactional services to be provided by the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe,
Uganda, assistance from the Global Procurement Support Section and
communications and logistics services to be provided by the United Nations Logistics
Base at Brindisi, Italy, and the United Nations Information and Communications
Technology Facility, Valencia.
33. I have approved an initial funding package by providing for un foreseen and
extraordinary expenditure to support resource requirements for the start-up and initial
months of operations of the new Mission.
34. Recruitment for the UNITAMS advance team is ongoing. Once deployed, in the
last quarter of 2020, it will assume responsibility for further planning. The advance
team will lead discussions on integration and coordination modalities with the United
20-12062

7/16

Nations country team and UNAMID, respectively. It will also develop the clear and
measurable core and contextual benchmarks and indicators requested by the Security
Council in its resolution 2524 (2020), given that the development of those
benchmarks will require in-depth and sustained engagement with stakeholders in the
Sudan.

IV. Observations
35. The Sudan is making progress with its transition. The Sudan and the
international community have to remain steadfast in their commitment to advancing
the broad political vision enshrined in the Constitutional Declaration of August 2019.
I commend the transitional Government for the steps it has taken thus far to
implement the benchmarks contained in the Constitutional Declaration. Those include
undertaking economic reforms, reaching a comprehensive peace agreement with
armed groups in Darfur and the Two Areas, and amending legislation to improve the
rule of law and the protection of fundamental rights, with notable improvements with
regard to women’s rights in particular.
36. Amid this progress, the Sudan is battling the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic,
which have compounded pressure on the transitional Government by further straining
health systems, interrupting economic activity and deepening socioeconomic
grievances and humanitarian needs. Furthermore, in recent months, the Sudan has
experienced devastating floods and has been affected by the worst desert locust
infestation in the Horn of Africa in 25 years, both of which pose major threats to food
security and livelihoods. The United Nations is doing its utmost to assis t the
Government in responding to the COVID-19 pandemic and meeting wider
humanitarian needs, including through advocacy for support to economic reform
efforts.
37. The peace agreement reached on 29 August with the SRF alliance and
SLA-Minni Minawi, and the joint agreement on principles signed on 3 September
with the SPLM-N Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction, are milestones in the transition. I
commend all parties to these agreements for their continued political will and
determination in working towards the common objective of peace, despite the
difficulties posed by the COVID-19 pandemic. I also call on those who remain outside
the peace process to participate in addressing long-standing internal conflicts in the
country and contribute to the success of the country ’s transition.
38. The implementation of all agreements reached during the Sudanese peace
process will require sustained political support and good offices to ensure that trust
is maintained between the signatories and that disputes arising from the challe nges of
implementation are resolved. These are not the first peace agreements reached in the
country’s recent history, but they are the first to be reached in a transitional context.
This unique opportunity for full implementation must be seized. The Unite d Nations
will offer support to the implementation of these and future peace agreements during
the transition period, as requested by the parties and within its capacity and mandate.
It will do so in collaboration with other international partners, notably the African
Union.
39. The recent upsurge in violence and volatility in Darfur, the Two Areas and
Eastern Sudan underscores that peace has not yet been achieved. The volatility
highlights the inherent fragility and unique challenges faced by countries in transition.
Hence, a comprehensive, country-wide approach is required. I commend the
establishment of a national committee for the protection of civilians and encourage
the Government to swiftly implement its comprehensive national plan for protecting
civilians, which is aimed at addressing not only the immediate need for the continued
8/16

20-12062

physical protection of all civilians across the Sudan, but also provides for other
measures that could improve the situation sustainably. I pledge the support of the
United Nations to the implementation of the strategy. All stakeholders, including the
armed groups, have a responsibility to establish a safe environment for all Sudanese,
in particular for women, girls and boys in conflict-affected areas. Without such safety,
the people of the Sudan will be able neither to enjoy nor exercise their human rights.
40. Furthermore, peacebuilding requires efforts beyond the implementation of
peace agreements. In that regard, the United Nations will support Sudanese
stakeholders in addressing conflict drivers and root causes, as well as the legacy of
past conflicts. The United Nations will also continue to support peacebuilding efforts
across the country, which includes strengthening rule of law institutions and ensuring
proper accountability for serious human rights violations in order to consolidate peace
and security gains.
41. Spiralling inflation, continuing shortages of key commodities, a growing public
deficit and dropping revenues have placed the country’s economy in a critical st ate.
The economic hardship that was the driver of the street demonstrations that began in
December 2018, and which led to the change in government, have yet to be overcome.
In that context, it is imperative that international support is delivered as the
transitional Government strives to implement its difficult economic reform agenda.
That has been one of my key priorities in supporting the Sudan. I commend donors
for the contributions to the Sudan Family Support Programme they pledged at the
High-Level Sudan Partnership Conference, held in Berlin on 25 June, and the funding
for humanitarian assistance and development activities. I urge donors to release those
funds as soon as possible so that the Sudan Family Support Programme can move
from its pilot stage to full implementation. This is a crucial element of the economic
reform agenda as agreed between the transitional Government and IMF. Progress in
the implementation of the IMF staff-monitored programme will help the Sudan to
move towards debt relief and secure access to significant funding for international
development assistance. Unless addressed, economic sanctions, including the
continued inclusion of the Sudan on the list of State sponsors of terrorism of the
United States of America, will also have significant implications for the country’s
access to international financial assistance, investment and debt relief in the short and
medium terms.
42. Financial and political support for the transition has to be firmly predicated on
continued progress towards a democratic, civilian-led political system in the Sudan.
A prosperous and democratic Sudan will serve as an important pillar of stability in
the region. The question is not whether the international community can afford the
support that the Sudan needs, it is whether the international community can afford not
to support the Sudan as it strives to meet its formidable challenges.
43. I welcome the close collaboration with the transitional Government throughout
the UNITAMS planning process, which will enable us to deliver in accordance with
the will of the Sudanese people to have a peaceful and prosperous country. Similarly,
the continuing effective partnership between the United Nations and the African
Union will maximize the two organizations’ comparative advantages in support of the
transition in the Sudan. The planning process also benefited from extensive
consultations with our partners in the wider international community, and it has
yielded key results. I would like to express my gratitude to my Specia l Adviser on the
Sudan for leading this process and for his efforts in support of the transition in the
Sudan.
44. Nevertheless, important work lies ahead before the Mission can deliver its
mandated activities by 1 January 2021. I count on your continued support and
engagement as we work together towards the success of the transition in the Sudan.
20-12062

9/16

Annex I
Report on African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur pursuant to Security Council resolution 2525 (2020)

I. Introduction
1.
The present annex is submitted pursuant to paragraph 10 of Security Council
resolution 2525 (2020), by which the Council requested the Secretary-General to
provide an update on the implementation of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) mandate every 90 days as an annex to the regular
reporting requested on United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS). The present annex provides an update on the situation in Darfur
for the period from 1 June to 31 August 2020.

II. Update on the situation in Darfur and implementation of
the mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur
A.

Political situation
Political developments in the Sudan
2.
The transitional Government of the Sudan continued to implement provisions
of the Constitutional Declaration of 17 August 2019. On 9 July, the Prime Minister
sought the resignation of seven ministers in a cabinet reshuffle. On 22 July, he
appointed interim civilian governors, including two women, for all 18 states. In
Darfur, the appointments were largely welcomed, although some criticized what they
saw as partisan appointments.
3.
Demonstrations took place in Khartoum and other parts of the country, including
in camps for internally displaced persons in Darfur. Demonstrators demanded justice
for the victims of the June 2019 crackdown on peaceful protesters in Khartoum,
improved security and service delivery, and other reforms. Protesters in Darfur,
including in Nertiti, Kabkabiyah, Kass, Kutum, El Fasher, Ed Daein and Masteri
highlighted protection challenges and demanded that authorities disarm militias and
improve security.
Peace process
4.
The peace talks between the transitional Government and the Sudanese
Revolutionary Front and the Sudan Liberation Army (SLA)-Minni Minawi, mediated
by the Government of South Sudan, proceeded largely online owing to restrictions
related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and reached a successful conclusion
on 31 August with the initialling of a peace agreement. The ceremony was preceded
on 28 and 29 August by the signing of eight peace protocols that were focused on
wealth- and power-sharing, displaced people and refugees, land ownership and lands
traditionally used by a tribal community (hawakeer), compensation and
rehabilitation, accountability and reconciliation, the pastoral sector, and security
arrangements. The formal participation of women in the talks remained marginal. The
Operation provided logistical and technical support for the peace process.
5.
The Sudanese Alliance, an umbrella for splinter groups from SLA -Abdul Wahid
and the Justice and Equality Movement, joined the Darfur track of the Juba talks in
May. Despite its withdrawal from the Sudanese Revolutionary Front, SLA -Minni

10/16

20-12062

Minawi also continued to participate, with Mr. Minawi himself initialling the
31 August agreement. SLA-Abdul Wahid continued to reject the peace process.

B.

Security situation
6.
The overall security situation in Darfur deteriorated during the reporting per iod,
largely as a result of an increase in intercommunal violence and criminality and the
continuation of infighting within SLA-Abdul Wahid.
Fighting between forces of the transitional Government and armed movements
7.
The Operation recorded 48 incidents of armed conflict resulting in 115 fatalities,
compared with 37 incidents and 34 fatalities from 1 March to 31 May 2020. On
1 June, SLA-Abdul Wahid attacked the Sudanese Armed Forces checkpoint in
Kutrum, Central Darfur, reportedly leading to the killing of 27 Sudanese Armed
Forces soldiers and 9 SLA-Abdul Wahid elements. Confrontation between the SLA Abdul Wahid factions of Mubarak Aldouk and Saleh Borsa also continued, with
clashes between 21 May and 11 June in the Daya area, Central Darfur, resulting i n 17
fatalities and the displacement of 6,887 families. SLA -Abdul Wahid infighting
continued between 26 July and 3 August in Buh and Torong Tonga, South Darfur,
resulting in 48 fatalities and significant displacement.
Intercommunal conflict and land issues
8.
Intercommunal violence increased across Darfur, with UNAMID recording 15
intercommunal clashes with 126 fatalities during the reporting period, compared with
13 clashes with 93 fatalities in the period from 1 March to 31 May 2020.
Intercommunal violence further led to new displacements and the destruction of
villages and farms. In several instances, police stations and government buildings,
including armouries, were attacked and looted. In West Darfur, clashes between the
Masalit and Northern Rizeigat in the area of Masteri and El Geneina in late July left
about 75 civilians dead while displacing close to 7,000 people in Masteri and over
13,000 in El Geneina, with more than 30 villages affected and 1,500 houses burned.
In North Darfur, internally displaced persons at Fata Borno camp were attacked on
13 July by nomad militias, killing nine. In South Darfur, conflict between Masalit and
Fallata from 23 to 26 July led to 18 fatalities.
9.
Land-related intercommunal conflicts increased with the start of the farming
season, with a total of 85 land-related conflicts and 17 fatalities compared with 47
land-related conflicts with 20 fatalities in the period from 1 March to 31 May 2020.
Attacks on Boronga, South Darfur, on 26 and 31 July by suspected Misseriya le ft one
person dead, some 28 houses burned and at least 20,500 people displaced, and gave
way to protests in Kass during which a Sudan Police Force station was burned and
the armoury looted.
10. On 26 July, the Prime Minister announced the deployment of add itional joint
security forces to Darfur to protect local populations during the farming season. The
Operation has been working closely with the country’s authorities and local
communities to de-escalate tensions and reinforce the Government’s protection
capacity. Large-scale violence around the Kalma camp for internally displaced
persons over the killing of two nomads on 10 June was averted by UNAMID
intervention and the deployment of government security forces. In response to the
incidents in Fata Borno, UNAMID has scaled up its presence to deter further violence
and support the Government. Similarly, in the Hamadiya camp for internally
displaced persons in Central Darfur, UNAMID strengthened its military and police

20-12062

11/16

patrolling to deter violence after a power struggle for the camp’s leadership resulted
in violence, with many families fleeing the camp.
Incidents against United Nations personnel and installations
11. A total of 65 mostly criminal incidents targeted at UNAMID, United Nations
and humanitarian personnel and premises were recorded during the review period.

C.

Protection of civilians
12. Civilians in Darfur continued to be vulnerable to attacks owing to the
persistently weak protective environment. Notwithstanding movement limita tions
due to COVID-19, UNAMID continued to contribute to the protection of civilians,
including access to humanitarian assistance. The military component conducted a
total of 4,605 patrols, including 888 related to the protection of civilians. The police
component deployed 893 patrols, including 352 to camps for internally displaced
persons, 199 related to firewood, grass or farmlands, 172 to villages and 106 to towns,
32 to markets, 2 to return areas and 30 to migration routes. The Operation facilitated
51 humanitarian escorts as an emergency response to about 50,000 beneficiaries in
the Jebel Marra. The Mission also supported the voluntary surrender of 200 weapons
in Central Darfur and cleared 20 hazardous areas of explosive remnants of war, and
destroyed 64 explosive remnants of war and 34 rounds of small arms ammunition.
13. The Operation provided COVID-19 prevention support to camps for internally
displaced persons in the greater Jebel Marra, benefiting over 5,000 people. In
collaboration with state authorities, the Mission contributed to COVID-19 awareness
campaigns and distribution of hygiene material and protective equipment. The
Mission conducted workshops on COVID-19 for prisons and justice institutions in
Darfur and engaged with Sudanese authorities on preventing its spread there.
14. With the COVID-19 pandemic, UNAMID and the United Nations country team
used the flexibility in the State liaison functions initiative to redirect $1.9 million to
equip and maintain Government isolation centres across Darfur. Despite delays to
State liaison function activities caused by the pandemic, construction of a police
station in the Shoba return area in North Darfur was completed on schedule. Through
the State liaison functions, non-food relief items were distributed to 400 vulnerable
households of internally displaced persons.
15. The Operation continued to build institutional and physical infrastructure to
help to prevent outbreaks of violence and mitigate their toll. In West and North Darfur,
workshops were held in collaboration with Sudanese authorities to strengthen
women’s resilience and mitigation capacities in relation to gender-based violence. In
South Darfur, two capacity-building workshops on child protection and children’s
rights were held to enhance the skills of social workers and persons living with
disabilities. Also, trainings were held for prison officers, including 28 women, in
North and South Darfur on the human rights approach to prison management.
16. During the reporting period, UNAMID engaged closely with the Government to
support the national plan of the Sudan for protecting civilians after the exit of
UNAMID of 21 May 2020 (see S/2020/429). On 16 and 28 July, UNAMID and the
Government held meetings to discuss the Operation’s support and agreed to establish
a high-level coordination mechanism. On 13 and 14 August, UNAMID and the
Government of the Sudan held a high-level joint workshop to improve cooperation in
addressing the protection challenges in Darfur, with the parties agreeing on a
coordination mechanism and a task force to enhance cooperation.

12/16

20-12062

D.

Humanitarian situation
17. During the reporting period, humanitarian needs were driven largely by the
increase in intercommunal clashes, the economic situation, flooding and the impact
of COVID-19. The drivers included the intercommunal violence in West, North and
South Darfur, where humanitarian partners conducted assessments and provided
assistance in response. Over the past nine months, huma nitarian partners have also
provided assistance to some 350,000 people in previously inaccessible parts of South
Darfur. This furthers recent improvements in accessing areas occupied by SLA -Abdul
Wahid, following engagement with the Government and SLA -Abdul Wahid.
18. As at 6 August, seasonal flooding had affected more than 16,000 people in
North, South, East and West Darfur, with the Government and humanitarian partners
providing assistance to those affected. At the same time, the COVID -19 outbreak and
related restrictions compounded existing economic challenges. According to the latest
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification report, some 2.8 million people are
facing a food crisis or emergency levels of food insecurity in Darfur during the current
period.

E.

Human rights situation
19. From June to August, UNAMID documented 93 alleged human rights violations
and abuses, involving 403 victims, including 40 women and 28 minors, which reflects
an increase relative to the 97 cases involving 299 victim s that were documented
between March and May 2020. Owing to various factors, including the impact of
COVID-19 restrictions, these may not be the actual numbers.
20. Women continued to be particularly vulnerable to human rights violations and
abuses. The Operation documented 20 cases of sexual and gender-based violence and
conflict-related sexual violence involving 28 survivors, which represents an increase
of 10 cases compared with the same period in the previous year. The cases included
the assault and rape of two Fur women, allegedly by nomads, on 25 June near Belle
el-Sereif village in Central Darfur, and the rape of two women on 16 July in the Tiga
farming area in North Darfur. The Operation verified 364 incidents of grave violations
affecting 77 children (37 boys and 40 girls) and 5 attacks against schools and
hospitals. The violations included rape and other forms of sexual violence, killing and
maiming, abduction, attacks against schools and hospitals, and the use of unexploded
explosive ordnance. They included the gang rape of a 15-year-old female, allegedly
by nomads, on 3 June near the Otash camp for internally displaced persons in South
Darfur and the sexual assault of 11- and 8-year old girls on 8 July by two men in the
Buri farming area in Central Darfur. Alleged perpetrators included members of the
Sudanese Armed Forces, the Rapid Support Forces (RSF) and SLA -Abdul Wahid
elements. Owing to the lack of resources and capacities on the ground, access to
justice and accountability responses for child victims of grave violations remains
limited.
21. During the reporting period, the Government amended laws impeding human
rights, particularly women’s rights; it abolished the death penalty for apostasy,
criminalized female genital mutilation and repealed public order laws that laid down
how women could behave in public. It also signed a framework for cooperation with
the United Nations on addressing conflict-related sexual violence. The Operation and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights jointly
established the COVID-19 rights watch initiative to highlight concerns over
vulnerable groups and mitigate the subversion of human rights and rule of law
processes.

20-12062

13/16

III. Coordination with the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan and transition planning
22. The UNITAMS planning team visited Darfur from 5 to 8 August. The team
travelled to Zalingei, El Fasher and Nyala to meet the new civilian governors and
civil society groups, and visited the Kalma and Hassahisa camps for internally
displaced persons in South and Central Darfur. The team’s visit to the UNAMID
temporary operating base in Golo, Central Darfur, and a planned visit to a gathering
site for internally displaced persons there could not take place as Sudanese military
intelligence denied access to those locations.
23. Simultaneously, the Operation engaged the Sudanese authorities about putting
in place the structures necessary to support the eventual drawdown and exit of
UNAMID in a responsible manner. While much of the work during the reporting
period was focused on support to the Government’s protection of civilians
responsibilities as described above, it also included engagement in other areas, such
as in the form of a workshop held on 12 August with the Ministry of Labour and
Social Development. This resulted in a joint technical committee for activities to
support community engagement in the creation of a protective environment and to
reduce intercommunal tensions.

IV. Financial aspects
24. The General Assembly, in its resolution 74/261 C of 30 June 2020, authorized
the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Operation in amounts not
exceeding $240.2 million for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2020.
25. As at 27 August 2020, unpaid assessed contributions to the special account for
UNAMID amounted to $320.8 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for
all peacekeeping operations at that date amounted to $ 4,657.0 million.
26. Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs was made for the period up to
31 July 2019, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent-owned equipment was
made for the period up to 31 March 2019, in accordance with the quarterly pay ment
schedule.

V. Observations
27. I commend the parties for the initialling of a peace agreement and of eight
important protocols at the culmination of the Juba talks. It constitutes a significant
milestone for the country’s political transition, laying solid foundations for a peaceful
and prosperous future for the people of the Sudan. Despite the lengthy process, its
outcomes are a testimony to the strong commitment of all the stakeholders to peace.
I call on the parties to engage without delay in th e implementation of all provisions,
particularly those addressing the issues of land ownership and the system of
hawakeer, refugees and internally displaced persons, the pastoral sector, and security
and justice; doing so will bring immediate relief and benefits to the long-suffering
population of Darfur. I also encourage those who have not joined the peace process
to date to show courage and determination in addressing their differences through
engagement and dialogue for the benefit of the constituencies they represent. Finally,
I commend the resolute efforts of the Government of South Sudan to bring this
process to a successful end.
28. The progress of the transitional Government on its democratic transition,
including the appointment of interim civilian governors for all five Darfur states, is
14/16

20-12062

very encouraging. I applaud the progress on commitments to gender equality and
women’s rights, and I urge the transitional Government to ensure that it achieves 40
per cent representation of women, as called for in the Constitutional Declaration.
29. The recent rise in intercommunal violence in Darfur is, however, very
concerning. Coming at a time when discussions are being held over the future of
Darfur, the increased clashes and demands for greater security are a r eminder that
many Darfuris continue to worry that they may be left behind by the new agreement.
I welcome the Government’s response to the violence and the demonstrated will to
address the legitimate security demands of internally displaced persons and oth er
Darfuris. The 31 August peace agreement should serve as a turning point to bring all
affected communities on board in their search for peace.
30. The bold steps undertaken by the transitional Government towards a national
plan for protecting civilians deserve acknowledgement and support. The Operation is
fully committed to providing effective support to the Government’s protection
responsibilities in Darfur and I am heartened by the recent engagements in that regard,
including in the form of the high-level workshop held in August 2020. It is important
that commitments lead to tangible results and that mechanisms established in those
meetings lead to even deeper cooperation on protection.

20-12062

15/16

Proposed organization chart of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan for 2021

Funds, programmes
and specialized
agenciesa
Working groups
(substantive and support)

Integrated Office of the
Deputy Special
Representative of the
Secretary-General/Resident
Coordinator/Humanitarian
Coordinator

Support to
civilian
protection and
prevention

Police
Commissioner

Peacebuilding support

Regional offices in Darfur, Two
Areas and Eastern Sudan

Abbreviations: USG, Under-Secretary-General; ASG, Assistant Secretary-General.
a
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, International Atomic Energy Agency, International Fund for Agricultural Devel opment, International Labour
Organization, Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, United Nations Development Programm e, United Nations Environment Programme, United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, United Nations Population Fund, United Nations Human Settlements Programme , Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, United Nations Children’s Fund, United Nations Industrial Development Organization, United Nations Office for Project Services, United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, World Food Programme, World Health Organization, Internation al Monetary Fund, World Bank,
United Nations Volunteers, Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, International Organization for Migration, United Natio ns Office on Drugs and Crime and Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

S/2020/912

16/16

Annex II

20-12062
