A/ES-10/409–S/2008/8

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
4 January 2008
Original: English

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
Agenda item 5
Illegal Israeli actions in Occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory

Security Council
Sixty-third year

Identical letters dated 4 January 2008 from the Permanent
Observer of Palestine to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council
It is my deep regret to inform you that the Palestinian people in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory have begun their new year under increasing assault by Israel,
the occupying Power, which has intensified its illegitimate military campaign
against the Palestinian civilian population, killing and wounding more people,
including women and children. Such military aggressions and violations of
international law by the occupying Power threaten to further destabilize the
extremely fragile situation on the ground and to completely undermine the
momentum and good will created during the recent period by the Annapolis and
Paris conferences and resumed bilateral negotiations.
The Israeli occupying forces have been carrying out a series of lethal raids and
attacks against towns and cities in the Gaza Strip in recent days. On Wednesday,
2 January 2008, the occupying forces launched air missile attacks against the
Al-Shujaiya neighbourhood of Gaza City, killing at least six Palestinians and
wounding dozens, while military bulldozers barrelled through the neighbourhood,
causing destruction to property and later razing vast tracts of agricultural land.
This attack was followed on Thursday, 3 January 2008, by Israeli tank and
warplane bombings across the Gaza Strip that resulted in the killing of at least nine
Palestinians, bringing terror, grief and devastation to more Palestinian families.
Among the civilians killed were five members of one family in Khan Younis,
including a mother, Karima Fayyad, her daughter, Asmaa’ Hamdan Fayyad, her two
sons, Sami and Ahmad Hamdan Fayyad, and her nephew Mohammad Khodair
Fayyad. Several children were seriously wounded as well in the assaults carried out
yesterday in the Gaza Strip, with nearly 30 more Palestinians injured as a result of
the heavy tank shelling, missile strikes and machine gunfire by the Israeli occupying
forces, which also deliberately blew up homes and levelled agricultural fields in the
area. In addition to the death and destruction caused, many of those civilians
wounded remain in critical condition in Gaza hospitals that continue to be

08-20210 (E) 070108

*0820210*

A/ES-10/409
S/2008/8

overwhelmed due to the shortage of supplies and medicines resulting from the
ongoing Israeli siege of the Gaza Strip and the continuing humanitarian crisis.
Today, the Israeli occupying forces continued to carry out attacks in the Gaza
Strip, killing two Palestinian men in the town of Beit Hanoun. Earlier in the week,
on Sunday, 30 December 2007, Beit Hanoun was also the scene of death and tragedy
as the Israeli occupying forces opened fire at a crossing point where pilgrims were
returning to the Gaza Strip. The attack resulted in the killing of one Palestinian
woman, Khaldiyya Ahmad Hamdan, who had just returned from the hajj
(pilgrimage) to Mecca, and wounded at least five other people.
Israel, the occupying Power, has also been carrying out major military
operations in the West Bank, particularly in and around the cities of Nablus,
Tulkarem and Bethlehem, totally undermining the efforts being undertaken by
Palestinian Authority security forces, which had been increasingly effective in
recent weeks. On Wednesday, 2 January 2008, hundreds of Israeli soldiers in
armoured vehicles raided the city of Nablus and the Balata refugee camp there and
imposed a curfew on the civilian population. Forced house-to-house searches were
carried out by the occupying forces, resulting in the injury of at least 33 Palestinians
and the arrest and detention of several others.
At the same time, Israel has not undertaken measures to ease the severe
restrictions on the movement of Palestinian persons and goods throughout the West
Bank and particularly into and out of East Jerusalem and the surrounding areas.
Moreover, in grave breach of international humanitarian law, in violation of United
Nations resolutions and in total disrespect for its road map commitments, Israel
continues to carry out settlement activities and also continues to construct the wall
in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. Such illegitimate, expansionist measures by
the occupying Power continue to create facts on the ground that will prejudice final
status negotiations and continue to poison the atmosphere between the two sides,
seriously harming the prospects for peace.
In this connection, I must also draw your attention to the violence and
intimidation that continue to be perpetrated by illegal Israeli settlers against
Palestinian civilians in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. Two of many examples
include the killing of a Palestinian man, Wasfi Al-Khateeb, who was run over by an
Israeli settler in a car in the village of Na’leen, west of Ramallah in the West Bank,
on 29 December 2007 and later died, on 30 December. Also, on Wednesday,
2 January 2008, a group of Israeli settlers set fire to the historic Al-Hamadiyya
Mosque, in the village of Al-Khader, near Bethlehem, using beehives stolen from a
nearby Palestinian farm to set the blaze. In this regard, it should be noted that the
settlers from the illegal settlements surrounding Al-Khader have been making
repeated attempts to seize land from the village and have continuously been
harassing and terrorizing the civilian population there.
All of these continuing Israeli aggressions against the Palestinian civilian
population in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, must be
of concern to the international community, for their continuation and escalation can
only fuel the cycle of violence and bring more instability, tragedy and loss,
worsening the situation on the ground and dimming the prospects for peace. Serious
efforts must be exerted by the international community, including the United
Nations Security Council, to bring an end to such violations of international law by
Israel, the occupying Power, and to compel Israel to abide by its legal obligations

2

08-20210

A/ES-10/409
S/2008/8

and commitments and to carry out much-needed confidence-building measures. At
the same time, efforts must continue to be exerted to further promote the positive
momentum generated by recent important international conferences in order to halt
the deterioration of the situation and support the advancement of resumed bilateral
negotiations between the parties on critical final status issues.
The present letter is in follow-up to our previous 304 letters to you regarding
the ongoing crisis in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
since 28 September 2000. These letters, dated from 29 September 2000 (A/55/432S/2000/921) to 28 December 2007 (A/ES-10/408-S/2007/766), constitute a basic
record of the crimes being committed by Israel, the occupying Power, against the
Palestinian people since September 2000. For all of these war crimes, State
terrorism and systematic human rights violations committed against the Palestinian
people, Israel, the occupying Power, must be held accountable and the perpetrators
must be brought to justice.
In follow-up to the above-mentioned letters, it is my deep regret to inform you
that at least 23 more Palestinian civilians, including children, have been killed by
the Israeli occupying forces, raising the total number of martyrs killed since
September 2000 to 4,862 (the names of the martyrs that have been identified are
listed in the annex to the present letter).
I should be grateful if you would arrange to have the text of the present letter
and its annex distributed as a document of the tenth emergency special session of
the General Assembly, under agenda item 5, and of the Security Council.
(Signed) Riyad Mansour
Ambassador
Permanent Observer

08-20210

3

A/ES-10/409
S/2008/8

Annex to the identical letters dated 4 January 2008 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council
Names of martyrs killed by the Israeli occupying forces in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem *
(From Friday, 28 December 2007, to Friday, 4 January 2008)
Friday, 28 December 2007
1.

Bassel Al-Natsha

Saturday, 29 December 2007
2.

Ibrahim Ali Al-Louh

Sunday, 30 December 2007
3.
4.
5.

Adel Youssef Qishta
Khaldiyya Ahmad Hamdan
Wasfi Al-Khateeb

Tuesday, 1 January 2008
6.

Yehya Sa’eed Jaber

Wednesday, 2 January 2008
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Aa’hed Mahmoud Shamali
Youssef Mohammad Shamali
Mus’ab Waleed Jindiyya (18)
Abdel Kareem Ahmad Al-Helou
Hamada Ahmad Abu Omeira
Salem Fouad Al-Wadiyya

Thursday, 3 January 2008
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

Karima Fayyad
Sami Hamdan Fayyad
Ahmad Hamdan Fayyad
Asmaa’ Hamdan Fayyad
Mohammad Khodair Fayyad (17)
Munir Ibrahim Barham
Borhom Abu Lihya
Mohammad Abdallah Qishta
Yasser Rafiq Hellis

Friday, 4 January 2008
22.
23.

Ahmad Nasr Al-Kafarna
Mohammad Awad Al-Kafarna

__________________

* The total number of Palestinian martyrs killed by the Israeli occupying forces since
28 September 2000 is 4,862.

4

08-20210
