RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE SIXTH COMMITTEE

CONTENTS
Page

895 (IX). Question of defining aggression (4 December 1954) (item 51) . . . .
896 (IX). Elimination or reduction of future statelessness (4 December 1954)
(item 49) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
897 (IX). Draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security of Mankind
( 4 December 1954) (item 49) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
898 (IX). International criminal jurisdiction (14 December 1954) (item 50) . .
899 (IX). Draft articles on the continental shelf ( 14 December 1954) ( item
64) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
900 (IX). International technical conference on the conservation of the living
resources of the sea (14 December 1954) (item 65) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
901 (IX). Question of the correction of votes in the General Assembly and
its Committees (14 December 1954) (item 60) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

895 (IX). Question of defining aggression

49
50
50
50
51
51

Considering that, at the request 2 of the Economic and
Social Council, the International Law Commission has
given priority to this item,

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 599 (VI) of 31 January
1952 and 688 (VII) of 20 December 1952,
Considering that the discussions to which the question of defining aggression gave rise at the ninth session of the General Assembly have revealed the need
to co-ordinate the views expressed by the States
Members,
1. Decides to establish a Special Committee comprising one representative of each of the following
States Members : China, Czechoslovakia, Dominican
Republic, France, Iraq, Israel, Mexico, Netherlands,
Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Syria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Yugoslavia, which will
meet at United Nations Headquarters in 1956;
2. Requests the Special Committee to submit to the
General Assembly at its eleventh session a detailed
report followed by a draft definition of aggression,
having regard to the ideas expressed at the ninth session of the General Assembly and to the draft resolutions and amendments submitted;
3. Decides to place the question on the provisional
agenda of the eleventh session of the General Assembly.
504th plenary meeting,
4 December 1954.

Noting that the International Law Commission, at
its fifth session in 1953, proposed 3 a draft Convention
on the Elimination of Future Statelessness and a draft
ConYention on the Reduction of Future Statelessness,
and invited Governments to submit their comments
thereon,
Considering that comments were received from
fifteen Governments, which comments were published
in an annex to the report• of the International Law
Commission on the work of its sixth session,
Consideri>,g that the Economic and S0cial Council has
approved" the principles of the two draft Conventions,
Considering that the International Law Commission
revised, in the light of the comments received from
Governments, the above-mentioned draft Conventions
and submitted8 the revised drafts to the General Assembly,
Recoqnizing the importance of reducing and, if possible, eliminating future statelessness by international
agreement,
1. Expresses its appreciation for the work of the
International Law Commission in this field;
2. Expresses its desire that an international conference of plenipotentiaries be convened to conclude

896 (IX). Elimination or reduction of future
statelessness
The General Assembly,
Considering that the International Law Commission included1 the topic "Nationality, including statelessness" in its list of topics of international law provisionally selected for codification,
1

49

2 See Economic and Social Council, re~olution 319 B (XI},
section II I.
a See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth Session, Supplement No. 9, chapter IV.
• Ibid., Ninth Session, Supplemtnt No. 9.
~ See Economic and Social Council, resolution 526 B (XVII).
e See Ofjici.JJ Records of the General Ass.:mbly, Ninth StssiOt1, Supplement No. 9.

See Official Records of the General Assembly, F014rth

SessiOtl, SupPlement No. 10, para. 16.

49

General Assembly -

50

Ninth Session

a convention for the reduction or elimination of future
statelessness as soon as at least twenty States have
communicated to the Secretary-General their willingness to co-operate in such a conference;
3. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To communicate, together with the present resolution, the revised draft Conventions to Member States
and to each non-member State which is or hereafter
becomes a member of one or more of the specialized
agencies of the United Nations or which is or hereafter becomes a Party to the Statute of the International
Court of Justice ;
(b) To fix the exact time and place for the conference, to issue invitations to those States to which
the revised draft Conventions have been communicated
and to take all other measures for the convening of the
conference and for its operation in case the condition
stated in paragraph 2 above is met;
( c) To report on the matter to the General Assembly
at its eleventh session;
4. Requests Governments of States to which reference is made in paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (a) above,
to give early consideration to the merits of a multilateral
convention on the elimination or reduction of future
statelessness.
504th plenary meeting,
4 December 1954.

Considering that the General Assembly has estahlished9 a new Special Committee on the question of
defining aggression to submit to the General Assembly at its eleventh session a detailed report with
a draft definition of aggressicn, and that it ha~ also
postponed'° consi<leration of the draft Code until the
Special Committee has submitted ib report, so that
the question of the draft Code will also be included
in the provisional agenr1a of the eleventh session,
Considering that. after the General Assembly has
examined the Special Committee's report and the draft
Code, an interval should be allowed before it resumes
consideration of the question of an international
criminal jurisdiction in order to give Governments
sufficient time duly to consider the influence and effect
of the first two questions in relation to the question of
an international criminal jurisdiction,
1. Thanks the 1953 Committee on International
Criminal Jurisdiction for the efforts it has made in
carrying out its terms of reference;
2. Decides to postpone consideration of the question of an international criminal jurisdiction until
the General Assembly has taken up the report of the
Special Committee on the question of defining aggression and has taken up again the draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security uf Mankind.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.

897 (IX). Draft Code of Offences against the
Peace and Security of Mankind

899 (IX). Draft articles on the continental shelf

The General Assembly,
Considering that the draft Code of Offences against
the Peace and Security of Mankind, as formulated
in chapter III of the report 7 of the International Law
Commission on the work of its sixth session, raises
problems closely related to that of the definition of
aggression,
Considering that, by its resolution 895 (IX) of 4
December 1954, the General Assembly decided to entrust to a Special Committee of ninet('en Member
States the task of preparing and submitting to the
General Assembly at its eleventh session a detailed
report on the question of defining aggression and a
draft definition of aggression,
Decides to postpone further consideration of the
draft Code of Offences against the Peace and Security
of Mankind until the Special Committee on the question of defining aggression has submitted its report.
504th plenary meeting,
4 December 1954.

898 (IX). International criminal jurisdiction

The General Assembly,
Having received the report8 of the 1953 Committee
on International Criminal Jurisdiction to which a
revised draft statute for an international criminal court
is annexed,
Considering the connexion between the question of
defining aggression, the draft Code of Offences against
the Peace and Security of Mankind, and the question
of an international criminal jurisdiction,
1
8

Ibid.
Ibid., Supplement No. 12.

The General Assembly,
Considering that the International Law Commission
in its report 11 on the work of its fifth session submitted
for the consideration of the General Assembly draft
articles on the continental shelf,
Believing that consideration by the General Assembly
of the regime of the high sras, the regime of territorial
waters and all related problems should be undertaken
without undue delay,
Recalling that, in resolution 798 (VIII) of 7 December 1953, the General Assembly, having regard to the
fact that the problems relating to the high seas, territorial waters, contiguous zones, the continental shelf
and the superjacent waters were closely linked together
juridically as well as physically, decided not to deal
with any aspect of those matters until all the problems
involved had be~n studie<l by the International Law
Commission and reported upon by it to the General
Assembly,
1. Requests the international Law Commission to
devote the necessary time to the study of the regime
of the high seas, the regime of territorial waters and
all related problems in order to complete its work on
these topics and submit its final report in time for the
General Assembly to consider them as a whole, in
accordance with resolution 798 (VIII), at its eleventh
session;
2. Drcides to include the final report of the International Law Commission on these topics in the provisiona! ::tgenda for the eleventh session of the General
Assembly.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
• See resolution 895 (IX), p. 49.
10 See resolution 897 (IX), above.
11 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighth
Session, Supplement No. 9, chapter Ill.
