S/PV.8834

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8834th meeting

Monday, 16 August 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Tirumurti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Lipand
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-22577 (E)
*2122577*

S/PV.8834

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Afghanistan to participate in
this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and give him
the floor.
The Secretary-General: The world is following
events in Afghanistan with a heavy heart and deep
disquiet about what lies ahead. All of us have seen the
images in real time — chaos, unrest, uncertainty and
fear. Much lies in the balance: the progress, the hope,
the dreams of a generation of young Afghan women
and girls, boys and men. At this grave hour, I urge all
parties — especially the Taliban — to exercise utmost
restraint to protect lives and to ensure that humanitarian
needs can be met.
Conflict has forced hundreds of thousands from
their homes. The capital city has seen a huge influx
of internally displaced persons from provinces around
the country, where they felt insecure or fled during
fighting. I remind all parties of their obligation to
protect civilians, and I call on all parties to provide
humanitarians with unimpeded access to deliver timely
and life-saving services and aid. I also urge all countries
to be willing to receive Afghan refugees and to refrain
from any deportations.
Now is the time to stand as one. The international
community must be united and utilize all available
instruments to ensure the following.
First, we must speak with one voice to uphold
human rights in Afghanistan. I call upon the Taliban
and all parties to respect and protect international
humanitarian law and the rights and freedoms of all
persons. We are receiving chilling reports of severe
restrictions on human rights throughout the country, and
I am particularly concerned by accounts of mounting
human rights violations against the women and girls of
2/13

16/08/2021

Afghanistan, who fear a return to the darkest days. It is
essential that the hard-won rights of Afghan women and
girls be protected. They are looking to the international
community for support — the same international
community that assured them that opportunities would
be expanded, education would be guaranteed, freedoms
would spread and rights would be secured.
Secondly, the international community must unite
to make sure that Afghanistan is never again used as
a platform or safe haven for terrorist organizations. I
appeal to the Security Council and the international
community as a whole to stand together, work together,
act together and use all tools at their disposal to
suppress the global terrorist threat in Afghanistan and
to guarantee that basic human rights will be respected.
Regardless of who holds power, those two fundamental
principles, in which our world has such a deep and
abiding interest, must be upheld.
The United Nations is committed to supporting
Afghans. We continue to have staff and offices in areas
that have come under Taliban control. I am relieved
to report that, in large measure, our personnel and
premises have been respected. We urge the Taliban
to continue to do so and to honour the integrity and
inviolability of diplomatic envoys and premises.
The humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan affects
18 million people — fully half of the country’s
population. It is vital that basic services continue to be
provided. In a statement issued yesterday, the Taliban
said that it would work with existing institutions. It
is crucial that civil servants’ salaries continue to be
paid, that infrastructure be maintained, that airports
be reopened and that health and education services
continue. The United Nations presence will adapt to the
security situation.
But above all, we will stay and deliver in support of
the Afghan people in their hour of need. Looking ahead,
I call for an immediate end to violence, for the rights
of all Afghans to be respected and for Afghanistan to
comply with all international agreements to which it is
a party.
Afghans are a proud people with a rich cultural
heritage. They have known generations of war
and hardship. They deserve our full support. The
following days will be pivotal. The world is watching.
We cannot — and must not — abandon the people
of Afghanistan.
21-22577

16/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8834

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

the city. Kabul residents are living in absolute fear
right now.

I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.

There is no time for a blame game anymore. We
have an opportunity to prevent further violence and
prevent Afghanistan from descending into a civil war
and becoming a pariah State. Therefore, the Security
Council and the Secretary-General should use every
means at their disposal to call for an immediate
cessation of violence and respect for human rights and
international humanitarian law; call on the Taliban
to fully respect the general amnesty offered by them,
cease targeted killings and revenge attacks and abide
by international humanitarian law; urge that no
public institutions or service-delivery infrastrucure
be demolished, including works of art in museums
and media institutions; stress that anyone violating
the human rights of Afghan citizens and international
humanitarian law will be held accountable; and urgently
establish a humanitarian corridor for the evacuation of
those at risk of the Taliban’s retribution and attacks.

Mr. Isaczai (Afghanistan): I thank you,
Mr. President, or this opportunity to speak at yet
another Security Council meeting on the situation in
Afghanistan and for India’s leadership of the Council
during this critical period. We welcome the convening
of this emergency meeting of the Security Council
on the situation in Afghanistan and thank all the
Council members, particularly Estonia and Norway
as co-penholders on Afghanistan, for their role in
organizing it.
Today I speak on behalf of millions of people in
Afghanistan whose fate hangs in the balance and are
faced with an extremely uncertain future. I speak
for millions of Afghan girls and women who are
about to lose their freedom to go to school, work and
participate in the political, economic and social life
of the country. I speak for thousands of human rights
defenders, journalists, academics, civil servants and
former security personnel whose lives are at risks for
defending human rights and democracy.
I speak for thousands of internally displaced
people who are desperately in need of shelter, food and
protection in Kabul and other places. As members are
witnessing for themselves, the situation in Kabul — a city
of almost 6 million people — is extremely worrisome,
to say the least. We have seen the chaotic scenes at the
Kabul International Airport, as desperate citizens try
to leave the country.
We are extremely concerned about the Taliban not
honouring the promises and commitments made in its
statements at Doha and other international forums.
We have witnessed time and again how the Taliban
has broken its promises and commitments in the past.
We have seen gruesome images of the Taliban’s mass
executions of military personnel and targeted killings
of civilians in Kandahar and other big cities.
We cannot allow that to happen in Kabul, which has
been the last refuge for many people escaping violence
and the Taliban’s revenge attacks. Kabul residents are
reporting that the Taliban has already started house-tohouse searches in some neighbourhoods, registering
names and looking for people on their target list. There
are already reports of targeted killings and looting in

They should furthermore call on neighbouring
countries of Afghanistan to open their borders and
facilitate the exit of people trying to escape and the
entry of goods for humanitarian relief and operations;
call for the immediate establishment of an inclusive and
representative transitional Government that includes
all ethnic groups and women representatives that can
lead to a dignified and lasting solution to the conflict,
bring peace and preserve the gains of the past 20 years,
especially for women and girls; and stress that the
Council and the United Nations will not recognize any
administration that achieves power through force or
any Government that is not inclusive and representative
of the diversity of the country.
They should also unequivocally state that they do
not recognize the restoration of the Islamic emirate,
as reaffirmed in previous Council statements and
agreements; establish international guarantees for the
implementation of a future political agreement; and,
lastly, mobilize urgent humanitarian assistance for the
18 million people of Afghanistan, particularly those
displaced by the current conflict. The United Nations
humanitarian appeal of $1.3 billion remains funded at
40 per cent. We urge the international community to
meet the remainder of this life-saving appeal to provide
critical aid to all internally displaced people.
In conclusion, I would like to thank the United
Nations and the many other organizations that are on

21-225773/13

S/PV.8834

The situation in Afghanistan

the ground providing life-saving humanitarian support
and monitoring human rights on the ground.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Lipand (Estonia): I welcome the presence
and strong messages of the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representative of Afghanistan.
Last week (see S/PV.8831) we highlighted our
grave concern that the number of civilians killed and
injured in Afghanistan had reached the highest on
record, with the Taliban responsible for the largest
share of casualties. Today, having declared control
over Afghanistan, the Taliban bears even greater
responsibility and accountability for the safety and
security of all people in Afghanistan. Estonia calls
on those in power and in positions of authority in
Afghanistan to adhere to international law, in particular
international humanitarian law, and uphold the norms
and standards concerning human rights.
What has not changed is that more than half the
population of Afghanistan is in need of humanitarian aid.
It is of critical importance to ensure that humanitarian
access not be hindered and that aid providers can work
in safety. We call on all parties to allow immediate, safe
and unhindered humanitarian access for United Nations
humanitarian agencies and other actors providing
assistance. This is the time for building, repairing and
healing, not retaliating, looting and profiteering. It is
the critical time to establish peace.
The people of Afghanistan deserve peace
and security. A sustainable end to the conflict in
Afghanistan can be ensured only through an inclusive
political settlement that upholds the constitutional
protections for the rights of all people of Afghanistan,
particularly women, children and persons belonging
to minorities. Only an inclusively negotiated political
solution can lead to a durable peace in the country, as
well as stability in the region.
I would like to reiterate Estonia’s commitment to
the people of Afghanistan. However, our cooperation
with any future Afghanistan leadership will be based
on its willingness to uphold the positive achievements
of recent decades and act according to the norms and
standards of international law, including international
human rights law. Our political and financial support
continues to be conditional on the preservation of the
country’s human rights and democratic achievements.
4/13

16/08/2021

We welcome the efforts by Afghanistan’s neighbours
and partners that have offered their help by providing
shelter to those escaping the dangers and uncertainties
that accompany armed conflict.
I end with special thanks to the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. The efforts of the
Mission are now more important than ever, as is the
safety and security of its staff.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): I thank you, Mr. President,
for calling this emergency meeting on the situation in
Afghanistan. Allow me also to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his participation and his briefing, as well as
Ambassador Isaczai for his remarks.
In
echoing
the
Secretary-General
and
previous speakers, the situation in Afghanistan is
extremely serious. Over the past few weeks, amid an
ongoing violent conflict, the national security and
defence forces of the country have almost collapsed
entirely. Over the past 24 to 48 hours, the leadership of
the central Government disintegrated. The country and
its population are now facing a multi-layered crisis of
very significant proportions — suffering and hardship
because of violent conflict, drought and food insecurity,
as well as the coronavirus disease pandemic and other
infectious diseases, such as polio and measles.
We, the Security Council and the entire
international community, need to show our continued
commitment to them, in both words and actions. In this
unprecedented situation, Norway calls for an immediate
end to the violence in Afghanistan, the restoration of
security and civil order and urgent talks to resolve the
current crisis of constitutional authority and arrive at a
peaceful settlement.
The reality with which the international community
must now contend is that the Taliban movement
exercises de facto control over much of the Afghan
territory, including the capital, Kabul. We have taken
careful note of statements by Taliban representatives
over the past few days. Those include assurances that
the security and safety of all Afghans, diplomats and
humanitarian workers will be guaranteed. It has been
communicated that Government workers, whether
military or civilian, will not face retribution of any
kind. Furthermore, Taliban representatives have stated
that women and girls will have access to work and
education. Those are encouraging words. However,
the Taliban will be judged not by words, but by actions
in the days, weeks and months ahead. How Taliban
21-22577

16/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

members conduct themselves in actual deed will matter
a great deal in terms of whether or not, and how, the
international community will be willing and able to
relate to, cooperate with and support a future new
Afghan Government in which the Taliban participates.
Restoring law and order in Kabul must be the
utmost priority. There have been disturbing reports of
looting and chaos. The current situation at and around
Kabul International Airport is also unclear and deeply
worrisome. We call on all parties to ensure that all
Afghan and foreign nationals who wish to leave the
country can do so in a safe and orderly way.
The ongoing violence across Afghanistan, including
in urban areas, has caused grave harm to civilians,
especially children, as well the interruption of services
and damage to civilian infrastructure, including those
providing water and sanitation, food and education and
health services. Safe access to those services must be
immediately restored.
We are deeply concerned about the number of
reported serious violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights abuses in communities affected
by the ongoing armed conflict across the country,
and stress the urgent and imperative need to bring the
perpetrators to justice. All parties must respect their
obligations under international humanitarian law in all
circumstances, including those related to the protection
of civilians. A sustainable end to the conflict in
Afghanistan can be achieved only through an inclusive,
just, durable and realistic political settlement that
upholds human rights, especially for women, children
and minorities.
We express our support for the ongoing political
and diplomatic efforts centred on both Doha and Kabul
to ensure a transition that is orderly and prevents further
bloodshed. We commend the ongoing diplomatic efforts
by several key stakeholders, including the United
States, Qatar and Pakistan.
The future new Government must be united,
inclusive, representative and participatory. It must
have the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women. It must adhere to Afghanistan’s international
obligations, including with regard to respecting
universal human rights.
Finally, for peacebuilders, human rights defenders,
journalists and media workers, especially the brave
women who for years have stood up for their rights and

S/PV. 8834

demanded equal participation and say in their future, the
situation feels desperate. Consistent marginalization at
negotiations, as well as reprisals and targeted violence
against them and their family members, gives rise to
deep concerns about their safety and the goal of an
inclusive political settlement.
In the current situation, we, the Council and the
wider international community, all have a responsibility
to ensure their protection, and must use all means
of support and diplomatic and political channels to
amplify their voices and protect them from harm.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
sobering briefing and strong statement. His role, along
with the roles of his Personal Envoy, Jean Arnault,
and Special Representative Lyons and her team on the
ground, is especially vital now as we enter an uncertain
and crucial period that requires the international
community to speak with a clear and unified voice.
The United States deeply appreciates the continued
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and of other United Nations actors on the
ground in Afghanistan that are continuing to provide
life-saving assistance to Afghans in need.
We also thank the delegations of Norway and
Estonia for calling today’s meeting, and India for
convening it, given the events of the past 72 hours.
We welcome the participation of the delegation of
Afghanistan in today’s meeting.
Over this past weekend, members of the
international community joined together to state
unequivocally that every Afghan should be able to live
in safety, security and dignity. We also called on all
parties in Afghanistan to ensure safe departures and
the protection of human life and property.
Today I would like to reiterate, re-emphasize
and reassert that call. Civilian populations, including
journalists and non-combatants, must be protected.
Attacks against civilians and civilian objects must stop.
And the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
Afghan citizens, especially women, girls and members
of minority groups, must be respected. We also call
on all parties to prevent terrorism, and we must all
ensure that Afghanistan cannot ever again be a base
for terrorism. We also call on the Taliban to permit
humanitarian organizations to continue their vital work
in Afghanistan.

21-225775/13

S/PV.8834

The situation in Afghanistan

In addition to the ongoing violence, the Afghan
people are suffering acutely from the effects of
the coronavirus disease and drought. Those urgent
humanitarian needs must remain top of mind for all
of us in the coming hours, days, weeks and beyond.
Humanitarian personnel and agencies must have safe,
unhindered access to provide life-saving assistance to the
increasing numbers of Afghans in need. We are deeply
concerned that right now aid is not flowing to people
in crisis. According to the World Food Programme,
more than 500 tons of aid are currently sitting at
border crossings taken over by Taliban forces. Those
aid deliveries must resume immediately, and the World
Food Programme must have immediate and sustained
safe passage to deliver this much-needed assistance.
Finally, and critically, all Afghan nationals and
international citizens who wish to depart must be
allowed to do so safely. President Biden has made clear
that any action that puts United States personnel or
our mission at risk will be met with a swift and strong
military response. The United States promises to be
generous in resettling Afghans in our own country,
and I am heartened by the pledges we have seen from
other nations to do the same. We all need to do more,
and the time to step up is now. We urge Afghanistan’s
neighbours and others in the region and beyond to
give refuge, be it temporary or permanent, to Afghans
attempting to flee. Together, we must do everything we
can to help Afghans who wish to leave and seek refuge.
I will conclude where I began. The Afghan people
deserve to live in safety, security and dignity. We in the
international community stand ready assist them.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting at such a tragic and historic moment for
Afghanistan. This is indeed a grave time, as a page is
being turned and the future of the country, which has
already suffered so much, is more uncertain than ever.
We heard the Secretary-General express his concerns,
which we share. Our eyes are on Kabul, where the
peace and security of Afghanistan and the entire region
are at risk.
I would like to begin by reiterating our strong
condemnation of the violence and violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law currently
occurring in Afghanistan. All parties to the conflict
must fulfil their obligations, particularly with regard
6/13

16/08/2021

to the protection of civilians. We call for an immediate
ceasefire and respect for international law.
In the midst of the violence, I spare a thought for all
those who have built today’s modern Afghanistan and
must be protected. Their protection, but more broadly the
protection of civilians, especially women and children,
must be an absolute priority. Those responsible for
abuses will not go unpunished. The Security Council
must remain attentive to the evolution of the situation.
Civilians, especially women and children, must not be
forgotten. Women must be protected, and their rights
must be respected.
Democratic progress, the fight against organized
crime — in particular the fight against drugs — and
the protection of cultural heritage are all advances that
have brought Afghanistan into the concert of nations in
the past 20 years and must not be erased.
The third priority is, of course, Afghan unity. Peace
can be achieved only if everyone participates.
The security situation must not overshadow the
urgency of the humanitarian situation. The conflict is
causing the number of displaced persons to increase
and intensifying the already immense needs of the
population. Humanitarian aid must reach everyone.
Access for medical and humanitarian personnel to
all those in need, as well as the protection of such
personnel, must be guaranteed.
In conclusion, I would like to remind the Council
that France stands by the people of Afghanistan and
all its partners in order to move forward on the road to
peace. The first of those partners is the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I commend the
courage and hard work of the teams of that absolutely
outstanding Mission under the leadership and
coordination of Ms. Deborah Lyons. I also welcome the
work of Mr. Jean Arnault.
The United Nations has an essential and
indispensable role to play in Afghanistan, but it
cannot do so alone. The resolute commitment of the
international community to the Afghan people will be
equally decisive in the months and years to come.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
What is happening now in Afghanistan is a tragedy.
We have long believed that the only path towards
sustainable peace in Afghanistan and regional stability
21-22577

16/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

lies in a negotiated political settlement. We have worked
hard to breathe life into peace negotiations between the
Afghan Government and the Taliban, working closely
with the United States, our leading allies and other
regional Powers.
The Taliban pledged, at Doha, to engage in those
talks in good faith. Its actions on the ground have
betrayed that promise. The Taliban must immediately
do three things.
First, it needs to cease all hostilities and military
action to ensure the protection of civilians and to allow
the safe and orderly departure of foreign nationals and
others who wish to leave.
Secondly, it must commit unequivocally not to
harbour or give safe haven to terrorist groups that
endanger other countries.
Thirdly, the Taliban must honour its promises to
protect and uphold human rights, including those of
women, girls and minorities.
We have seen evidence of Taliban human rights
abuses in areas where it has taken control, including
the persecution of minority groups, harsh restrictions
on women, allegations of forced marriage and the use
of civilians as human shields. If the Taliban continues
to abuse basic human rights, it cannot expect to enjoy
any legitimacy in the eyes of the Afghan people or the
international community.
Given the fragile security situation, Afghanistan
is now facing a catastrophic humanitarian crisis.
The lack of access has masked the true scale of the
problem. Half of the population was already in need
of humanitarian assistance at the start of the year, and
the situation is much worse now. The Taliban must
respect international humanitarian law and permit
humanitarian organizations to continue their work by
guaranteeing safe, unhindered access to those in need.
The United Kingdom has long been a leading
provider of humanitarian aid to Afghans both in
Afghanistan and in the region. Over recent years,
the United Kingdom has been proud to be one of the
leading contributors to the Afghanistan humanitarian
fund. We will continue to work with our partners in
the Security Council, the Human Rights Council and,
most important, the region to deliver a more stable and
inclusive Afghanistan for all its people.

S/PV. 8834

It is vital that the international community
coordinate closely in the coming days and weeks to
ensure that we speak with a single message in our
engagement with Afghanistan. The United Kingdom
will use its presidency of the Group of Seven and
membership of the Council to help forge such closer
coordination and address the humanitarian plight that
the Afghan people now face.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to make
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — namely, Kenya, the Niger
and Tunisia — as well as Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines (A3+1).
I thank the Secretary-General for his briefing on
the latest developments in Afghanistan. The A3+1
reiterates its support for the stabilization efforts
deployed by the United Nations in the search for a
durable solution to the Afghan crisis, which has been
developing in worrisome ways in the past few days.
This meeting follows on the heels of a similar
meeting we held on 6 August (see S/PV.8831). If at
that time we still had hope — as slim as it might have
been — for the Taliban to heed our appeal and stop its
attacks, today we are faced with a fait accompli with
the effective collapse of the Afghan Government and
a takeover by the insurgents. The A3+1 deplores the
violence, human rights abuses, loss of life and suffering
endured by the civilian population who are being forced
to leave their homes because of the latest fighting across
the country. We reiterate our call for an immediate end
to the hostilities.
We also reiterate our principled rejection of any
seizure of power by force and call for the establishment
of an effective dialogue, as we are convinced that the
only viable solution to the conflict is a negotiated
political settlement. We take note of the discussions
between the Taliban and different Afghan stakeholders.
We hope that those negotiations will result in an interim
transitional Government that is inclusive and takes into
account other political voices within the country. We
also urge the international community and all regional
Powers that have leverage on the warring parties to
use that influence and advocate for a lasting ceasefire,
which is a condition for true dialogue.
While it is difficult to predict how the coming
days, months and years will unfold, in particular with
regard to the political and security situations, one
thing remains certain: Afghanistan is on the brink of

21-225777/13

S/PV.8834

The situation in Afghanistan

a humanitarian catastrophe, the first victims of which
are women and children. The A3+1 would therefore like
to highlight the importance of finding an urgent and
sustainable solution to the already dire humanitarian
crisis, which has been worsened by the recent fighting.
The effects of the recent upsurge in violence,
combined with those of climate change and the
coronavirus disease pandemic, have created a
situation where more than a third of the population
is experiencing food insecurity and thousands are
internally displaced, the overwhelming majority of
whom are women and children. We call on the United
Nations and humanitarian agencies to step up their
support to the displaced populations and honour the
pledges made to the Afghan humanitarian plan.
The Afghan people need, now more than ever, the
support and solidarity of the international community
and regional players to help them navigate this
challenging time. Every effort must be made to mitigate
the pains of the civil war and assist them in their search
for peace and a stable environment conducive to the
pursuit of democratic governance, as well as social and
economic well-being.
The A3+1 continues to welcome and fully support
the good offices of the United Nations and all other
diplomatic efforts by neighbouring countries to reduce
tension in order to reach a negotiated solution to the
crisis. Furthermore, we emphasize that the search for
peace must not be at the expense of Afghan human
rights, particularly those of women, children and
Afghanistan’s ethnic and religious minorities.
While making peace requires settlement between
combatants, we believe that the international
community does not wish for peace processes to
reward and legitimize the use of military interventions
and association with terrorist organizations through
political recognition. We recall how the Taliban came
to be thrown out of power because of its support of
Al-Qaida. Reports of the release of prisoners affiliated
to the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and
Al-Qaida by the Taliban are extremely disturbing.
Such actions will embolden terrorist networks and
motivate a resurgence of increased export of terrorism,
particularly to countries in regions that have active
conflict situations.
In its statement of 6 August (see S/PV.8831),
the A3+1 recalled the Council’s decision to split the
Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions list in response to
8/13

16/08/2021

efforts by the Afghan Government to negotiate a peace
process with the Taliban that would lead to national
reconciliation in Afghanistan. The purpose of that
decision was to provide a future lifeline for members
of the Taliban who renounce violence and disassociate
themselves from Al-Qaida. The Council must therefore
not relent in its demand that the Taliban make sustained
efforts to embrace peace, cease its links with Al-Qaida
and ISIS and engage in a peace process that will
transform Afghanistan to a net exporter of peace.
As we conclude, the A3+1 notes that the situation
in Afghanistan is extremely volatile and unpredictable.
Armed insurgent groups and terrorist groups across
the world are watching closely in order to replicate
the unravelling events. The Council must therefore
carefully consider the decisions that it takes, fully
aware that building political tracks for entities using
terrorism to achieve political ends will in the end
be counterproductive.
Finally, Kenya, Tunisia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines and the Niger reaffirm their unwavering
solidarity with the people of Afghanistan during these
uncertain times, and we reaffirm our support for their
vision for a peaceful and progressive country.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I want to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence here today and for
his very powerful words at the beginning of our meeting.
We supported the convening of this urgent
meeting to discuss the unfolding tragic developments
in Afghanistan. Over the past weeks, as we heard,
we have witnessed in real time the Taliban seizing
control of Afghan cities by force, culminating in the
loss of Government control in Kabul. We have all seen
the scenes of chaos at the airport. We cannot say that
we were not warned of this possible outcome. In the
Chamber, we heard many worrying alerts, not least in
the courageous testimonies of members of Afghan civil
society. Sadly, and tragically for so many, we failed
to heed those warnings. We will now have to address
the consequences. In the face of an unfolding crisis of
tragic proportions, the Council will now have to assume
its responsibilities and act.
This is a calamitous situation for all the people
of Afghanistan. As we have consistently done in the
Chamber, we condemn the appalling violence and the
indiscriminate attacks perpetrated against civilians in
Afghanistan. The violence and the intimidation must
end. It is clear that we have entered a new phase in
21-22577

16/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV. 8834

Afghanistan. Peace will be achieved only through an
agreed, inclusive and negotiated solution. Violence
does not provide legitimacy, nor does it deliver durable
peace. Respect for the rule of law and compliance with
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law, is imperative.
We call now for the utmost restraint to protect lives and
to ensure that the dire humanitarian needs be addressed.

marriages and sexual and gender-based violence.
Telling the international community what it wants to
hear will fool no one. We will not turn a blind eye to
the truth. We condemn, in the strongest terms, the
deliberate targeting of women and girls by the Taliban.
Girls must be free to attend school; women must be able
to participate fully in society; and those who speak up
for human rights must be free to do so.

Given the urgency of the situation and the desperate
plight facing the Afghan people, it is vital that we act
to address the crisis facing Afghanistan. Lives are
at imminent risk through the worsening violence,
displacement and food insecurity. The international
community has a responsibility to respond, to act to
protect civilians and to alleviate the suffering of the
Afghan people. Safe and reliable humanitarian access
must be guaranteed and protected and the work of all
the relevant United Nations agencies and humanitarian
partners must be facilitated without exception.

In focusing on the needs of women, I, of course,
also want to condemn the reported reprisals and attacks
against and summary executions of Afghan men. That
also must stop.

Those who have worked for peace, human rights
defenders, who have tirelessly endeavoured to promote
and protect the rights of their fellow citizens, must not
now be abandoned.
I wish to address the women of Afghanistan
directly — women who have the most at stake as the
democratic Government dissolves and an uncertain
future awaits. Lest there be any doubt as to the gravity
of the situation, I am speaking to the women at the
airport with their children and families, trying to find a
way out; the women hiding in their homes; the women
sleeping in the streets; and the women still fighting for
peace and human rights although that may well now
risk their lives.
To the women of Afghanistan, I say that we hear
their pleas to the international community at this dark
time. The fear, indignation and sense of betrayal that
they feel is understood and is righteous. I call on the
Council to stand with the women of Afghanistan. Their
rights and their future participation in Afghan society
cannot be sacrificed. That is our shared responsibility
at this table; it must also be our shared priority. All of
us around the table can, and should, agree that, as a
non-negotiable principle in all discussions, the rights
of women in Afghanistan must be protected. That is the
future of Afghanistan.
The Taliban have reportedly said that women
have nothing to fear from them, yet we hear multiple
and credible reports of summary executions, forced

It is high time to learn from the past, or we will
be doomed to see the worst of history repeating
itself in Afghanistan. Two decades of progress are
disintegrating on our watch. The Afghan people have
worked too hard and lost too much to see their futures
repeat the past of their mothers, fathers, grandmothers
and grandfathers — generations lost to conflict.
Strong, enduring peace can be built only by
inclusive and representative negotiations. Let us
be clear here today — the future governance of
Afghanistan can have the support and endorsement of
the international community only if it guarantees the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women,
includes minority groups and young people, upholds
human rights and fundamental freedoms and ensures
adherence to the rule of law and accountability, as set
out in resolution 2513 (2020).
In our view, the Council needs to be prepared
to consider further measures from the toolbox at its
disposal as this crisis unfolds. Afghan Minister for
Education Rangina Hamidi spoke in recent hours of her
fear, shared by many Afghan women, that she will be
forced to pay the price for trying to make Afghanistan
a better place and for being active in her society, simply
realizing her rights.
Ireland calls for a clear message today from the
Council. While much, including the political future
of Afghanistan, is currently uncertain, what is clear is
that the failure to fully respect and uphold the rights of
all the people of Afghanistan, in particular the rights
and safety of women and girls, cannot and will not be
accepted. We owe that to the women of Afghanistan
and to all the people of Afghanistan who have kept faith
with the promises of the international community for a
brighter future.

21-225779/13

S/PV.8834

The situation in Afghanistan

Our obligation is to act in solidarity with them all
now in this time of crisis.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico supports the convening of today’s
emergency meeting. I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing on the latest developments in Afghanistan.
I would also like to thank the delegations present in the
Chamber this morning, and I welcome and acknowledge
the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan.
Over the course of the last few weeks, and especially
over this past weekend, the conflict in Afghanistan has
entered a deadlier and more destructive phase. The
Taliban’s advance on major urban centres and now on
Kabul has dramatically changed the power dynamics
and had an extremely worrisome humanitarian impact.
The military offensive makes it clear that a ceasefire
has still not been negotiated, and the casualty figures
for the conflict are the highest ever recorded.
Mexico rejects the use of force and violence. It
emphatically stresses that Afghanistan’s institutional
framework of the country must be respected and that
a process of national reconciliation be sought. The
future of Afghanistan must be decided democratically
by all Afghans.
My country also unequivocally deplores the
deliberate attacks against the civilian population.
Reports of summary executions, intentional targeting of
women, beatings, and media restrictions and censorship
are alarm bells for the international community.
The highest price of the political and military
entrenchment in Afghanistan continues to be paid
by the most vulnerable. The catastrophic trajectory
of violence affects a population that finds itself in
increasingly precarious conditions and with very few
options, especially for women and girls. Humanitarian
personnel, doctors, translators and other international
service providers are also particularly vulnerable at this
time. The massive wave of displacement we are seeing
and the desperation of civilians to flee the country are
symptomatic of this vulnerability.
The military campaign has resulted in a drastic
shift in control over territory and material means. My
country, Mexico, urgently calls on the international
community to evaluate very seriously the transfer of
arms that could be diverted or end up in the wrong
hands. As long as there is proliferation of weapons,
10/13

16/08/2021

the Taliban and other groups will have the means to
consolidate their objectives by force. That is why we
urge that irresponsible transfers not be approved and
that the highest international standards be exercised
to contain the catastrophic impact of the situation
in Afghanistan.
Despite the agreements signed and the existence of
a robust framework of international law on combating
terrorism, we are also concerned that the door is
being opened for Afghanistan to once again become
a safe haven for terrorist groups. Any scenario for
Afghanistan’s future must ensure that this does
not happen.
The international community, and in particular the
Security Council, must present a united front to make it
clear that the present course of action is unacceptable,
that agreed commitments must be respected and that
the path of dialogue and political negotiation must be
favoured. In addition, we call on those in direct dialogue
with the Taliban to express in the strongest terms their
condemnation of attacks on civilians, particularly
women, children and minorities, and to call urgently
for a constructive resumption of negotiations.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We would like to thank the Secretary-General of
the United Nations for his thoughts and views on
the situation in Afghanistan. We would also like to
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Ambassador Ghulam M. Isaczai.
We are closely following the rapidly changing
situation in Afghanistan. As soon as the withdrawal of
foreign forces was announced, we all heard worrying
reports about an uptick in violence and the number of
victims. Furthermore, as we have seen, major Afghan
cities have fallen without much resistance.
Since the previous discussion in the Security
Council (see S/PV.8831), just 10 days have passed.
However, the situation in the country over that time
has changed beyond recognition. Today all our eyes
are on Kabul, which yesterday was quickly abandoned
by the country’s leader, ordinary Afghans as well as
part of the diplomatic corps. It is clear that such a sharp
turnabout took everyone by surprise, including those
who very recently made public pronouncements about
the high degree of military fitness of the Afghan law
enforcement structures that were prepared and trained
over the past 20 years.
21-22577

16/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

Broadly, we are continuing to closely monitor the
situation in the country. Currently, we believe that
there is no point in panicking. The main point is that
a widespread bloodbath among civilians has been
avoided. We urge all Afghan parties to refrain from
hostilities and foster a peaceful settlement.
We believe that the international community must
pursue its efforts to assist Afghanistan in achieving
national reconciliation. The extended troika — Russia,
China, Pakistan and the United States — has been
actively engaged in this effort. We believe that an
important role could be played in this regard by Iran
as well. We will determine our further official steps
in relation to the Taliban depending on the evolving
situation and the Taliban’s specific actions.
According to our reports, the Taliban have
already sought to bring public order and confirmed
security guarantees for civilians and staff members of
foreign diplomatic missions. We trust, in the current
circumstances, that the security of diplomatic staff
and the United Nations presence in Afghanistan will
be guaranteed and that their institutions will enjoy
immunity. Against this backdrop, the Russian Embassy
in Kabul is continuing to operate normally. Still, we
remain concerned by the ongoing terrorist threat in
Afghanistan, including from the Islamic State-Khorasan
Province, whose terrorist activity is likely to spill across
Afghanistan borders and thereby threaten the security
of neighbouring countries in Central Asia.
Terrorism is inextricably linked to the drug problem.
The deteriorating situation in Afghanistan over recent
months has led to a sharply worsening humanitarian
situation. Of concern are the numerous reports of the
number of internally displaced persons and the refugee
flows across the country’s borders, which is creating
an additional burden for neighbouring States, including
Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Iran and Pakistan, not to
mention increasing the risk of fighters infiltrating the
region, inter alia, by pretending to be refugees. We are
in regular contact with all five Central Asian countries,
both bilaterally and through such regional organizations
as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the
Collective Security Treaty Organization.
We still want to see a swift peaceful settlement in
Afghanistan, a subsequent stabilization of the country
and a post-conflict recovery. We are convinced that an
end to the years-long bloody war and the achievement
of national reconciliation would benefit all — the

S/PV. 8834

people of Afghanistan, its regional neighbours and the
world as a whole.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his presence and for his briefing. I also
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan at today’s briefing.
We have followed the situation in Afghanistan,
especially in recent days, with deep concern. The
situation may negatively affect the security and stability
not only of Afghanistan, but also the region, especially
in neighbouring countries. We are particularly
concerned about the high number of civilian casualties
reported over the past few weeks. In that regard, I wish
to highlight the following.
First, the utmost priority now is to protect civilians.
All parties must respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law
and ensure the protection of civilians, particularly
the most vulnerable, including women and children.
The delivery of essential services to the civilian
population must be ensured. The safety and security
of United Nations personnel, humanitarian workers,
foreign nationals and the personnel of international
organizations must be guaranteed.
Secondly, we join others in calling for an end
to violence and the restoration of security and civil
order. We call on all parties in Afghanistan to engage
in dialogue, resolve their differences and promote
national reconciliation, respecting the aspirations of
the Afghan people to long-term peace, stability and the
country’s development.
Thirdly, efforts are urgently needed to prevent
a humanitarian catastrophe in the country. Essential
services for the civilian population must not be
disrupted, including those addressing food insecurity
and the coronavirus disease pandemic. Immediate,
safe and unhindered humanitarian assistance must be
ensured to help Afghan people in need. We call on the
United Nations regional and international partners
to redouble their efforts to meet the aforementioned
priorities, while according special and urgent attention
to the protection of and assistance to the civilian
population during this difficult time.
Last but not least, we would like to commend the
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and stress the importance of ensuring the
security and safety of the Mission.

21-2257711/13

S/PV.8834

The situation in Afghanistan

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General
and thank him for his briefing at today’s meeting. I
listened closely to the statement by the representative
of Afghanistan.
The situation in Afghanistan has undergone
major changes. We respect the will and choices of the
Afghan people. The war in Afghanistan has gone on
for more than 40 years. Ending the war and achieving
peace is not only the collective aspiration of more than
30 million Afghan people; it is also the shared hope
of the international community and the countries of
the region.
Currently, the urgent task at hand is to restore,
peace, stability and order as soon as possible in order
to avoid senseless casualties and a large-scale flow
of refugees to the greatest extent possible. The rights
and interests of diplomatic missions and personnel in
Afghanistan are inviolable. The safety, security and
interests of foreign nationals in Afghanistan must be
respected and guaranteed. It is incumbent upon all
parties in Afghanistan to safeguard people’s lives and
property. They should provide assurances for the safety
of the foreign citizens who remain in the country and
ensure an orderly evacuation of those who decided to
leave.
China has always maintained that a political
solution is the only way out for Afghanistan. Currently,
the national prospects of Afghanistan are at a historic
crossroads. China takes note of the statement made by
the Taliban yesterday that the war in Afghanistan has
ended and that it would negotiate the establishment of
an open, inclusive Islamic Government and responsibly
take action to ensure the safety of Afghan citizens and
foreign missions in the country.
China expects that those commitments will be
fulfilled so as to ensure a smooth transition, curb
terrorism in all its forms and criminal acts, and keep
war and chaos at bay from the Afghan people so that
they can rebuild their beautiful homeland. We hope that
the Taliban will unite all parties and ethnic groups in
Afghanistan to establish a broad and inclusive political
structure commensurate with its national needs in
order to lay the foundation for achieving lasting peace
in the country.
Over the past 20 years, terrorist organizations,
such as the Islamic State, Al-Qaida and the Eastern
Turkistan Islamic Movement, have settled and grown
12/13

16/08/2021

in Afghanistan, posing a serious threat to international
and regional peace and security. Afghanistan must
never again become a haven for terrorists. This is the
bottom line to which any future political solution in
Afghanistan must adhere. We hope that the Taliban will
earnestly deliver on its commitments and make a clean
break with all terrorist organizations.
All countries should uphold their obligations in
accordance with international law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions, work with one another in
combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
and take resolute action to prevent terrorist
organizations, such as the Islamic State, Al-Qaida and
the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement, from taking
advantage of the chaos.
As we speak, the humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan is very dire. Humanitarian assistance and
pandemic prevention and control are under tremendous
pressure. The international community should scale
up humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan and its
neighbouring countries, which have received a large
number of displaced persons from Afghanistan, so
as to help alleviate the regional humanitarian crisis.
The parties concerned should ensure that the work of
international humanitarian relief agencies can continue
unhindered. The international community should also
continue to help Afghanistan and its neighbours control
the pandemic without delay.
The current chaos in Afghanistan is directly
related to the hasty withdrawal of foreign troops. The
countries concerned should deliver on their goodfaith commitment to supporting peace, reconciliation
and reconstruction in Afghanistan and playing a
constructive role in the issue of Afghanistan. Based
on respect for Afghan ownership and the unwavering
efforts of neighbouring countries in the political,
security, development, humanitarian and counternarcotics areas, constructive assistance to Afghanistan
should be provided on a continuing basis.
Several Council members said in their statements
that they would like to see Afghanistan’s neighbours
and countries of the region play a greater role. We
have learned that such countries asked to participate
in today’s meeting. It is regrettable that their requests
were not granted.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan has long played an important role in
supporting the peaceful reconstruction of Afghanistan.
21-22577

16/08/2021

The situation in Afghanistan

Given the current situation on the ground, which is
undergoing major changes, we hope that the SecretaryGeneral will take the appropriate steps to ensure
the safety of the Mission’s personnel. We also look
forward to the Secretary-General’s timely presentation
to the Security Council of practical and actionable
recommendations on the future of the United Nations
presence in Afghanistan.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
Allow me, at the outset, to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General and his very important remarks.
I also welcome the presence of the Permanent
Representative Afghanistan to the United Nations.
The Security Council is meeting for the second
time in a period of 10 days (see S/PV.8831) to discuss
the situation in Afghanistan. In this short period of
time, we have witnessed dramatic changes in the
situation. We have also seen very unfortunate scenes
at the Hamid Karzai International Airport, in Kabul.
There is widespread panic among the people. Women
and children are in distress. Incidents of gunfire have
been reported from the city, including at the airport.
While the security situation remains precarious, a
grave humanitarian crisis is unfolding.
We have heard urgent appeals from all quarters,
including from the Secretary-General. It is time for the
international community, in particular the Council, to
act, ensure an immediate cessation of violence, contain
any possible crisis and mitigate the consequences. As
a neighbour of Afghanistan and a friend of its people,
India is deeply concerned about the current situation
prevailing in the country. Afghan men, women and
children are living in a constant state of fear. They are
uncertain about their future. Everyone is concerned
about the increasing violations of the fundamental
rights of Afghan citizens. Afghans are worried about
whether or not their right to live with dignity will be
respected. There are many unanswered questions.
We hope that the situation stabilizes soon and that
the parties concerned will address the humanitarian
and security issues. We also hope that there will be
an inclusive dispensation that represents all segments
of Afghan society. The voices of Afghan women,
the aspirations of Afghan children and the rights of

S/PV. 8834

minorities must be respected. Broader representation
would help the arrangement gain more acceptability
and legitimacy.
The current situation in Afghanistan has numerous
challenges; however, there are a few opportunities. If
there is zero tolerance for terrorism, in all its forms and
manifestations, and it is ensured that the territory of
Afghanistan is not used by terrorist groups to threaten or
attack any other country, then Afghanistan’s neighbours
and the region would feel safer. The Secretary-General
underlined that unequivocally earlier.
Afghanistan has already seen enough bloodshed
in the past. It is time for the international community
to come together, rising above any partisan interests,
to support the people of Afghanistan in their desire
for peace, stability and security in the country and to
enable all Afghans, including women, children and
minorities, to live in peace and dignity.
India has contributed significantly in recent years
to the development of the country. In that context,
Indian development projects have been undertaken in
critical areas, such as power, water, roads, health care,
education, agriculture and capacity-building. India’s
emphasis has been on the welfare and well-being of
the people of Afghanistan. Before the current crisis
unfolded, India had ongoing development projects in
every one of the 34 provinces of Afghanistan.
As underscored by Council members, we need
to continue to support the robust work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and ensure
the safety of its personnel. We call upon the parties
concerned to maintain law and order, ensure the safety
and security of all involved, including United Nations,
diplomatic and consular personnel, and observe
human rights and international humanitarian law in all
circumstances in Afghanistan.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list of
speakers. I will now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

21-2257713/13
