United Nations

A/RES/64/159

General Assembly

Distr.: General
10 March 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 69 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 18 December 2009
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/64/439/Add.2 (Part II))]

64/159. The right to food
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming all previous resolutions and decisions on the right to food adopted
within the framework of the United Nations,
Recalling the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1 which provides that
everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for her or his health and
well-being, including food, the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger
and Malnutrition 2 and the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 3 in particular
millennium development goal 1 on eradicating extreme poverty and hunger by 2015,
0F

1F

2F

Recalling also the provisions of the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, 4 in which the fundamental right of every person to be
free from hunger is recognized,
3F

Bearing in mind the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World
Food Summit Plan of Action 5 and the Declaration of the World Food Summit: five
years later, adopted in Rome on 13 June 2002, 6
4F

5F

Reaffirming the concrete recommendations contained in the Voluntary
Guidelines to Support the Progressive Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in
the Context of National Food Security, adopted by the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in November 2004, 7
6F

_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
Report of the World Food Conference, Rome, 5–16 November 1974 (United Nations publication, Sales
No. E.75.II.A.3), chap. I.
3
See resolution 55/2.
4
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
5
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit,
13–17 November 1996 (WFS 96/REP), part one, appendix.
6
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the World Food Summit: five years
later, 10–13 June 2002, part one, appendix; see also A/57/499, annex.
7
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the Council of FAO, One Hundred
and Twenty-seventh Session, Rome, 22–27 November 2004 (CL 127/REP), appendix D; see also
E/CN.4/2005/131, annex.
2

09-47137

*0947137*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/159

Reaffirming also that all human rights are universal, indivisible,
interdependent and interrelated, and that they must be treated globally, in a fair and
equal manner, on the same footing and with the same emphasis,
Reaffirming further that a peaceful, stable and enabling political, social and
economic environment, at both the national and the international levels, is the
essential foundation that will enable States to give adequate priority to food security
and poverty eradication,
Reiterating, as in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the
Declaration of the World Food Summit: five years later, that food should not be
used as an instrument of political or economic pressure, and reaffirming in this
regard the importance of international cooperation and solidarity, as well as the
necessity of refraining from unilateral measures that are not in accordance with
international law and the Charter of the United Nations and that endanger food
security,
Convinced that each State must adopt a strategy consistent with its resources
and capacities to achieve its individual goals in implementing the recommendations
contained in the Rome Declaration on World Food Security and the World Food
Summit Plan of Action and, at the same time, cooperate regionally and
internationally in order to organize collective solutions to global issues of food
security in a world of increasingly interlinked institutions, societies and economies
where coordinated efforts and shared responsibilities are essential,
Recognizing that the complex character of the global food crisis, in which the
right to adequate food is threatened to be violated on a massive scale, is a
combination of several major factors, such as the global financial and economic
crisis, environmental degradation, desertification and the impacts of global climate
change, as well as natural disasters and the lack in many countries of the appropriate
technology, investment and capacity-building necessary to confront its impact,
particularly in developing countries, least developed countries and small island
developing States,
Resolved to act to ensure that the human rights perspective is taken into
account at the national, regional and international levels in measures to address the
current global food crisis,
Expressing its deep concern at the number and scale of natural disasters,
diseases and pests and their increasing impact in recent years, which have resulted
in massive loss of life and livelihood and threatened agricultural production and
food security, in particular in developing countries,
Stressing the importance of reversing the continuing decline of official
development assistance devoted to agriculture, both in real terms and as a share of
total official development assistance,
Recognizing the importance of the protection and preservation
agrobiodiversity in guaranteeing food security and the right to food for all,

of

Recognizing also the role of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations as the key United Nations agency for rural and agricultural
development and its work in supporting the efforts of Member States to achieve the
full realization of the right to food, including through its provision of technical
assistance to developing countries in support of the implementation of national
priority frameworks,

2

A/RES/64/159

Taking note of the final Declaration adopted at the International Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development of the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations in Porto Alegre, Brazil, on 10 March 2006, 8
7F

Acknowledging the High-level Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis
established by the Secretary-General, and supporting the Secretary-General in his
continuing efforts in this regard, including continued engagement with Member
States and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the right to food,
Reaffirms that hunger constitutes an outrage and a violation of human
1.
dignity and therefore requires the adoption of urgent measures at the national,
regional and international levels for its elimination;
Also reaffirms the right of everyone to have access to safe, sufficient and
2.
nutritious food, consistent with the right to adequate food and the fundamental right
of everyone to be free from hunger, so as to be able to fully develop and maintain
his or her physical and mental capacities;
Considers it intolerable that, as estimated by the United Nations
3.
Children’s Fund, more than one third of the children who die every year before the
age of 5 do so from hunger-related illness, and that, as estimated by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the number of people who are
undernourished has grown to about 1.02 billion worldwide, including as a result of
the global food crisis, while, according to the latter organization, the planet could
produce enough food to feed everyone around the world;
Expresses its concern that women and girls are disproportionately
4.
affected by hunger, food insecurity and poverty, in part as a result of gender
inequality and discrimination, that in many countries, girls are twice as likely as
boys to die from malnutrition and preventable childhood diseases and that it is
estimated that almost twice as many women as men suffer from malnutrition;
Encourages all States to take action to address gender inequality and
5.
discrimination against women, in particular where it contributes to the malnutrition
of women and girls, including measures to ensure the full and equal realization of
the right to food and ensuring that women have equal access to resources, including
income, land and water and their ownership, as well as full and equal access to
education, science and technology, to enable them to feed themselves and their
families;
Encourages the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the
6.
right to food to continue mainstreaming a gender perspective in the fulfilment of his
mandate, and encourages the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and all other United Nations bodies and mechanisms addressing the right to
food and food insecurity to integrate a gender perspective into their relevant
policies, programmes and activities;
Reaffirms the need to ensure that programmes delivering safe and
7.
nutritious food are inclusive of and accessible to persons with disabilities;

_______________
8

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the International Conference on
Agrarian Reform and Rural Development, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 7–10 March 2006 (C 2006/REP),
appendix G.

3

A/RES/64/159

8.
Encourages all States to take steps with a view to achieving
progressively the full realization of the right to food, including steps to promote the
conditions for everyone to be free from hunger and, as soon as possible, to enjoy
fully the right to food, and to create and adopt national plans to combat hunger;
Recognizes the advances reached through South-South cooperation in
9.
developing countries and regions in connection with food security and the
development of agricultural production for the full realization of the right to food;
10. Stresses that improving access to productive resources and public
investment in rural development are essential for eradicating hunger and poverty, in
particular in developing countries, including through the promotion of investments
in appropriate small-scale irrigation and water management technologies in order to
reduce vulnerability to droughts;
11. Recognizes that 80 per cent of hungry people live in rural areas and
50 per cent are small-scale farm-holders, and that these people are especially
vulnerable to food insecurity, given the increasing cost of inputs and the fall in farm
incomes; that access to land, water, seeds and other natural resources is an
increasing challenge for poor producers; that sustainable and gender-sensitive
agricultural policies are important tools for promoting land and agrarian reform,
rural credit and insurance, technical assistance and other associated measures to
achieve food security and rural development; and that support by States for small
farmers, fishing communities and local enterprises is a key element for food security
and the provision of the right to food;
12. Stresses the importance of fighting hunger in rural areas, including
through national efforts supported by international partnerships to stop
desertification and land degradation and through investments and public policies
that are specifically appropriate to the risk of drylands, and in this regard calls for
the full implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly
in Africa; 9
8F

13. Urges States that have not yet done so to favourably consider becoming
parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity 10 and to consider becoming parties
to the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture 11 as
a matter of priority;
9F

10F

14. Recalls the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples 12 and acknowledges that many indigenous organizations and representatives
of indigenous peoples have expressed in different forums their deep concerns over
the obstacles and challenges they face for the full enjoyment of the right to food,
and calls upon States to take special actions to combat the root causes of the
disproportionately high level of hunger and malnutrition among indigenous peoples
and the continuous discrimination against them;
1F

_______________
9

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
Ibid., vol. 1760, No. 30619.
11
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Report of the Conference of FAO, Thirty-first
Session, Rome, 2–13 November 2001 (C 2001/REP), appendix D.
12
Resolution 61/295, annex.
10

4

A/RES/64/159

15. Notes the need to further examine various concepts such as, inter alia,
“food sovereignty” and their relation with food security and the right to food,
bearing in mind the need to avoid any negative impact on the enjoyment of the right
to food for all people at all times;
16. Requests all States and private actors, as well as international
organizations within their respective mandates, to take fully into account the need to
promote the effective realization of the right to food for all, including in the ongoing
negotiations in different fields;
17. Recognizes the need to strengthen national commitment as well as
international assistance, upon the request of and in cooperation with the affected
countries, towards the full realization and protection of the right to food, and in
particular to develop national protection mechanisms for people forced to leave their
homes and land because of hunger or humanitarian emergencies affecting the
enjoyment of the right to food;
18. Stresses the need to make efforts to mobilize and optimize the allocation
and utilization of technical and financial resources from all sources, including
external debt relief for developing countries, and to reinforce national actions to
implement sustainable food security policies;
19. Calls for the early conclusion and a successful, development-oriented
outcome of the Doha Round of trade negotiations of the World Trade Organization
as a contribution to creating international conditions that permit the full realization
of the right to food;
20. Stresses that all States should make all efforts to ensure that their
international policies of a political and economic nature, including international
trade agreements, do not have a negative impact on the right to food in other
countries;
21. Recalls the importance of the New York Declaration on Action against
Hunger and Poverty, and recommends the continuation of efforts aimed at
identifying additional sources of financing for the fight against hunger and poverty;
22. Recognizes that the promises made at the World Food Summit in 1996 to
halve the number of persons who are undernourished are not being fulfilled, while
recognizing the efforts of Member States in this regard, and invites once again all
international financial and development institutions, as well as the relevant United
Nations agencies and funds, to give priority to and provide the necessary funding to
realize the aim of halving by 2015 the proportion of people who suffer from hunger,
as well as the right to food as set out in the Rome Declaration on World Food
Security5 and the United Nations Millennium Declaration;3
0H

1H

23. Reaffirms that integrating food and nutritional support, with the goal that
all people at all times will have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet
their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life, is part of a
comprehensive effort to improve public health, including the response to the spread
of HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other communicable diseases;
24. Urges States to give adequate priority in their development strategies and
expenditures to the realization of the right to food;
25. Stresses the importance of international cooperation and development
assistance as an effective contribution both to the expansion and improvement of
agriculture and its environmental sustainability, food production, breeding projects
on diversity of crops and livestock, and institutional innovations such as community
5

A/RES/64/159

seed banks, farmer field schools and seed fairs, and to the provision of humanitarian
food assistance in activities related to emergency situations, for the realization of
the right to food and the achievement of sustainable food security, while recognizing
that each country has the primary responsibility for ensuring the implementation of
national programmes and strategies in this regard;
26. Also stresses that States parties to the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights 13 should consider
implementing that agreement in a manner supportive of food security, while mindful
of the obligation of Member States to promote and protect the right to food;
12F

27. Calls upon Member States, the United Nations system and other relevant
stakeholders to support national efforts aimed at responding rapidly to the food
crises currently occurring across Africa, and expresses its deep concern that funding
shortfalls are forcing the World Food Programme to cut operations across different
regions, including Southern Africa;
28. Invites all relevant international organizations, including the World Bank
and the International Monetary Fund, to continue to promote policies and projects
that have a positive impact on the right to food, to ensure that partners respect the
right to food in the implementation of common projects, to support strategies of
Member States aimed at the fulfilment of the right to food and to avoid any actions
that could have a negative impact on the realization of the right to food;
29. Takes note with appreciation of the interim report of the Special
Rapporteur; 14
13F

30. Supports the realization of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur, as
extended by the Human Rights Council in its resolution 6/2 of 27 September 2007; 15
14F

31. Requests the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to provide all the human and financial resources
necessary for the effective fulfilment of the mandate of the Special Rapporteur;
32. Welcomes the work already done by the Committee on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights in promoting the right to adequate food, in particular its General
Comment No. 12 (1999) on the right to adequate food (article 11 of the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), 16 in which the Committee
affirmed, inter alia, that the right to adequate food is indivisibly linked to the
inherent dignity of the human person and is indispensable for the fulfilment of other
human rights enshrined in the International Bill of Human Rights, and is also
inseparable from social justice, requiring the adoption of appropriate economic,
environmental and social policies, at both the national and the international levels,
oriented to the eradication of poverty and the fulfilment of all human rights for all;
15F

33. Recalls General Comment No. 15 (2002) of the Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights on the right to water (articles 11 and 12 of the
_______________
13

See Legal Instruments Embodying the Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
done at Marrakesh on 15 April 1994 (GATT secretariat publication, Sales No. GATT/1994–7).
14
See A/64/170.
15
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. I,
sect. A.
16
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2000, Supplement No. 2 and corrigendum
(E/2000/22 and Corr.1), annex V.

6

A/RES/64/159

Covenant), 17 in which the Committee noted, inter alia, the importance of ensuring
sustainable water resources for human consumption and agriculture in realization of
the right to adequate food;
16F

34. Reaffirms that the Voluntary Guidelines to Support the Progressive
Realization of the Right to Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security,
adopted by the Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations in November 2004,7 represent a practical tool to promote the realization of
the right to food for all, contribute to the achievement of food security and thus
provide an additional instrument in the attainment of internationally agreed
development goals, including those contained in the Millennium Declaration;
2H

35. Welcomes the continued cooperation of the High Commissioner, the
Committee and the Special Rapporteur, and encourages them to continue their
cooperation in this regard;
36. Calls upon all Governments to cooperate with and assist the Special
Rapporteur in his task, to supply all necessary information requested by him and to
give serious consideration to responding favourably to the requests of the Special
Rapporteur to visit their countries to enable him to fulfil his mandate more
effectively;
37. Requests the Special Rapporteur to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session on the implementation of the present
resolution and to continue his work, including by examining the emerging issues
with regard to the realization of the right to food within his existing mandate;
38. Invites Governments, relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes, treaty bodies, civil society actors and non-governmental organizations,
as well as the private sector, to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur in the
fulfilment of his mandate, inter alia, through the submission of comments and
suggestions on ways and means of realizing the right to food;
39. Decides to continue the consideration of the question at its sixty-fifth
session under the item entitled “Promotion and protection of human rights”.
65th plenary meeting
18 December 2009

_______________
17

Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 2 (E/2003/22), annex IV.

7
