186

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

measures towards the full and speedy implementation
of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly, deplores in particular the fact
that those agencies continue to rnaintain co-operation
with the colonialist racist minority régime of South
Africa and urges the executive heads of those agenci@s
to draw the particular attention of their governing organs to the present resolution with a view to formulating specific programmes beneficia! to the peoples of
the colonial Territories, particularly Zimbabwe and
Namibia;
6. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to render
or continue to render, as a matter of urgency, all
possible moral and material assistance to the colonial
peoples in Africa struggling for their liberation from
colonial rule;
7. Requests once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
to continue to provide all moral and material assistance
to the newly independent and emerging States;
8. Recommends that the organizations concerned
should initiate or broaden contacts with the colonial
peoples in consultation with the Organization of African Unity, review their procedures with respect to
the formulation and preparation of assistance programmes and projects and introduce greater flexibility
in those procedures so as to be able to extend the
necessary assistance without delay to help the colonial
peoples and their national liberation movements in
their struggle to exercise their inalienable right to selfdetermination and independence in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV);
9. Urges those specialized agencies and organizations within the United Nations system which have
not already done so to include in the agenda of the
regular meetings of their governing bodies a separate
item on the progress made by those organizations in
the implementation of the Declaration and other relevant resolutions of the United Nations;
10. Urges once again the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system,
in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, to take ali
necessary measures to withhold any financia!, economic, technical or other assistance from the Government of South Africa and the illegal régime in Southern Rhodesia, to discontinue all support to them until
they restare to the peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe
their inalienable right to self-determination and independence and to refrain from taking any action which
might imply recognition of, or support for, the legitimacy of the domination of the Territories by those
régimes;
11. Notes with satisfaction the arrangements rnade
by severa! specialized agencies and organizations within
the United Nations system which enable representatives
of the national liberation movements recognized by
the Organization of African Unity to participate fully
as observers in the proceedings relating to matters
concerning their respective countries, and calls upon
those agencies and organizations which have not yet
done so to follow this example and to make the necessary arrangements without delay;

12. Recommends that ali Governments should intensify their efforts in the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
of which they are members to ensure the full and effective implementation of the Declaration and other
relevant resolutions of the United Nations and, in that
connexion, should accord priority to the question of
providing assistance on an emergency basis to peoples
in the colonial Territories and to their national liberation movements;
13. Urges the executive heads of the specialized
agencies and other organizations within the United
Nations system, having regard to the recommendations
contained in paragraph 8 above, to formulate with the
active co-operation of the Organization of African
Unity and to submit, as a matter of priority, to their
governing and legislative organs concrete proposals for
the full implementation of the relevant United Nations
decisions, in particular specific programmes of assistance to the peoples in the colonial Territories and
their national liberation movements;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
assist the specialized agencies and other organizations
within the United Nations system in working out appropriate measures for implementing the present resolution and to prepare for submission to the relevant
bodies, with the assistance of those agencies and other
organizations, a report on the action taken since the
circulation of bis previous report in implementation of
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including the present resolution;
15. Requests the Economic and Social Council to
continue to consider, in consultation with the Special
Committee, appropriate measures for co-ordination of
the policies and activities of the specialized agencies
and other organizations within the United N ations system in implementing the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly;
16. Requests the Special Committee to continue
to examine this question and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session.
82nd plenary meeting
13 December 1978

33/42.

United Nations Educational and Training
Programme for Southern Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions on the United Nations Educational and Training Programme for Southern Africa,
in particular resolution 32/37 of 28 November 1977,
Recalling furtlzer its resolution 32/119 of 16 December 1977 on assistance to South African student
refugees,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the Programme for 1977 /78, 69
Taking note with satisfaction of the substantial increase in contributions to the Programme in 1978 and
69 A/33/297

and Corr.1.

VII,

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

the consequent increase in the number of awards
granted for 1978/79,
Recognizing that, because of the continuing influx
of student refugees from southern Africa into neighbouring States and the continued rise in the cost of
educational and training awards, additional funds are
essential if the Programme is to continue in operation
at a satisfactory leve!,
Reaffirming that the Programme has been a significant and worthwhile effort of the intemational community to assist the people of southern Africa and
that its continuation and expansion during this critica!
period are essential,
l. Expresses its appreciation to all those who have
made voluntary contributions to the United Nations
Educational and Training Programme for Southern
Africa;
2. Commends the Secretary-General and the Advisory Committee on the United Nations Educational
and Training Programme for Southem Africa for the
work they have accomplished in strengthening and expanding the Programme;
3. Appeals once again to all States, organizations
and individuals to make generous contributions to the
Programme in arder to ensure its continuation and
expansion;

4. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Advisory Committee, to arrange for an evaluation of the Programme in the light of developments in
southern Africa since the last evaluation in 1975;70
5. Decides to enlarge the composition of the Advisory Committee by the addition of up to six members,
on the basis of consultations by the Secretary-General
with regional groups. 71

82nd plenary meeting
13 December 1978
70 See A/10331, paras. 25-28.

7 1 The

composition of the Advisory Committee will be
announced subsequently.

33/43.

187

Offers by Memher States of study and
training facilities for inhahitants of Non•
Self-Governing Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/38 of 28 November 1977,
H aving examined the report of the Secretary-General
on offers by Member States of study and training facilities for inhabitants of Non-Self-Goveming Territories,72 prepared under General Assembly resolution 845 (IX) of 22 November 1954,
Bearing in mind the continued need to provide educational and training facilities at all levels for the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Goveming Territories,
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made scholarships available to the
inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories;
3. Invites all States to make or continue to make
generous offers of study and training facilities to
the inhabitants of Non-Self-Governing Territories, particularly those in southem Africa, and, whenever possible, to provide travel funds to prospective students;
4. Requests the administering Powers to ensure the
widespread and continuous dissemination in the Territories under their administration of information relating to offers of study and training facilities made
by States and to provide all the necessary facilities to
enable students to avail themselves of such offers;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
6. Draws the attention of the Special Committee
on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples to the present resoIution.
82nd p/enary meeting
13 December 1978
72 A/33/372.
