General Assembly--Thirty-sixth Session

184

----- -------··-•--"---------·------.

I 0. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly, from the thirty-eighth session on. a biennial progress report bringing up to date the study on international conditions and human rights;
11 . Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled ··Alternative approaches and ways and means within the United Nations
system for improving the effective enjoyment of human
rights and fundamental freedoms'·.
97th plenm:v meeting
14 December 19/il

36/134.

National institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/123 of I 6 December 1977.
33/46 of 14 December I 978 and 34/49 of 23 November
1979 concerning national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights,
Mindful of the guidelines on the structure and functioning
of national and local institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights, endorsed by the General Assembly
in its resolution 33/46,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights, 115
Mindful also of the need to create conditions, at the national and international levels, for the promotion and protection of the human rights of individuals and peoples,
Emphasizing the importance of the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights, 116 the International Covenants on Human
Rights 117 and other international human rights instruments
for promoting respect for and observance of human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
Reiterating its conviction that all human rights and fundamental freedoms are indivisible and interdependent, and
that equal attention and urgent consideration should be given
to the implementation, promotion and protection of both
civil and political rights, and economic, social and cultural
rights,
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights and the
Economic and Social Council have been giving attention
to the development of public information activities in the
field of human rights,
1. Invites all Member States to take appropriate step~
for the establishment or, where they already exist. the
strengthening of national institutions for the promotion and
protection of human rights;
2. Emphasizes the importance of the integrity and independence of such national institutions, in accordance with
national legislation;
3. Draws attention to the constructive role that national
non-governmental organizations can play in the work of
national institutions;
4.. Inv_ites all Member States to take appropriate steps
to d1ssemmate the texts of human rights instruments. including international covenants and conventions, in their
respective national or local languages in order to give the
widest possible publicity to these instruments;
5. Recommends that all Member States should consiue1
including material relevant to a comprehensive understanding of human rights issues in their educational curriculum:
115

6. Recommends that all Member States should take appropriate steps to encourage the exchange of experience in
the establishment of national institutions for the promotion
and protection of human rights; '
7. Requests the Secretary-General. in carrying out public information activities in the field of human rights, to
give due attention to the role of national institutions and
non-governmental organizations concerned with the promotion and protection of human rights;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all necessary assistance to Member States, upon their request, in
the implementation of paragraph 4 above, high priority
being accorded to the needs of developing countries;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session a report providing
detailed information on the various types of national institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights,
taking into account differing social and legal systems and
the contribution that national institutions can make towards
the implementation of the international human rights
instruments:
I0. Recommends that Member States should bring the
present resolution to the attention of representatives of their
national institutions;
11 . Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-eighth session a subitem entitled "National institutions for the promotion and protection of human rights''.
97th plenary meeting
14 December /98/

36/135.

Alternative approaches and ways and means
in the United Nations system for improving the
effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/175 of 15 December 1980, in
which it decided to consider at its thirty-sixth session the
question of the establishment of a post of United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights under the item entitled '' Alternative approaches and ways and means within
the United Nations system for improving the effective enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms",
Having considered the report of the Commission on Human Rights on its thirty-seventh session, 118
Noting that the Commission on Human Rights informed
the General Assembly that it had not been able to reach a
decision at its thirty-seventh session on the desirability of
the establishment of a post of United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Noting also that the Commission on Human Rights has
been seized of this question since its thirty-fourth session
under the item entitled "Further promotion and encouragement of human rights and fundamental freedoms, including
the question of the programme and methods of work of the
Commission: alternative approaches and ways and means
within the United Nations system for improving the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms".
I . Requests the Commission on Human Rights at its
thirty-eighth session to consider this question with the attention it deserves;
2. F.urther requests the Commission on Human Rights
lo ~ubm1t a report on its deliberations and their results to

A/36/440.

116

Resolution 217 A (Ill).
117
Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex

'" Official Records u/ the Economic and Social Council, 19/i/, Sup11le111t'l1t No. 5 (E/1981/!'i and Corr. I).
