General Auembly-Fourteenth Senion

10

Council, and commends the Governing Council on the
first year of its work ;
2. Commends the Managing Director of the Special
Fund on the successful beginning of the operations of
the Fund;
3. Notes the increase in the total of contributions
announced on 8 October 1959 at the United Nations
Pledging Conference on the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance and the Special Fund;
4. Expresses iJs confidence that the Managing Director, from the outset of the operations of the Special
Fund, in conformity with all the provisions related to
voluntary contributions and to the use of resources
embodied in General Assembly resolution 1240 (XIII),
will endeavour to make the fullest possible use of all
resources available to the Fund;
5. Calls upon States Members of the United Nations
or members of any of the specialized agencies or of the
International Atomic Energy Agency so to contribute
to the Special Fund that it rapidly attains resources
sufficient to enable it to undertake and execute on a
sustained basis the tasks laid upon it in the founding
resolutions 1219 (XII) and 1240 (XIII).
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959 .

1383 (XIV). Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance
A

The General Assembly,
Taking note of chapter Ill, section XII, of the report
of the Economic and Social Council,2
Recalling General Assembly resolution 1255 A
(XIII) of 14 November 1958 and Economic and Social
Council resolutions 222 (IX) of 14 and IS August
1949, 542 B II (XVIII) of 29 July 1954, 734
(XXVIII), 735 (XXVIII), 736 (XXVIII) and
737 (XXVIII) of 30 July 1959,
Bearing in mind that the year 1959 marks the tenth
anniversary of the establishment of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance,
Believing that the Expanded Programme has an important and urgent role to play in the United Nations
efforts for the economic and social development of
under-developed countries,
Noting with satisfaction the results achieved by the
Expanded Programme during its first ten years,
Noting that, in order to ensure more ample and effective results in the future, it would be desirable to obtain
larger contributions from the participating countries,
Believing that industrialization and agricultural development are among the most important aims of the
under-developed countries, and that countries in this
process of development need increasing technical
assistance,
Noting with appreciation that, at the United Nations
Pledging Conference on the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance and the Special Fund on 8 Octoher
1959, a number of countries expressed their intention
of increasing their contributions for 1960.
Regretting however that the resource~ at present
envisaged for 1960 are not sufficient even to maintain
the present level of operations,
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourteenth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/4143).

Commends the Executive Chairman and the members of the Technical Assistance Board for the effective
manner in which the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance is being executed ;
2. Takes note of the appraisal made by the Economic
and Social Council and its Technical Assistance Committee, together with the Technical Assistance Board
and the participating organizations, of administrative
arrangements which have the purpose of achieving increased efficiency in the operations of the Expanded
Programme;
3. Notes also the decision taken by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 735 (XXVIII) to
provide greater flexibility and longer range planning
in country programming procedures;
4. Affirms the desirability of continuing to endeavour
to make the fullest possible use of all available contributions consistent with the existing principles and
procedures of the Expanded Programme;
5. Expresses the hope that Governments will, in
accordance with their financial possibilities, continue
to support the Expanded Programme and so contribute
to the Programme that increasing resources will be
available:
(a) For undertaking and executing on a sustained
basis the tasks laid upon the Programme;
( b) For devoting urgent attention to the compelling
rn:ecb of newly independent countries and countries in
a similar economic and social condition without prejudice to the possibility of further assistance to other
under-developed countries.
841 st plenary meeting,
20 N 01•embcr 7059.

B
The General Assembly,
Noting that the technical assistance programmes of
the United Nations after ten years of operation have
become, thanks to the constantly increasing number of
countries actively participating in their execution, programmes of international technical co-operation,
1.. Canswers that, in the present circumstances, the
term "technical co-operation" would more accurately
describe the nature of the assistance provided by the
United Nations and the specialized agencies under the
technical assistance programmes;
2. Expresses the wish that the term "technical
assistance" may be replaced by the term "technical
co-operation" to designate both the United Nations
regular programme of technical assistance and the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, and requests the Economic and Social Council to consider the
possibility of such a change and to report thereon to
the C;eneral Assemhly at its fifteenth session.
841st pletmry meeting,
20 November 1959.
1384 (XIV). United Nations regular programme
of technical assistance
Thr (;cneral Assembly,
llaving considered chapter Ilf, section X, of the
report of the Economic and Social Council, 2
Rcralling its resol11tio11 200 (III) of 4 December
]()48.
