General Assemhly-Twenty-sixth Session

28
ARTICLE XXV

Any State Party to this Convention may propose amendments to this Convention. Amendments shall enter into force
for each State Party to the Convention accepting the amendments upon their acceptance by a majority of the States Parties
to the Convention and thereafter for each remaining State
Party to the Convention on the date of acceptance by it.
ARTICLE

XXVI

Ten years after the entry into force of this Convention, the
question of the review of this Convention shall be included
in the provisional agenda of the United Nations General
Assembly in order to consider, in the light of past application
of the Convention, whether it requires revision. However, at
any time after the Convention bas been in force for five
years, and at the request of one third of the States Parties
to the Convention, and with the concurrence of the majority
of the States Parties, a conference of the States Parties shall
be convened to review this Convention.
ARTICLE XXVII

Any State Party to this Convention may give notice of its
withdrawal from the Convention one year after its entry into
force by written notification to the Depositary Governments.
Such withdrawal shall take effect one year from the date of
receipt of this notification.
ARTICLE XXVIII

~is Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French,
Russrnn and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall be deposited in the archives of the Depositary Governments. Duly
certifit:d copies of this Convention shall be transmitted by the
Depos1tary Governments to the Governments of the signatory
and acceding States.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, duly authorized, have
signed this Convention.
DONE in triplicate, at the cities of London, Moscow and
Washington, this
.... day of . . . .
. . , one thousand
nine hundred and .............. .

2778 (XXVI). Convening of the Working Group
on Remote Sensing of the Earth by Satellites

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2733 C (XXV) of 16 December 1970 in which it requested the Scientific and
Technical Sub-Committee of the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, as authorized by the
Committee, to determine at what time and in what
specific frame of reference a working group on earth
resources surveying, with special reference to satellites,
should be convened,
W elcoming the decision of the Sub-Committee at its
eighth session to establish and convene a Working
Group on Remote Sensing of the Earth by Satellites,
Sharing the view expressed by the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space in the report on its
fourteenth session that the potential benefits from
technological developments in remote sensing of the
~arth from space platf?rms could be extremely meanmgful for the econorruc development of all countries
especially the developing countries, and for the preser~
vation of the global environment, 5
Noting that the Working Group on Remote Sensing
of the Earth by Satellites held a first organizational
meeting in connexion with the fourteenth session of
the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,
11 Ibid., para. 10.

Looking forward to the early initiation of the substantive work of the Working Group, keeping in mind
that experiments to test the feasibility of remote sensing
of the earth from space platforms are scheduled to
begin early in 1972,
Expressing confidence that in discharging its responsibility the Working Group would seek to promote the
optimum utilization of this space application for the
benefit of individual States and of the international
community,
1. Requests Member States to submit information
on their national and co-operative international
activities in this field, as well as comments and working papers, through the Secretary-General to the Working Group on Remote Sensing of the Earth by Satellites;
2. Endorses the request of the Scientific and Technic~l Sub-Committee that the Working Group solicit the
v~e~s of appr~riate United Nations bodies and speciahzed agenc1es, and other relevant international
organizations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Working Group with his comments on this subject and
to submit working papers on matters falling within the
terms of reference of the Group;
4. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space and its Scientific and Technical SubCommittee to bring about the early initiation of the
Working Group's substantive work and to keep the
General Assembly informed in a comprehensive fashion
on the progress of its work.
1998th plenmy meeting,
29 November 1971.
2779 (XXVI). Preparation of an international
treaty concerning the Moon

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2222 (XXI) of 19 December 1966 stressing the importance of international cooperatio~ in the field of activities in the peaceful
exploration and use of outer space, including the Moon
and other celestial bodies, and the importance of
developing the rule of law in this new area of human
endeavour,
Reaffirming the common interest of ail mankind in
furthering the peaceful exploration and use of outer
space for t~e benefit o! ail States and for the development of fnendly relations and mutual understanding
among them,
Taking into account the advances made in recent
years _in the exploration of outer space, including those
resultmg from extensive lunar research programmes
on the basis of modern science and technology,
Bearing in mind the interest of all mankind in the
exploration and utilization of the Moon exclusively
for peaceful purposes and in preventing the Moon from
becoming a scene of international conflict
Prompted by the consideration that the' Moon as the
only natural _satellite of the earth, has an important
~ole to play m the conquest of outer space and that
1t should be used with due regard to the interests of
present and future generations,
f!esiring. to further the elaboration of specific rules
of mternat10nal law to govern the activities of States
on the Moon on the basis of the Charter of the
United ~~t_ions and the !reaty on Principles Goveming
the Act1v1tles of States m the Exploration and Use of
