S/2007/647*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 November 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 31 October 2007 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Timor-Leste from 24 to 30 November 2007. They have
agreed on the terms of reference of the mission (see annex).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo (South Africa — Head of Mission)
Ambassador Liu Zhenmin (China)
Mr. Luc Joseph Okio (Congo)
Mr. Muhammad Anshor (Indonesia)
Ms. Diana Eloeva (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Peter Burian (Slovakia)
Ambassador Jackie Wolcott (United States of America)
I should be grateful if you would have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Leslie K. Christian
President of the Security Council
*

__________________

* Reissued for technical reasons.

07-58147* (E) 061107

*0758147*

S/2007/647

Annex
Security Council mission to Timor-Leste: terms of reference
1.
To reaffirm the Security Council’s commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of Timor-Leste and the
promotion of long-term stability in the country.
2.
To commend the people of Timor-Leste for their successful elections and
efforts aimed at consolidating peace and democracy in their country.
3.
To encourage the Government, the Parliament, the political parties and the
people of Timor-Leste to continue to work together and engage in political dialogue
and consolidate peace, democracy, the rule of law, security sector reform,
sustainable social and economic development and national reconciliation in the
country.
4.
To reaffirm the commitment of the Security Council to assist the Timorese
people to consolidate peace, democratic governance and the rule of law, in the
post-electoral period in Timor-Leste, to support and encourage efforts to ensure
accountability and justice and implementation of United Nations recommendations
in that regard, and to stress that the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) set out in Security Council resolution 1745 (2007)
constitutes a significant contribution by the United Nations to this endeavour.
5.
To express the Security Council’s full support for UNMIT and for the United
Nations presence in Timor-Leste, and to assess the progress made on the ground in
the implementation of the mandate of UNMIT.
6.
To discuss and exchange views with the Timorese authorities on ways and
means to assist the country in developing capacities necessary to build on security
and democratic and other gains achieved thus far.
7.
To underscore the long-term commitment of the international community to
stabilization and development in Timor-Leste, and the need for continuing support
of bilateral and international partners to Timorese efforts towards self-reliance.

2

07-58147
