66

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

ticular thi; United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, to make all necessary efforts to
ensure that the mid-term review and appraisal is prepared and carried out in a co-ordinated and comprehensive manner covering all sectors of economic and
social development, and to co-operate with the Secretary-General and with the Economic and Social Council
in the review of the machinery for over-all review and
appraisal, as mentioned in paragraph 3 above;
6. Requests the regional economic commissions to
continue and intensify their efforts, in conformity with
paragraph 81 of the International Development Strategy, in the preparation and carrying out of the midterm review and apprai,sal at the regional leve!;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
in particular with the United Nations Development
Programme and the regional economic commissions, to
take all possible steps to increase the assistance which
developing countries may need and request for strengthening their planning and evaluation machinery and procedures, which would also facilitate the mid-term review and appraisal at the country level;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to intensify and
stimulate efforts to mohilize public opinion in all countries, in particular the developed countries, in support
of the objectives and policies for the Second United Nations Development Decade in the interest of the world
community as a whole.
2204th plenary meeting
17 December 1973
3179 (XXVIII). Quantification of scientific ami
technological activities related to development

The General Assembly,
Recalling the recommendation contained in chapter
IX of the report of the Committee on Science and Technology for Development on its first session 85 for the
revision of paragraphs 60, 61 and 63 of the International Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Development Decade, 86 and the decision adopted
on the subject by the Economic and Social Council at
its fifty-fifth session, 87
Recalling f urther that in paragraph 63 of the International Development Strategy the General Assembly
specifically recommended that, at the time of th~ first
biennial review, consideration be given to the settmg of
quantitative targC;?ts for direct su1:port by ?ev:loped
countries of the efforts of developmg countnes m the
field of science and technology, in terms of a percentage
of both the gross national product of the developed
countries and their own research and development programmes,
Considering the importance of defining targets for the
effective implementation of assistance programmes in
the field of science and technology on levels compatible
with the devclopment requirements of the developing
countries during thc Second United Nations Development Decade,
85 Of]icwl Records uf the Economzc and Social Council,
Fifty-f1fth Session, Supplement No. 4 (E/5272 and Add.1/
Rev.l and E/5272/Add.2), para. 120.
86 Resolution 2626 (XXV).
87 Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 1 (E/5400), p. 16.

Bearing in mind that the Intergovernmental Group
of Experts on the Quantification of Scientific and _Technological Activities related to Development, owmg ~o
its late convening, was not able to produce its report m
time for consideration by the Economic and Social
Council at its fifty-fifth session and by the General
Assembly at its twcnty-eighth session,
1. Decides to request the Economic and Social
Council to instruct the Committee on Science and Technology for Development to give priority at its second
session to the consideration of the subject of quantitative
targets in the field of science and technology to enable
the Council to consider the subject at its fifty-seventh
session and to report thereon to the General Assembly
at its twenty-ninth session;
2. Further decides to include in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-ninth session an ítem entitled
"Quantification of scientific and technological activities
related to development, including the definition of the
quantitative targets contemplated in paragraph 63 of the
International Development Strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decade".
2204th plenary meeting
17 December 1973
3180 (XXVIII). World Food Conference

The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the principal task of a world food
conference, on which the greatest effort should be concentrated, consists in developing ways and means
whereby the international community as a whole could
take specific action to resolve the world food problem
within the broader context of development and international economic co-operation,
Believing that a world food conference would provide
members with a forum in which to bring about the improvement of world food security and emergency
assistance,
Recognizing that the conference should, in the first
instance, place emphasis on additional measures for
increasing the food production, consumption and trade
of developing countries,
Reca!ling that the Fourth Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Algiers from 5 to 9 September 1973, called for the
convening, as a matter of urgency, of a conference on
food problems at the ministerial leve!, sponsored
jointly by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
Unitcd Nations and the Unitcd Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, 88 and further recalling the
proposal of the United Statcs of America for the convocation of a world food conference; under the auspices
of the United Nations, 89
1. Decides to convene a World Food Conference
under thc auspices of the United Nations for about
two weeks, in November 1974, in Rome;
2. Recommends that the Conference be an intergovernmental conference at the ministerial level;
3. Entrusts the Economic and S,JCial Council with
ovcr-all rcsponsibility for the Confcrence;
88 A/9330 and Corr.l, p. 99.
89 See O/]icial Records of the

General Assembly, Twentyeighth Session. Annexes. agenda i,tem 105, document A/9194.

Resolutions adopted on the reporl8 of the Seeond Committee

bodies of other organizations in the United Nations
system concerning the goals and objectives of the Conference, as requested by the Economic and Social
Council in its decision of 18 October 1973 ;90
6. Invites all the competent organizations of the
United Nations system to collaborate closely in the
organization of the Conference;
7. Accepts with appreciation the invitation of the
Government of ltaly to act as host to the Conference in
Rome.
2204th plenary meeting
17 December 1973

4. Requests the Secretary-General, after consultation with the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, to appoint as soon as possible
a Secretary-General of the Conference and to set up a
small Conference secretariat drawing particularly upon
the expertise and competence of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development and
other relevant bodies of the United Nations system;
5. Recommends that, in preparing for the World
Food Conference, proper account be taken of the recommendations of the seventeenth Conference of the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and of the recommendations made by legislative

*

67

oo See o,_
Resumed F.
Add.1), p. 3.

•

:cords of the Economic and Social Council,
,h Session, Supplement No. IA (E/5400/

*

Other decisions
Report of the Economic and Social Council
(ltem 12)

At its 2203rd plenary meeting, on 17 DeceTllber 1973, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Second Committee: 91
(a) Decided to defer until its twenty-ninth session further consideration of
the draft resolution entitled "Measures to improve the organization of the work
of the Council", recommended by the Econornic and Social Council in its resolution 1622 (LI) of 30 July 1971, and the amendments submitted thereto during
the consideration of the draft resolution by the Second Committee, 92 with a view
to taking a decision at that session;
( b) Decided, in view of the request for triennial reports from the Protein
Advisory Group, contained in paragraph 2 of Economic and Social Council resolution 1728 A (LIII) of 28 July 1972, that separate reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the progress being made towards the solution of the protein problem,
as requested in paragraph 6 of its resolution 2416 (XXIII) of 17 December 1968,
should no longer be required, on the understanding that the present decision would
not preclude the Secretary-General from issuing a covering note to those triennial
reports incorporating a statement on the protein problem, so as to permit him to
highlight his particular concems in a distinctive manner;

(e) Decided to defer until its twenty-ninth session consideration of the question of the outflow of trained personnel from the developing to the developed
countries, following examination of that question by the Committee on Science
and Technology for Development at its second session;
(d) Took note of the World Plan of Action for the Applicatinn of Science
and T echnology to Development 93 as a means of strengthening the scientific and
technological components in international co-operation and in nationa:l development plans;
(e) Took note of the report on the economic and social consequences of
disarmament94 prepared by the Secretary-General in pursuance of General Assembly
resolutions 2685 (XXV) of 11 December 1970 and 2171 (XXI) of 6 December
1966;
(f) Took note of the report on the problem of mass poverty and unemployment in developing countries95 prepared by the Secretary-General in pursuance
of General Assembly resolution 3018 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972.
9 1 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth Session, Annexes, agenda
ítem 12, document A/9400, para. 64.
92 See A/C.2/280.
93 United Nations publication, S? 1es No.: E.71.11.A.18.
94 E/5243 and Add.1/Rev.l.
95 E/5343 and Corr.1 and E/5343/Add.l.
