VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

damental freedoms without distinction of any kind,
including any distinction as to sex,
Affirming that women and men should, on a basis of
equality, participate in and contribute to the social,
economic and political processes of development and
should share equally in improved conditions of life,
Recalling its resolution 34/180 of 18 December 1979,
by which it adopted the Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against Women,
Recalling also resolution 28 adopted on 30 July I 980
by the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women,8 5
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General on
the status of the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women/"
I. Expresses its great satisfaction that, since the
adoption by the General Assembly in December 1979
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women, seventy-nine Member
States have signed the Convention;
2. Notes with appreciation, in particular, that nine
Member States have acceded to or ratified the Convention;
3. Invites all States which have not yet done so to
become parties to the Convention by signing and ratifying or acceding to it;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session a report on
the status of the Convention.

92nd plenary meeting
11 December 1980

35/170.

in the Protection of Human Rights, organized by the
United Nations and held at The Hague from 14 to
25 April 1980,° 0
Recognizing that a number of Member States already
have legal provisions and safeguards which reflect the
principles of the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials,
I. Calls upon all States:
(a) To consider favourably the use of the Code· of
Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials within the
framework of national legislation and practice or directives governing law enforcement agencies;
(b) To make the text of the Code of Conduct available to all law enforcement officials in their own
language;
(c) To instruct, in basic training programmes and in
all subsequent training and refresher courses, law enforcement officiali; in the provisions of the national
legislations which are connected with the Code of Conduct and other basic texts on human rights;
2. Invites Governments in all regions of the world to
consider measures to promote the application of the
Code of Conduct, including the organization of symposia on the role of law enforcement officials in the
protection of human rights;
3. Invites the Committee on Crime Prevention and
Control to study the application of the Code of Conduct on the basis of the information received from
Member States, taking into account the recommendations of the national symposia on the role of law
enforcement officials in the protection of human rights,
and to include the outcome of its considerations in its
regular report to the Economic and Social Council.

96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980

Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials

The General Assembly,
Aware of the prominent role that law enforcement officials have to play in the protection of human rights, in
particular the right to life, liberty and security of person,
and in the prevention and suppression of torture or
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment, laid down in articles 3 and 5 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 87
Recalling its resolution 34/169 of 17 December 1979,
in which it adopted the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials,
Recalling also resolution 12 adopted on 5 September
I 980 by the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, 88
Noting the Declaration on the Protection of All Persons from Being Subjected to Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, 84
which in article 5 provides, inter alia, for the duty of
States to include the prohibition against torture in the
training of competent officials,
Noting with interest the conclusions and recommendations of the Symposium on the Role of the Police
"See Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 July
1980 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.80.IV.3 and corrigendum), chap. I, sect. B.
"A/35/428.
"Resolution 217 A (Ill).
"See A/CONF.87/14/Rev.l, part one, chap. I, sect. B.
"Resolution 3452 (XXX), annex.

193

35/171.

Report of the Sixth United Nations Congress
on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment
of Offenders

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the importance to all nations of making rapid progress in the prevention of crime and the
treatment of offenders, in view of the significant increase
in crime, including new forms of crime, in various parts
of the world,
Considering that the phenomenon of crime, through
its impact on society, impairs the over-all development
of nations, undermines people's spiritual and material
well-being, compromises human dignity and creates a
climate of fear and violence that endangers personal
security and erodes the quality of life,
Considering that the international community should
make concerted, systematic efforts to co-ordinate and
stimulate technical and scientific co-operation and
policies directed towards crime prevention in the context
of political, economic, social and cultural development,
Recalling the responsibility assumed by the United
Nations in crime prevention under General Assembly
resolution 415 (V) of I December 1950, which was affirmed in Economic and Social Council resolutions 731 F
(XXVIII) of 30 July 1959 and 830 D (XXXH) of
2 August 1961, and in the promotion and strengthening
"' ST/HR/SER.A/6, chap. Ill.
