S/2014/394

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
11 June 2014
Original: English

Note by the President of the Security Council
In paragraph 2 of resolution 2105 (2013), the Security Council requested the
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) to provide a final
report to the Council with its findings and recommendations.
Accordingly, the President hereby circulates the report dated 5 June 2014
received from the Panel of Experts (see annex).

14-04008 (E)

120614

*1404008*

S/2014/394

Annex
Letter dated 5 June 2014 from the Panel of Experts established
pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010) addressed to the President of
the Security Council
On behalf of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1929 (2010), I have the honour to transmit herewith, in accordance with
paragraph 2 of resolution 2105 (2013), the final report on its work.
(Signed) Salomé Zourabichvili
Coordinator
Panel of Experts established pursuant to resolution 1929 (2010)
(Signed) Jonathan Brewer
Expert
(Signed) Chunjie Li
Expert
(Signed) Thomas Mazet
Expert
(Signed) Jacqueline Shire
Expert
(Signed) Kazuto Suzuki
Expert
(Signed) Elena Vodopolova
Expert
(Signed) Olasehinde Ishola Williams
Expert

2/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Final report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 1929 (2010)
Summary
The Panel submits this report less than two months before the deadline set by
the Joint Plan of Action for the conclusion of a comprehensive agreement between
the Islamic Republic of Iran and its counterparts in the E3+3, a with expectations high
that a comprehensive solution is within reach. The prospect of such a solution has
dramatically shifted the context in which the Panel works. The Joint Plan of Action,
which entered into force in January 2014, provides the Islamic Republic of Iran with
limited, targeted relief from certain unilateral or multilateral sanctions. The
International Atomic Energy Agency has reported that, to date, the Islamic Republic
of Iran has fulfilled its “voluntary measures” agreed to under the Joint Plan of
Action.
A challenge for States during this period of intense negotiation and, should it
occur, implementation of a comprehensive solution, will be to maintain clarity with
respect to State obligations under existing Security Council sanctions. Some States
have indicated to the Panel a degree of uncertainty as to whether Security Council
resolutions concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran remain fully in force. One source
of uncertainty concerns the status of obligations regarding procurement related to
uranium enrichment by the Islamic Republic of Iran, should such activities continue
under a comprehensive solution.
The Panel investigated more than two dozen cases during this mandate
involving alleged violations of resolution 1929 (2010) and prior resolutions. The
majority of incidents concern the attempted procurement of dual-use items.
Most of those items, with some exceptions, fall below established control
thresholds. Their identification remains a challenge to the implementation of
Security Council sanctions intended to target Iranian procurement of goods and
materials for prohibited activities. On the basis of the cases investigated by the Panel
and information made available by States, it is increasingly difficult for authorities to
identify links between below-threshold items and prohibited end users or end uses in
the Islamic Republic of Iran. This may be a function of more sophisticated
procurement strategies on the part of the Islamic Republic of Iran, which has
developed methods of concealing procurement, while expanding prohibited
activities. Such methods can also be used by the Islamic Republic of Iran to procure
and finance legitimate trade, which further complicates the efforts of States to
identify illicit procurement.
The Islamic Republic of Iran has continued to engage in ballistic missile
activities. It is reported to have conducted a number of ballistic missile test launches
over the past year, which are a violation of paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010). It
is also developing its launch capabilities: a new launch site near the city of Shahrud
was identified. At the same time, the Islamic Republic of Iran decided to forgo its
2013 Great Prophet military exercises, during which numerous ballistic missiles have
traditionally been launched.

14-04008

3/54

S/2014/394

Member States and media have continued to report allegations of ongoing arms
transfers by the Islamic Republic of Iran. During the current mandate, the Panel
investigated one case of an attempted transfer by the Islamic Republic of Iran of
conventional arms and related materiel. The actions of the Islamic Republic of Iran
in this respect stand in contrast to the apparent restraint it has shown in other areas of
prohibited activities.
Several States have conveyed to the Panel their assessment that there has been
a decrease in the number of detected attempts by the Islamic Republic of Iran to
procure items for prohibited programmes, and related seizures, since mid-2013.
While the Panel cannot confirm this development independently, because of delays
between incidents and their subsequent reporting to the Committee, it is possible that
this decrease reflects the new political environment in the Islamic Republic of Iran
and diplomatic progress towards a comprehensive solution.
a

4/54

The E3+3 countries include France, Germany, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, China, the Russian Federation and the United States of America.

14-04008

S/2014/394

Recommendations
The Panel recommends that the Committee address the following issues
identified by the Panel as challenges to the effective implementation of sanctions:
• In the event of a comprehensive solution to the Iranian nuclear issue, States
will require guidance regarding the status of Security Council sanctions
contained in resolution 1929 (2010) and previous resolutions, in particular
with respect to nuclear-related procurement.
• Member States would benefit from additional clarification regarding their
reporting obligations to the Committee with respect to possible incidents of
non-compliance. Such guidance should address the content, timing and
sequencing of reporting steps. This could include clarification of disposal
procedures and possible measures of assistance to States.
• States are advised to make available to the Committee any additional
information regarding designated individuals, in particular bio-identifiers such
as passport numbers, photograph, and date and place of birth. The Panel stands
ready to assist the Committee in this task.
• States should alert their respective manufacturers of dual-use goods to the risk
of diversion to the Islamic Republic of Iran through overseas distributors and
encourage the effective implementation and regular examination of internal
compliance procedures.
• States and financial institutions are encouraged to make available to the Panel
further information regarding typologies of proliferation financing in order to
promote better understanding of such transactions.
• States should alert their carriers and freight forwarders to the importance of
obtaining more accurate and complete documentation for cargo. This is
especially important in the case of shipper-owned and -sealed containers
originating in or destined for the Islamic Republic of Iran. This initiative could
be promoted through international professional or trade associations.
• In order to identify front companies and, as appropriate, assets of designated
individuals and entities, States should be encouraged to provide open public
registries of companies with as many details as possible of their legal
ownership, beneficial ownership and shareholders. This is consistent with the
current priorities of the Financial Action Task Force’s.

Introduction
1.
The present report has been prepared in accordance with the Panel’s mandate
as set forth in paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010), and renewed by resolution
2105 (2013) on 5 June 2013. It summarizes the Panel’s work over the past year.
Methodology
2.
The Panel carries out its work on the basis of the mandate set forth in
paragraph 29 of resolution 1929 (2010), mindful of the methodological standards
contained in the report of the Informal Working Group of the Security Council on
General Issues of Sanctions of 22 December 2006 (S/2006/997) and further

14-04008

5/54

S/2014/394

described in Best Practices and Recommendations for Improving the Effectiveness of
United Nations Sanctions. The Panel operates under the direction of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). The Panel is
aware of potential sensitivities in connection with information received from States
or the private sector and is mindful of the importance of maintaining the
confidentiality of all sources of information.
Activities of the Panel
3.
The Panel’s work includes consultations with Member States, inspections of
reported incidents, and outreach regarding the implementation of sanctions. The
Panel consults regularly with experts in academia, non-governmental organizations,
the private sector and, as appropriate, United Nations bodies and expert panels. The
Panel held consultations with 32 States and undertook five inspection visits
concerning reported incidents. Annex I contains a list of all Member States visited
by the Panel.
4.
The Panel wishes to emphasize the positive example set by those States which
reported incidents of non-compliance. It would also like to highlight the high level
of cooperation it has received from States and entities approached during these
inspections and investigations, in particular those that have provided forensic or
technical analysis of samples.

International context
5.
Major events over the past year have shifted dramatically the political context
in which the Panel has carried out its work. The election of President Hassan Rouhani
on 15 June 2013 was followed by a reinvigoration of the diplomatic process aimed
at resolving the nuclear issue. The agreement with the E3+3 on 24 November 2013
on the Joint Plan of Action entered into force on 20 January 2014. 1
6.
The Joint Plan of Action establishes a six-month period ending 20 July 2014 in
which the Islamic Republic of Iran promises to take “voluntary measures” to begin
to restore confidence in the peaceful nature of its nuclear programme. Although
Security Council sanctions remain fully in place, during this period certain
unilateral and multilateral sanctions are suspended, and some assets have been
released. As of mid-April, the Islamic Republic of Iran had received four
instalments of US$ 4.2 billion in funds previously frozen abroad. 2
7.
The economy of the Islamic Republic of Iran has suffered from high inflation
and an inability to access foreign capital, although reports suggest that the situation
is slowly improving. The Rouhani Government has introduced new economic
policies and recent reports suggest that the economy is “stabilizing” and stands to
further improve should a comprehensive agreement be reached. The International
Monetary Fund projects that, after contracting for two consecutive years, “Iran’s

__________________
1 The E3+3 countries include France, Germany, the United Kingdom, China, the Russian

Federation and the United States of America.
2 “Iran to get fifth instalment of frozen assets next week” (translated text of report from IRNA

news website), BBC Monitoring Service, 11 April 2014.

6/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

economy will rebound by 1.5 per cent in the current year — even if sanctions relief
under a temporary deal proves short lived — as Tehran undertakes reforms”. 3
8.
Although the Joint Plan of Action has generated a great deal of optimism over
the future course of the country’s relationship with the international community, there
remain concerns regarding the Islamic Republic of Iran’s continuing alleged transfers
of conventional arms and related materiel in violation of Security Council resolutions.

Recent developments in prohibited activities
1.

Nuclear
9.
The conclusion of both a Framework for Cooperation between the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Islamic Republic of Iran on
11 November 2013, and the Joint Plan of Action on 24 November 2013 between the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the E3+3, have led to a scaling-back of certain
activities by the Islamic Republic of Iran and increased transparency with IAEA.
Implementation of the Joint Plan of Action
10. Under the Joint Plan of Action, the Islamic Republic of Iran has committed
itself, inter alia, to a suspension of uranium enrichment over 5 per cent, the dilution
of existing stocks of 20 per cent enriched uranium or fabrication into fuel plates, no
further installation of centrifuges, and the suspension of work on the IR-40 heavy
water research reactor (Arak reactor). 4 In monthly status reports regarding the
implementation of “voluntary measures” taken by the Islamic Republic of Iran to
implement the Joint Plan of Action, IAEA has confirmed, inter alia, that the country
has ceased enrichment of uranium above 5 per cent, is no longer operating
centrifuge cascades in an interconnected manner, and has diluted 50 per cent of its
20 per cent-enriched UF6 stocks. 5 IAEA also confirmed that the Islamic Republic of
Iran has halted further installation of centrifuges at the Natanz fuel enrichment plant
and work on the Arak reactor, and provided IAEA with information regarding
centrifuge production, assembly and storage facilities. 6 The Islamic Republic of Iran
is continuing certain activities, including enrichment of uranium to 5 per cent and
existing safeguarded research and development on advanced centrifuges. 7
Implementation of the Framework for Cooperation
11. Under this Framework, and in parallel with the Joint Plan of Action, the
Islamic Republic of Iran agreed with IAEA to implement “six initial measures” by
20 February. IAEA has confirmed that the Islamic Republic of Iran met the initial
requirements and the parties agreed to a further set of seven measures to be

__________________
3 “Iran economy stabilizing, to soar if deal reached: IMF”, Agence France-Presse, 11 April 2014.
4 International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), “Communication dated 27 November 2013 received

from the EU High Representative concerning the text of the Joint Plan of Action” (INFCIRC/855).
5 As at 14 April 2014, it had diluted 104.5 kg of 209 kg.
6 See IAEA, “Status of Iran’s nuclear programme in relation to the Joint Plan of Action”, 17 April

2014 (GOV/INF/2014/10); IAEA, “Status of Iran’s nuclear programme in relation to the Joint
Plan of Action”, 20 January 2014 (GOV/INF/2014/1).
7 IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and relevant provisions of Security
Council resolutions in the Islamic Republic of Iran”, 17 April 2014 (GOV/INF/2014/10), (see
“Main Developments” and paras. 30-33).

14-04008

7/54

S/2014/394

implemented by 20 May 2014. 8 These include the provision by the Islamic Republic
of Iran of initial information concerning potential military dimensions of its nuclear
programme, in particular the development of exploding bridgewire detonators. 9 This
is to be followed by a third set of measures yet to be agreed between the Islamic
Republic of Iran and IAEA, and to be implemented by 20 August.
Possible military dimensions
12. There remain areas of concern regarding the Islamic Republic of Iran’s nuclear
programme and its possible military dimensions. In its report of 20 February 2014,
IAEA referred to its 2011 analysis of allegations that the Islamic Republic of Iran
has carried out activities relevant to the development of a nuclear explosive device.
Among the issues identified by IAEA in 2011 are concerns about “alleged studies”
regarding “how to integrate a new spherical payload into the existing payload
chamber which would be mounted in the re-entry vehicle of the Shahab 3 missile”. 10
IAEA recently noted that information regarding the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
development of a nuclear explosive device “is assessed by the Agency to be, overall,
credible” and despite the country’s insistence that the claims are unfounded, “the
Agency has obtained more information since November 2011 that has further
corroborated the analysis contained in [the annex to the Director-General’s report of
November 2011]”. 11 It is not known whether the additional information addresses
the integration of a nuclear payload on a delivery vehicle.
2.

Ballistic missiles
Facilities
13. The Islamic Republic of Iran is continuing development of its ballistic missile
and space programmes. A new missile launch site 40 km from the city of Shahrud
was identified in August 2013. 12 A larger launch complex is assessed to be close to
completion at the Imam Khomeini Space Centre at Semnan for ballistic missiles and
satellite launch vehicles. 13 The Islamic Republic of Iran announced on 9 June 2013
the opening of the Imam Sadeq Observation and Monitoring Centre for monitoring
space objects, in particular satellites. 14

__________________
8 IAEA, “IAEA and Iran conclude talks in connection with implementation of Framework for

Cooperation”, IAEA Press Release, 9 February 2014.
9 “Iran has briefed U.N. nuclear agency on detonators — ISNA”, Reuters, 4 May 2014.
10 IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and relevant provisions of Security

Council resolutions in the Islamic Republic of Iran” (8 November 2011, GOV/2011/65, para. 59).
11 IAEA, “Implementation of the NPT Safeguards Agreement and relevant provisions of Security

Council resolutions in the Islamic Republic of Iran” (20 February 2014, GOV/2014/10, para. 64).
12 Jeremy Binnie and Joseph Bermudez, “Second Iranian space-launch centre revealed”, IHS Jane’s

Defence Weekly, 7 August 2013. The site is located 165 km north-east of the Semnan space centre.
13 “Iran to launch new space center, more satellites soon: Defense Minister”, Press TV, 20 June

2013; “Minister: Iran to launch several new space Centers”, Fars News Agency, 10 July 2013;
“Imam Khomeini Space Center is 80 per cent complete”, Tehran Times, 2 June 2012.
14 “Iran Defence Ministry launches space center”, RIA Novosti, 9 June 2013; “Iran says it sets up
space monitoring center”, Associated Press, 9 June 2013; “Ahmadinejad opens Iran’s first space
monitoring centre”, FARS News, 10 March 2013.

8/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Ballistic missile launches
14. On 10 February 2014, the Islamic Republic of Iran announced the successful
testing of the Barani ballistic missile, which was described by an Iranian official as a
“new generation of long-range ballistic missiles carrying multiple re-entry vehicle
payloads”. 15 The Minister of Defence, Hossein Dehghan, said it was capable of
“destroying massive targets and […] multiple targets”. 16
15. The Joint Plan of Action makes no reference to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
ballistic missile activities.
3.

Transfers of conventional arms and related materiel
16. Despite sanctions prohibiting such activities, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
repeatedly asserted its right to transfer arms and related materiel abroad. Such
transfers are substantiated by numerous media reports and statements by concerned
States and recipient groups.
17. Under President Hassan Rouhani, the Islamic Republic of Iran has continued a
policy of military cooperation, termed “defence diplomacy”. 17 Such cooperation has
reportedly been pursued with a number of countries, although it is not possible for
the Panel to determine whether transfers of arms are involved. 18 There has recently
been media reporting regarding an alleged agreement dated November 2013 under
which the Islamic Republic of Iran would provide Iraq with close to $200 million in
arms and related materiel. Iraqi authorities firmly denied this allegation in writing to
the Committee.
18. The war in the Syrian Arab Republic has intensified the demand for arms and
related materiel on all sides to the conflict; the Islamic Republic of Iran’s military
support for the current government in the Syrian Arab Republic is well
documented. 19 The war has also created additional opportunities for the Quds Force
of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) to be even more active in the

__________________
15 Jeremy Binnie, “Iran announced new missile tests”, IHS Jane’s Defence Weekly, 13 February

2014.
16 Ibid.
17 “Iran’s president urges Defence Ministry to export weapons”, TREND News Agency

(Azerbaijan), 1 March 2014.
18 See “Sultanate, Iran sign MOU on defence cooperation”, Times of Oman, 18 September 2013;

“Iran Revolutionary Guard training new Zimbabwe elite force”, The Telescope News, 16 April
2014; “Iran-Tajikistan to sign Defence MOU”, TREND News Agency (Azerbaijan), 13 May
2010; “VP: Iran ready to expand military cooperation with Azerbaijan”, Tasnim News, 15 April
2014; “India welcomes defence cooperation with Iran”, Press TV, 20 July 2013; “Defence
cooperation agreed with Qatar”, Payvand Iran News, 25 February 2010; “Afghanistan strategic
cooperation”, NSBC International, 10 December 2013; “Armenia, Iran discuss military
cooperation”, TREND News Agency (Azerbaijan), 8 February 2013.
19 See “Iran boosts military support to Syria”, Reuters, 21 February 2014; “Azerbaijan defence
Minister meets with chief of Iranian armed forces”, APA.AZ, 15 April 2014; “Iran to continue
supporting Syria”, Middle East Monitor, 17 February 2014; “Supplying the war in Syria”,
Strategypage.com, 26 February 2014; Will Fulton, Joseph Holliday and Sam Wyer, Iranian
Strategy in Syria (Institute for the Study of War, May 2013); “Who is supplying weapons lifeline
to Assad”, BBC News, 14 June 2013; “Iran, Iraq, Syria sign agreement to boost transit
cooperation”, Press TV, 13 January 2013; Ian Black, “Iran confirms it has forces in Syria and
will take military action if pushed”, The Guardian (London), 16 September 2012.

14-04008

9/54

S/2014/394

country. 20 One member of the Panel notes that the content of this paragraph is not
directly related to the Panel’s mandate.

I. Assessment and analysis of prohibited Iranian activities
A.

Summary of inspections of dual-use items
19. The Panel investigated 30 reported cases during the current mandate. 21 They
are listed in the tables in annex II. Some of the Panel’s inspection reports are
pending. The main points from the Panel’s investigations of those cases are
discussed below. With one exception, the shipments were all interdicted in third
countries.
20. All of the items are dual use in nature, and were interdicted by States on the
basis of intelligence information that they were intended for use in the Islamic
Republic of Iran’s prohibited activities. The majority of cases are reported to be
nuclear-related, a few having reported applications in the ballistic missile
programme. Three of the items are controlled under the lists cited in the relevant
resolutions; the others fall below control thresholds and were interdicted on the
basis of catch-all provisions regarding end use or end user. With the exceptions of
the items described in paragraphs 21 to 24 below, the Panel was not able to develop
further information regarding possible relationships to entities designated under
Security Council resolutions or prohibited activities. The cases underscore the
challenges for States in identifying sensitive dual-use items that are not listed but
could contribute to prohibited activities.
Carbon fibre case
21. On 6 June 2013, a State reported to the Committee that, in December 2012,
authorities intercepted and seized a shipment of carbon fibre in transit aboard the
Shahraz, en route to Bandar Abbas, Islamic Republic of Iran (annex II, table 2,
number 24; see figure I).
22. The Shahraz was carrying, inter alia, a consignment of 1,800 bobbins of
carbon fibre, weighing a total of 7,200 kg. The carbon fibre was identified in packing
materials and on documentation as T700SC-12000, a type of fibre manufactured by
the Japan-based company Toray. Shipping documents identified the consignee as
Hamidreza Afzalian Shirvan, Unit 2, No. 9 Biston 3 Alley, Biston St., Dastgheib
Blvd., Mashad, Islamic Republic of Iran. According to commercial shipping
databases, the Shahraz’s registered owner is recorded as Kish Roaring Ocean Shipping
Company PJS (Private Joint Stock) of the Islamic Republic of Iran. The Panel’s
research found the address and fax number of the shipper identified on the
consignment’s bill of lading to be associated with South Shipping Line Iran (SSL),
which is designated under Security Council resolution 1929 (2010).

__________________
20 Will Fulton, Joseph Holliday and Sam Wyer, Iranian Strategy in Syria (Institute for the Study of

War, 2013); “IRGC Top Commander: transfer of experience Iran’s only military aid to Syria”,
Fars News, 21 April 2014.
21 The confidential inspection and investigation reports submitted by the Panel since June 2013 are
listed in annex XI.

10/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

23. The Panel was able to inspect, photograph, and take a sample of the carbon
fibre. The material was also sent to Toray, which confirmed, on the basis of forensic
analysis, that the carbon fibre fell above the control thresholds established in lists
cited in resolution 1929 (2010).
Figure I
Example of six bobbins, torn bar-code labels and torn packing materials

Photograph: Panel of Experts

Aluminium alloy cases
24.

In two cases, the items reported fall above control thresholds.

(a) Aluminium alloy 2024 cylinders (annex II, table 2, number 20; see figure II).
These were shipped in the form of 21 cylinders about 3,000 mm long, 270 mm internal
diameter and wall thickness 30 mm. Metallurgical analysis carried out by a Member
State established that the cylinders were aluminium alloy 2024 T3. 22 The item is
controlled under the lists cited in the relevant resolutions on the basis of
composition and diameter of the cylinders.

__________________
22 Although aluminium alloy 2024 of temper state T3 does not meet the ultimate tensile strength

parameters in paragraph 2.C.1 of INFCIRC/254/Rev.8/Part 2 (30 June 2010), a technical note
states that the phrase “In item 2.C.1 the phrase ‘capable of’ encompasses aluminium alloys
before or after heat treatment”. Therefore this alloy is controlled regardless of its temper state.

14-04008

11/54

S/2014/394

Figure II
Example of a shipment of 21 cylinders of aluminium alloy 2024 T3

Photograph: Panel of Experts

(b) Aluminium alloy 7075 rods (annex II, table 2, number 28). Metallurgical
analysis by a Member State established that the rods were aluminium alloy 7075 T0.
This item is controlled under the lists cited in the relevant resolutions on the basis of
composition and diameter of the rods.
Inverter case
25. On 5 November 2013, a State reported to the Committee that a shipment of
several hundred inverters was interdicted in November 2012 en route to Bandar
Abbas, Islamic Republic of Iran (annex II, table 1, number 12). 23 Documentation
identified an individual as the consignee in the Islamic Republic of Iran with no
further information regarding the shipment’s end user or end use. According to the
manufacturer’s specifications the inverters could operate at up to 400 Hz. Inverters
have a wide range of industrial applications and those which operate in this range
are not controlled under the relevant resolutions.
26. The Islamic Republic of Iran has in the past procured inverters capable of
operating at frequencies of approximately 1,000 Hz which are necessary to drive IR-1
or IR-2M gas centrifuges at Natanz. The Panel’s consultations with several industry
and government experts suggest that upgrading some of the inverters in this
shipment to operate at such frequencies is not technically difficult. The
manufacturer stated that this was not possible. The Panel continues its consultations
with experts and its report on this case is pending.
Machine tools case
27. On 23 January 2013, Spain reported that it had initiated an investigation of a
Spanish company regarding transfers from Bilbao, Spain, to an alleged front company
__________________
23 Also known as frequency changers or converters.

12/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

in Turkey of electrical discharge machine tools and their components (annex II, table 1,
number 1). Electrical discharge machines are not included in control lists, except for
machines having two or more rotating axes, which is a function of the software used.
The end user of the tools was identified as Mapna Turbine Blade Manufacturing
Engineering Co., in Tehran. Although export licences were denied by Spanish
authorities, seven electrical discharge machines were exported in April 2010. Mapna
Turbine Blade Manufacturing Engineering Co. is designated by Canada, the United
Kingdom and Japan on grounds that it has ties to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
prohibited nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. The Panel’s report on this case is
pending.
Cold pilger case
28. Cold pilgers (annex II, table 1, number 9) are used in industrial processes that
require the production of metal tubes up to several metres long. Although the Panel
could establish no connection between the documented consignee in the Islamic
Republic of Iran (a freight forwarding company) and the country’s prohibited
activities, one State reported that the intended recipient of the pilger was an Iranian
firm identified as Aluminat. Aluminat has been associated by several States with
assisting “designated entities violate the provisions of United Nations and European
Union sanctions on Iran and for directly supporting Iran’s proliferation-sensitive
activities”. 24
Bellows case
29. In this case (annex II, table 1, number 7), the Panel was unable to establish a link
between the documented consignee and entities designated under relevant Security
Council resolutions. However, the Panel recently obtained information that establishes
a relationship between the consignee, Shahab Jamili of Nicaro Engineering, and the
Islamic Republic of Iran’s uranium enrichment programme. Jamili and Nicaro are
identified in an indictment for their efforts to procure items on behalf of the Islamic
Republic of Iran’s prohibited nuclear activities. 25
Documented consignees
30. In its investigations of 8 of the 30 cases listed in annex II, the Panel received
no shipping documentation and therefore no documented information about the
identity of the consignee or end user of the items in the shipments concerned. Where
documentation was available, the consignee was identified as a trading company
(five cases), freight forwarder (three cases), a named individual (eight cases) or a
company connected with the petrochemical industry (two cases).

B.

Analysis of items targeted for procurement
31. In addition to the inspections summarized above, the Panel gathered and
analysed information provided by States and experts that are assessed to be

__________________
24 Council of the European Union, Council Implementing Regulation No. 1264/2012 concerning

restrictive measures against Iran (21 December 2012).
25 United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts, USA v. Sihai Cheng, Seyed

Abolfazl Shahab Jamili, Nicaro Eng. Co. Ltd. and Eyvaz Technic Manufacturing Company, Case
No. 13-cr-10332, filed 21 November 2013.

14-04008

13/54

S/2014/394

important to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s prohibited nuclear and ballistic missile
activities.
Valves
32. The Panel had the opportunity to consult with industry, government and
non-governmental experts regarding the special role of valves in nuclear fuel cycle
applications. Valves subject to controls must have “a nominal size of 5 mm or greater;
a bellows seal; and [be] wholly made of or lined with aluminium, aluminium alloy,
nickel, or nickel alloy containing more than 60 per cent nickel by weight”. 26
According to experts, such valves encompass a relatively small fraction of those
necessary for industrial-scale nuclear facilities. Valves used in a nuclear reactor’s
primary circuit are most likely to be bellows-sealed and fall above control thresholds,
though it is possible that valves used elsewhere in the reactor complex are also
bellows-sealed.
33. Below-control threshold valves have numerous industrial applications, and are
widely used in nuclear fuel cycle activities. They require special vigilance on the part
of States to ensure that exports of such items are not diverted to prohibited activities.
Some types of below-threshold valves used in nuclear activities bear similarities to
those used in the petrochemical sector, for which the Islamic Republic of Iran has an
established demand. This further complicates efforts to understand which items may
be for prohibited purposes. Paragraph 61 below highlights the issue of the Islamic
Republic of Iran’s use of a petrochemical company as cover for procurement of valves
for the Arak heavy water research reactor.
Carbon fibre
34. The Islamic Republic of Iran has been attempting to procure high-grade carbon
fibre for use in the manufacturing of some of its centrifuge rotors. The material
inspected by the Panel has a tensile strength of 4,900 MPa, and modulus of 230 GPa,
which clearly falls above the control thresholds cited in resolution 1929 (2010).
Such high-performance carbon fibre also has a number of commercial applications,
in particular in the aerospace industry.
35. The Islamic Republic of Iran is also seeking carbon fibre of lower technical
specifications. In the cases described in annex III, these included carbon fibre tow,
fabrics, and carbon fibre that has been impregnated with resins (pre-pregs). Stated
end uses included strengthening and repair of concrete structures, the manufacture
of wind-turbine blades, automotive applications, and for electrical transmission
cables. The use of carbon fibre for reinforcing concrete structures is an expensive
option. Glass fibre is less expensive and more commonly used.
Aluminium
36. The Islamic Republic of Iran’s demand for raw and semi-finished materials for
both prohibited and legitimate industrial activity is well established. The Panel
investigated over the past year three shipments of high-grade 7000-series aluminium
that the Islamic Republic of Iran is assessed by some experts to lack the capability
to manufacture to sufficient quality indigenously. The country is, however, assessed
to be capable of manufacturing 6000-series aluminium alloy, which is a commonly
__________________
26 INFCIRC/254/Rev.8/Part 2 (30 June 2010).

14/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

produced metal with widespread commercial applications. Prohibited applications
include the outer casings of centrifuges. A number of States have expressed to the
Panel their concerns regarding the role of the Islamic Republic of Iran’s State-owned
aluminium company in supporting the country’s prohibited nuclear activities, in
particular by supplying aluminium to the Iran Centrifuge Technology Company,
known as TESA. In paragraphs 76 and 77, the Panel explores the Islamic Republic of
Iran’s use of barter to obtain aluminium without purchasing it on the open market.
Other critical items
37. The Panel notes that there remains uncertainty among many States regarding
the key components for the Islamic Republic of Iran’s centrifuges, their approximate
dimensions and whether the country is assessed to be able to produce items
indigenously or must import them. Figure III shows a grouping of three different
centrifuge types recently displayed by the Islamic Republic of Iran. The annotations
seek to identify a few key components, their approximate dimensions, and the
consensus among experts regarding whether the items are indigenously produced or
imported, or whether this is not known.
38. In addition to the items described above, the Islamic Republic of Iran is
reported to seek abroad, inter alia, vacuum equipment, maraging steel, specialized
oils (Fomblin oil for example), and magnetic tape.

14-04008

15/54

S/2014/394

Figure III
Iranian centrifuges annotated

Photograph: Siamak Ebrahimi, published by Tasnim News Agency
Note: This figure identifies centrifuge components, their approximate dimensions and likely
materials. The centrifuges were displayed by the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran at a
conference of the Parliamentary Union of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, held in
Tehran in February 2014.

A: IR-1 outer casing: assessed to be manufactured from 6000-series aluminium indigenously;
approximately 160-180 mm outer diameter; approximately 20 mm wall thickness
B: IR-1 centrifuge rotor: assessed to be 7000-series aluminium; approximately 100 mm outer
diameter; 1 mm wall thickness; 40 cm in length; 7000-series alloy imported; indigenous
manufacture
C: IR-2m rotor: carbon fibre; approximately 140-150 mm outer diameter; material imported;
fabrication of rotor indigenous
D: IR-1 bellows: maraging steel; approximately same wall thickness as centrifuge rotor;
contains single convolution; maraging steel imported; bellows manufactured indigenously
E: IR-2m outer casing: assessed to be 6000-series aluminium
F: Aluminium coil for cooling water
G: IR-2m bellows

16/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

C.

Summary of inspection and investigations of conventional arms
and related materiel
39. During the current period there was only one officially reported case of a
transfer by the Islamic Republic of Iran of conventional arms and related materiel
and one case on which the Panel was briefed, but which was not formally reported
to the Committee.
Case 1: seizure of arms aboard the Klos C
40. On 5 March, the Panamanian-flagged cargo vessel, Klos C, was interdicted in
the Red Sea by Israeli naval authorities. Cargo found aboard the vessel included
40 M-302 rockets, 181 120-mm mortars and approximately 400,000 rounds of
ammunition. The cargo was concealed in shipping containers among bags of
cement. According to Israeli authorities, 100 containers, including those containing
the armaments, were loaded on to the vessel in the Iranian port of Bandar Abbas,
and 50 additional containers were loaded aboard the vessel in the Iraqi port of Umm
Qasr. Iraqi officials informed the Panel that the vessel was empty when it arrived in
Umm Qasr. The Panel has conducted an inspection of the seized items, and received
documentation from relevant authorities. It is continuing to investigate this matter
and will submit its report to the Committee at the earliest possible date.
Case 2: update regarding seizure of high explosives reported by Kenya
41. The Panel was briefed by Kenyan authorities, analysed court proceedings, and
received information from another Member State regarding the discovery in June
2012 of a cache of RDX explosives transferred to Kenya. The case involved two
Iranians, one of whom claimed a connection to IRGC, and a third individual based
in the Islamic Republic of Iran allegedly connected to IRGC and identified as the
operation’s support. 27 Following their arrest, one of the Iranians led the Kenyan
authorities to the cache of explosives consisting of 15 kg of RDX buried on a
Mombasa golf course. 28 According to a State, it is likely that the explosives were
brought into the country aboard a vessel of the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping
Lines (IRISL) that had docked in Mombasa. 29 This allegation has not been further
substantiated. The two Iranians were sentenced in May 2013 to life imprisonment in
Kenya for possession of explosives. No further information or follow-up related to
the case is expected.

D.

Analysis of developments in conventional arms transfers
Ongoing arms transfers
42. During the current mandate, only one incident involving the transfer of
conventional arms was formally reported. This does not necessarily reflect an actual
decline in the quantity of arms being transferred by the Islamic Republic of Iran, but

__________________
27 Ahmad Abolfathi Mohammed and Seyed Mansour Mosavi. In the Chief Magistrate’s Court at

Milimani Law Courts, criminal case No. 881 of 2012.
28 The police officers testifying at the trial indicated that the total amount of explosives brought in

the country was close to 100 kg.
29 Kenyan authorities identified two Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping Lines vessels having docked

at Mombasa at the same time: M/V Pardis (IMO 9284142) and M/V Salis (IMO 9283021).

14-04008

17/54

S/2014/394

could be the result of a number of factors, including the country’s need to use
supply routes in a manner that is less likely to result in interdictions, better
concealment methods, or the lack of vigilance in other States. Member States and
the media continue to report arms transfers from the Islamic Republic of Iran,
including to the Syrian Arab Republic, Gaza, the Sudan and Bahrain. 30
43. Several States and some local authorities in Iraq indicated to the Panel that a
likely supply route of arms from the Islamic Republic of Iran to the Syrian Arab
Republic involves the use of Iraqi territory, primarily by air, but also by land. Iraqi
government officials have consistently denied such allegations and informed the
Panel that they make regular inspections of flights between the Islamic Republic of
Iran and the Syrian Arab Republic. According to Iraqi officials, from March 2012 to
the present, 64 such checks were conducted and turned up no evidence of prohibited
cargo.
Alleged transfers to Bahrain
44. In addition to the cases described above, the Panel is aware of other incidents
of alleged arms transfers by the Islamic Republic of Iran. In one, Bahrain’s Coast
Guard and police jointly intercepted a vessel in Bahraini coastal waters, seizing
assorted explosive materials, including what was described as Iranian-produced
bombs. 31 One Bahraini official described the incident as an “attempt to smuggle
explosives and firearms” into Bahrain, and attributed the origin of this attempt to the
Islamic Republic of Iran on the basis of statements made by the suspects as well as
markings on some of the items seized.
45. Bahrain’s chief prosecutor gave a statement describing the Islamic Republic of
Iran’s role in the incident. Five of the arrested “also confessed that they had
travelled to Iran and received training by Iranian personnel at Iranian Revolutionary
Guard camps at various locations in Iran. They also confessed having received sums
of money after training. Their confessions also included detailed accounts of how
they received the seized explosives, guns, munitions and equipment from a boat on
the high seas manned by an Iraqi crew, and stated that they reached that boat by
using coordinates which were given to them, all upon the instructions of the leader
Ali Al-Moussawi and other group leaders in Bahrain and abroad. Those instructions
also included concealing the smuggled weapons, explosives and tools until the zero
hour, to be used at that time in carrying out their plans, targeting vital sovereign and
security installations and assassinating certain figures”. 32

__________________
30 Daoud Shihab, media spokesman for the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (May 2013), said “All the

weapons in Gaza are provided by Iran be they weapons intended for Hamas Movement or for the
PIJ”; quoted in Asmaa al-Ghoul, “Palestinian Islamic Jihad: Iran supplies all weapons in Gaza”,
Al-Monitor, 14 May 2013; Sheikh Khalid bin Khalifa al Khalifa, Chairman of the Suhra Council’s
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and National Security of Bahrain, said “Iran’s export of
destruction and horror to Bahrain” signals Iran’s “intent to undermine the security and stability
of the region in order to advance its security interests”; quoted in Mohamed al Jayousi, “Iran’s
weapons smuggling in Gulf region undermines stability”, Central Asia Online, 23 January 2014.
31 Habib Toumi, “Bahrain foils weapons smuggling attempt”, Gulf News, 30 December 2013.
32 “Public prosecution issues statement on recently foiled terror arrests”, Bahrain News Agency,
2 January 2014.

18/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

E.

Analysis of ballistic missile activities
46. Analysis of the Islamic Republic of Iran’s ballistic missile programme remains
a challenge. With the exception of several launches, periodic displays of hardware
and one recent revelation of a new ballistic launch facility, the programme is opaque
and not subject to the same level of transparency as the country’s nuclear activities
are under IAEA safeguards. The following provides the Panel’s assessment of
developments over the past year with respect to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
ballistic missile and space launch activities.
Status of the Sejil
47. The Sejil (Ashura) is the Islamic Republic of Iran’s longest-range solid-fuelled
ballistic missile. Its last reported test was carried out in 2011; experts have
suggested a number of possible explanations for the absence of subsequent tests.
There may be difficulties procuring missile components or securing a reliable
supply of ingredients for solid fuel, hence a decision not to deplete a limited store of
missiles with tests. Another possibility is that the Islamic Republic of Iran has
decided to prioritize resources to more established missiles such as the Shahab
series. It cannot be excluded that the Islamic Republic of Iran is satisfied with the
Sejil’s performance and feels no further tests are necessary. It may also have
decided to suspend further testing which could be interpreted as inconsistent with
the spirit of the E3+3 negotiations. The Panel has no information about the number
of operational Sejil missiles in the Islamic Republic of Iran’s arsenal; the missile is
assessed by experts to require further testing.
Sejil transporter erector launcher vehicles
48. One indication that development of the Sejil is continuing is the display of
20 Sejil transporter erector launcher vehicles (TEL) at a 2013 military parade for the
first time (figures IV and V). Transporter erector launcher vehicles enhance the
mobility of missiles while decreasing their vulnerability. One expert noted that “The
number of TELs at Iran’s disposal is strategically crucial as the more ballistic
missiles it can launch in a single wave, the greater its chance of overwhelming
defensive systems”. 33

__________________
33 Jeremy Binnie, “Iran displays numerous ballistic missile launchers”, IHS Jane’s Defence Weekly,

29 May 2013.

14-04008

19/54

S/2014/394

Figures IV and V
Sejil missile transporter erector launcher vehicles at a military parade in May 2013

Photograph: Ministry of Defence of the Islamic Republic of Iran, as published by IHS Jane’s Defence Weekly

Shahab missiles
49. On 10 February 2014, the Islamic Republic of Iran test-fired the Barani,
described by the Ministry of Defence as “a new generation of long-range ballistic
missiles capable of carrying multiple re-entry vehicle payloads”. 34 Experts identified
it as a variant of the Shahab (Ghadr 1) and questioned its alleged multiple re-entry
vehicle capability, suggesting instead that it carried sub-munitions. The Islamic
Republic of Iran reportedly first announced this capability in 2006. 35 Aside from the
Barani, the Islamic Republic of Iran announced no tests of new ballistic missiles.
50. One State recently informed the Panel that the Islamic Republic of Iran tested
Ghadr 1 missiles on two occasions over the past year, in November 2013 and
January 2014. The Panel has no additional information in this regard.
New missile launch facilities
51. According to published reports and experts consulted by the Panel, the Islamic
Republic of Iran has continued to expand its rocket launch capabilities at the
Semnan Space Centre to accommodate larger missiles and space launch vehicles,
including possibly the Simorgh 3 space launch vehicle. 36 Some experts have
suggested that as the launch site construction is finished work on the Simorgh
project will intensify.
52. A new missile launch site 40 km from the city of Shahrud was identified in
August 2013 (figure VI). IHS Jane’s published analysis of satellite imagery of this,
suggesting that the new launch facility is capable of testing long-range ballistic
missiles. Analysts stated that “This site could be a facility for launching satellites
into orbit. However, Iran is already building at least one other site for this purpose
and, looking at the satellite imagery we have got, we believe that this facility is
__________________
34 Jeremy Binnie, “Iran announces new missile tests”, IHS Jane’s Defence Weekly, 13 February 2014.
35 Ibid.
36 Charles Vick, “Iranian expanded first and building second space launch centre”,

GlobalSecurity.org, 26 November 2013.

20/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

most likely used for testing ballistic missiles.” 37 This assessment is based on a
number of factors, including the site’s current lack of a liquid fuel storage facility,
the orientation of the launch pad (150 degrees north), and the location and
arrangement of buildings. 38
Figure VI
Launch pad at Shahrud facility

Photograph: DigitalGlobe, as published by IHS Jane’s.

Space launch activities
53. In February 2014, the Islamic Republic of Iran displayed two satellites
developed by Malek Ashtar University. A modification of the Navid satellite, the
Tadbir and Khalij-e-Fars satellites are reportedly intended to support secure wireless
communication. 39 One State recently informed the Panel of a Safir space launch
vehicle launched in March 2014. This has not been reported in open sources and the
Panel has no additional information regarding the launch at this time.
Procurement priorities
54. The Panel continues to receive limited information regarding procurement
efforts by the Islamic Republic of Iran for its ballistic missile-related activities.
According to one State, there is no change in procurement patterns for missiles.
Among the most important items the country is reportedly seeking are metals, as
well as components for guidance systems and fuel. Similarities between the Islamic
Republic of Iran’s ballistic missile and space programmes can make it difficult for
States to distinguish the end uses of procured items.
__________________
37 Ben Farmer,

“Iran launch site ‘likely for testing ballistic missiles’, analysts say”, The Telegraph
Online, 7 August 2013.
38 The location of the site and angle of the launch pad allow missiles to be fired on a trajectory in
which individual rocket stages would land within Iranian territory and the re-entry vehicle land
in the Indian Ocean. The Islamic Republic of Iran would thus be able to maximize the gathering
of telemetry information. See Joseph S. Bermudez, Jr., “Second Iranian space-launch centre
revealed”, IHS Jane’s Defence Weekly, 6 August 2013.
39 “Iran unveils new home-built satellites”, Iranian Students’ News Agency, 3 February 2014.

14-04008

21/54

S/2014/394

II. Methods of procurement and financing
A.

Procurement methods and challenges
55. The cases reported to the Committee during this mandate underscore the
challenges for States to distinguish between legitimate procurement by the Islamic
Republic of Iran for commercial purposes and prohibited activities. Three trends
capture the complexity of this issue. The Islamic Republic of Iran has demonstrated
continuing demand for high-quality dual-use goods, both above and below control
thresholds. Procurement of non-listed, dual-use items as substitutes for controlled
items is ongoing. The Islamic Republic of Iran has also demonstrated a growing
capability to produce key items indigenously. The Panel explores various avenues
for procurement, including a case in which the country’s petrochemical sector was
used as cover for nuclear-related procurement. Finally, the Panel highlights a
reported slowdown in procurement by the Islamic Republic of Iran and the potential
impact of the Joint Plan of Action on its procurement.
Controlled and high-quality items
56. Items recently investigated by the Panel include controlled valves, carbon fibre
and aluminium alloy. These indicate that the Islamic Republic of Iran continues to
seek key items abroad, preferably from established, high-quality suppliers. The
carbon fibre case investigated by the Panel, described in paragraphs 34 and 35
above, illustrates this point. The Islamic Republic of Iran’s attempts to procure
aluminium alloys 7075 and 2024, both controlled items with applications in
centrifuges and ballistic missiles, are other examples.
Below-threshold procurement
57. The Islamic Republic of Iran continues to target for procurement dual-use
items that fall below control thresholds, many of which have numerous industrial
applications. Some of these items can be upgraded or used for component parts in
indigenously produced items. Two cases under investigation by the Panel could fall
under this category. They include inverters and machine tools, described above in
paragraphs 25 to 27. Although the Panel has not yet concluded its investigation,
preliminary technical analysis by experts suggests this is possible. In the machine
tools case, a company shipped an electrical discharge machine tool to the Islamic
Republic of Iran, which could have applications in prohibited nuclear activities. An
electrical discharge machine tool with two or more contouring rotary axes that can
be coordinated simultaneously for contouring control is prohibited by
INFCIRC/254/Rev.8/Part 2. The machine exported to the Islamic Republic of Iran
had only a single rotating axis control but, according to the company, software can
be installed to upgrade the machine and allow for three rotating axes control.

22/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Figure VII
Mock-up of IR-40 reactor fuel assemblies

Photograph: Siamak Ebrahimi, Tasnim News

Indigenization
58. The Atomic Energy Organization of Iran regularly displays items manufactured
domestically as part of its nuclear programme, including valves, bellows and other
component parts of centrifuges. The quality of such equipment is not known.
According to Member States and experts, the Islamic Republic of Iran seeks to
reverse-engineer key components once procured abroad, including, for example,
inverters. The Panel notes that it has inspected more shipments of raw materials than
under previous mandates. The photograph (figure VII), taken at a display in
February 2014 by the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran, is reportedly of fuel
assemblies for the IR-40 Arak heavy water reactor.
Front companies
59. The Islamic Republic of Iran continues to make extensive use of front
companies to procure items for prohibited activities. Some companies may be
established solely for the purpose of prohibited procurement; others may also be
engaged in legitimate business. It may be difficult for States, in particular those
seeking to promote the ease of establishing new companies, to identify those that are
engaged in procurement for prohibited activities in the Islamic Republic of Iran, as
such entities constitute a tiny fraction of business entities.
60. Access to adequate and accurate information about legal and beneficial
ownership of companies is critical to effective implementation of financial sanctions
on the Islamic Republic of Iran. The need for such information has also been
highlighted by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) as central for anti-moneylaundering and countering terrorism financing. FATF has noted that “Member States
have to ensure that company registries are accessible, maintained up to date and as

14-04008

23/54

S/2014/394

much as possible include information about legal ownership, shareholders, and
beneficial owners”. 40
Use of other industries as procurement cover
61. Pursuant to its investigation of a case reported during the last mandate, the
Panel recently obtained documentary evidence of the Islamic Republic of Iran using
its petrochemical sector as a means of obscuring the end use and end user of items
procured for the Arak reactor. 41 The document is part of legal proceedings in the
reporting State. It contains detailed technical parameters for the design, procurement
and construction of the systems that comprise the Arak reactor complex. In a section
on procurement, the document states that the owner of the project is to be defined as
“Chemical and petrochemical company” and the purchaser “Chemical and
petrochemical company or its nominated representative” (annex IV). The document
was found among the possessions of members of a procurement network established
to source items necessary for the reactor.
Concealed shipment
62. In the course of the inspection of a shipment of stainless steel pipes (annex II,
table 2, number 26), a set of 10 titanium tubes was discovered packed inside 10 of
those pipes (figure VIII). The Panel’s investigation into this reported incident is
ongoing.
Figure VIII
Titanium tube concealed inside stainless steel pipe

Photograph: Panel of Experts
__________________
40 FATF Recommendation 24 requires countries to ensure that sound and up-to-date basic information

on the legal ownership of companies is available in the corporate registry and is held by companies.
This should include the company name, proof of incorporation, legal form and status, the address of
the registered office, basic regulating powers (for example, memorandum and articles of association),
and a list of directors. This information held by the registry should be made publicly available. See
FATF Draft Guidance on Transparency and Beneficial Ownership (FATF/PDG (2014)).
41 See the Panel’s final report of 2013 (S/2013/331, paras. 18-22).

24/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Freight forwarders
63. The Panel has noted previously the role freight forwarders could play in
preventing illicit procurement. 42 In three cases inspected under the current mandate,
names of freight forwarders were recorded on shipping documentation in the place
of consignors or consignees. Such practices are not necessarily illegal or unusual for
legitimate trade, but could be used by the Islamic Republic of Iran to conceal the
provenance and destination of shipments. The Panel notes that the International
Federation of Freight Forwarders Associations has issued a notice to its members
warning about the increased use of counterfeit bills of lading in connection with
shipments to and from the Islamic Republic of Iran. 43
Role of carriers
64. Documentation available to the Panel showed that, in at least five cases, carriers
accepted shipper-owned and -sealed containers for transport to the Islamic Republic of
Iran. Although such practices are common in connection with legitimate trade, some
carriers enhance their vigilance and will not accept shipper-owned and -sealed
containers originating in the Islamic Republic of Iran or destined for that country. 44
Possible slowdown in procurement
65. Several States noted that procurement associated with the Islamic Republic of
Iran’s prohibited activities appears to have slowed over the past six to nine months.
One State that has previously undertaken multiple interdictions related to the
Islamic Republic of Iran noted that only two such seizures were made in the second
half of 2013. A second State, which tracks such issues closely, also reported that
with only a few exceptions, illicit procurement appeared to be less active.
66. This slowdown could be explained by the Islamic Republic of Iran using more
opaque means of procurement, or States reporting less actively. It may also be the
case that the Islamic Republic of Iran has deliberately slowed the pace of
procurement, possibly coinciding with a change in the political climate under
President Rouhani and the initiation of the Joint Plan of Action. There is generally a
lag in reporting interdictions to the Panel of anywhere from a few months to several
years. This reporting gap makes it difficult for the Panel to make its own assessment
regarding the impact of the Joint Plan of Action on recent procurement trends.
Procurement and the Joint Plan of Action
67. Some States have expressed uncertainty regarding the status of Security
Council sanctions in the context of the Joint Plan of Action, in particular concerning
procurement for nuclear activities that are currently prohibited. Uncertainty
concerning such procurement could grow in the event of a comprehensive
agreement under which the Islamic Republic of Iran may maintain certain nuclear
activities, while Security Council sanctions continue to prohibit the supply of
__________________
42 S/2013/331, para. 116.
43 See International Federation of Freight Forwarders Associations, E-Flash newsletter No. 57

(5 July 2013), para. 8, “Increased use of counterfeit bills to and from Iran”.
44 See “General rules for cargo acceptance from Iran”, Maersk Line, available from

http://my.maerskline.com; “Rules for goods to and from Iran”, Safmarine, available from
http://mysaf2.safmarine.com.

14-04008

25/54

S/2014/394

proliferation-sensitive materials. 45 Members of the private sector are also closely
following developments with the Islamic Republic of Iran and are eager to resume
normal trade with the country. Many have begun to rebuild commercial ties to the
Islamic Republic of Iran and expressed optimism that the Joint Plan of Action would
quickly sweep away barriers to expanded trade.

B.

Procurement financing
68. The Islamic Republic of Iran faces substantial difficulties accessing the
international financial system because of the sweeping impact of unilateral
sanctions. For this reason, it uses a variety of channels for financing procurement
including both banking and non-banking methods. Distinguishing between financial
transactions connected with legitimate trade and with procurement for prohibited
activities remains a challenge for States. The Panel does not have information to
confirm that any of these channels are specifically used for financing prohibited
activities, but they could be used for this purpose.
69. Member States, when implementing requirements for ensuring vigilance when
business is done with Iranian entities, should take into account the possible
mechanisms for financial transactions described below and in annex V.

1.

Use of banking channels to finance procurement
Transactions through institutions in neighbouring States
70. The Panel continues to receive information from States and financial
institutions that Iranian companies could operate through trading companies or shell
companies in neighbouring States. 46 Depending on local regulations, such shell
companies would have a mix of Iranian shareholders (resident outside of the Islamic
Republic of Iran) and local shareholders, or exclusively local shareholders acting on
behalf of the Iranian parties (as the presence of Iranian shareholders would trigger
enhanced due diligence by banks). These shell companies open accounts at an
international bank in the relevant neighbouring State. The bank undertakes appropriate
due diligence (requesting, for example, shareholder details, incorporation
documents and source of funds), but the shell companies do not reveal their true
purpose. Trading companies may have operated for many years with established
bank accounts and have no record of connections with the Islamic Republic of Iran.
71. One scenario described to the Panel suggested that trading and shell companies
could place orders for goods from the United States or Europe, acting on behalf of
Iranian companies, but with the orders making no reference to the Islamic Republic
of Iran. To pay for the orders, the Iranian companies would transfer funds to a
branch of an Iranian bank in a neighbouring State. Funds are then transferred from
that branch to an account held by the trading or shell company at a branch of an

__________________
45 One member of the Panel considers that an additional challenge for States, obliged to implement

relevant Security Council resolutions, is maintenance of transparency and accountability by the
E3+3 and the Islamic Republic of Iran during negotiations for a comprehensive solution.
46 The term “trading company” is used here to mean an established business buying and selling
different types of products from and to businesses located overseas. Such a company is not an
end user. A “shell company” is used here to mean an entity that may exist only in name and
which has been set up specifically to carry out procurement by Iranian entities, while shielding
their involvement.

26/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

international bank in the State concerned, but in a way that obscures the Iranian
bank’s role. The transfer could take place in cash or through the trading or shell
company’s account with a local, non-Iranian intermediary bank. The international
bank thereby has no information that the transaction has any Iranian connection. The
trading or shell company can then instruct that payments be made to the bank
account of the companies in the United States or Europe that supply the goods.
Possible role of small Iranian banks
72. The majority of State-owned and large Iranian financial institutions are
excluded from the international financial system as a consequence of unilateral
sanctions. Several States, financial institutions and commercial entities highlighted
the role of small banks in financing legitimate transactions. Some of those banks
were known for active outreach activity to generate new business overseas. A
commercial entity reported that it received payments for goods sold to companies in
the Islamic Republic of Iran by means of letters of credit issued by one such Iranian
bank. States have highlighted the possibility that illegitimate trade could be carried
out under legal transactions.
Overseas accounts held by the Central Bank
73. The Central Bank of the Islamic Republic of Iran is not designated under
Security Council sanctions, but resolution 1929 (2010) refers to the need for
vigilance over financial transactions involving the Bank. The Central Bank
maintains accounts in local currencies in certain States for the purpose of receiving
payments for sales of oil or other energy products and transacting legitimate trade in
the local currency. The sums in such accounts can be on the order of billions of
United States dollars. One State reported that in 2011 a local businessman, using
falsified documentation, fraudulently transferred sums equivalent to about $1 billion
from the Central Bank account to several different States overseas. Their end use is
not known to the Panel. This example demonstrates the need for adequate vigilance
to prevent the potential abuse of this method of financing legitimate trade.
2.

Use of non-banking channels to finance procurement
Hawala/money exchanges
74. In the past, private companies and Member States have described the role of
hawala in small transactions. A legal expert who has handled cases related to hawala
transactions informed the Panel that hawala brokers or money exchangers may also
be used by large companies to effect payments equivalent to millions of dollars from
entities in the Islamic Republic of Iran. Although the practice is not illegal within
the State concerned, it is risky and expensive.
75. An example provided by that expert described a transaction between an Iranian
and an overseas company for the purchase of goods worth several million euros. The
foreign company received a down payment of 30 per cent through customary
banking channels. He noted that such channels for transferring funds out of the
Islamic Republic of Iran are limited and frequently unavailable, so that the balance
of the subsequent payment for the goods had to be made by the Iranian customer
through a money exchanger in Tehran. The money exchanger arranged to deliver the
outstanding balance in a series of payments using a partner in the State concerned,

14-04008

27/54

S/2014/394

with cash delivered by hand or deposits made directly into the company’s bank
account from third parties. The methods of balancing the payments are not known.
Barter
76. Barter trades can provide a means for the Islamic Republic of Iran to undertake
legitimate trade without resorting to the international financial system, in particular
for commodities or raw materials. During the current mandate, the Panel consulted
with one firm that has engaged in such trades with the Islamic Republic of Iran, as
well as with a number of experts in the private sector experienced in such trading
practices. The Islamic Republic of Iran has legitimate demand for raw materials and
there are no provisions under Security Council resolutions that explicitly prohibit
such trades.
77. During its enquiries, the Panel obtained information detailing specific barter
trades involving aluminium between an Iranian entity and a private sector firm.
They serve to illustrate how such trades can be structured in a manner that allows
the Islamic Republic of Iran to acquire significant quantities of a raw material, in
this case alumina, without purchasing it through a financial system that is
increasingly closed off to Iranian entities, in particular to State-owned enterprises.
Annex VI describes one of the transactions in greater detail.
Forfaiting
78. One Member State drew the Panel’s attention to the role of forfaiting houses in
financing legitimate procurement. Forfaiting is a form of international supply chain
financing in which forfaiting houses pay the supplier and then take money from the
purchaser. They assume all political and commercial risks and, for this reason, can
be an expensive way to conduct trade. 47 They operate largely outside the banking
system. One expert noted that payment using forfaiting houses was used until two
years ago when they became the target of unilateral sanctions. The Panel has also
investigated two cases of illicit procurement in which forfaiting methods were used
by parties involved.

III. Sanctions implementation challenges
A.

Export controls
79. Export control and customs enforcement remain the major instruments of
effective sanctions implementation. Member States consulted by the Panel during
the reporting period demonstrate a growing awareness of necessary export control
and customs procedures. Most States consulted by the Panel have substantial export
control legislation and regulations in place.
80. States emphasize the importance of coordination in the implementation of
export control and customs. Such coordination takes several forms, including
intragovernmental, between Member States in the sharing of information, and
between States and the private sector.

__________________
47 The website of the International Forfaiting Association, the international trade association for

institutions engaged in forfaiting, provides details on the business (www.forfaiters.org).

28/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

81. Major challenges to effective implementation of sanctions are insufficient
capacity, inadequate training of customs or export control authorities, difficulties
identifying dual-use items, identification of suspicious end users or end uses, and
issues related to intangible technology transfer.
82. Some States believe that the absence of significant trade with the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the absence of production of sensitive goods, and geographic
distance from the Islamic Republic of Iran would make them unlikely targets for
procurement. Such States may be unaware of the Islamic Republic of Iran’s complex
procurement techniques. 48
83. Identification of proliferation-sensitive items. Most States rely to different
degrees on electronic risk management systems as part of their export control. These
systems can be of varying quality. Some rely only on control lists that are
insufficient to identify below-threshold items. Additional risk identifiers should be
included, such as information regarding end use and end users, and denials.
84. Differences in implementation of catch-all provisions. The interpretation of
catch-all provisions varies among States. Some cases investigated by the Panel
illustrate the consequences of different interpretations by States which lead to
different decisions as to whether to interdict. Another element in the effective
implementation of catch-all provisions is the timely sharing of available relevant
information among concerned States.
85. Intangible technology transfer. Universities and research centres that have
traditionally hosted large numbers of students and scientists from abroad are
increasingly vigilant regarding the risks of intangible technology transfer to Iranian
nationals. One State, which did not have a policy to control access to sensitive areas
of study, reported a significant increase in applications by Iranian students, the
number of which in previous years had been close to zero.

B.

Private sector internal compliance procedures
86. During this mandate, the Panel consulted with a number of manufacturers
whose products were identified in shipments inspected by the Panel. Those
companies maintain robust internal compliance procedures and have a high
awareness of proliferation risks. One of the issues identified in the course of internal
enquiries by the companies was the role of overseas distributors.
87. In one case, the company required all recipients of its product in certain
countries to submit a letter of assurance for each shipment. The letter of assurance
forbade the reselling, retransfer or re-export of the product without the prior consent
of the company. However, the recipient and its subcontractors misunderstood or
failed to comply with the letter of assurance. In a second case, the company
concerned had a written arrangement with its distributor to ensure that its equipment
would not be transferred to the Islamic Republic of Iran. In both cases, the written
arrangements proved ineffective and could not preclude the delivery of the items to
unintended recipients.

__________________
48 One State, geographically distant from the Islamic Republic of Iran and with a low volume of

bilateral trade, informed the Panel that one of its manufacturers was approached by the Islamic
Republic of Iran to export many tons of steel plates in 2013. The manufacturer had little experience
in such exports. Although steel plates are not a controlled item, this procurement may suggest
that the Islamic Republic of Iran is seeking to develop new sources of goods or materials from
countries with relatively little experience of dealing with relevant Security Council sanctions.

14-04008

29/54

S/2014/394

C.

Incident reporting challenges
88. Member States continue to inform the Panel that domestic legal prosecutions
hinder their ability to report alleged violations to the Committee. However, two
States, despite similar legal considerations, have found ways to report incidents and
provide information to the Committee and the Panel, while maintaining
confidentiality as appropriate.
89. The Panel notes that in three of the cases reported to the Committee items
were confiscated by the State because they were suspected to be used in Iran’s
chemical weapons programme, including in manufacturing Sarin gas. The Panel
understands that such cases are not addressed by current Security Council
resolutions concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran.
90. The Panel’s experience has shown that the reporting requirements and
timetables set forth in resolution 1929 (2010) and prior resolutions do not work well
in practice. No State has ever reported an incident within five working days of an
inspection of interdicted items, and few submit second or subsequent reports.
Different reporting requirements in the resolutions might create uncertainty among
States regarding what and when they report to the Committee. Annex VII further
illustrates the challenges faced by States when reporting incidents of non-compliance.
91. The Panel reiterates the importance of States understanding that reporting does
not indicate weaknesses in their control measures, or ineffectiveness in
implementation of sanctions. On the contrary, reporting attempted or alleged
violations of sanctions indicates that States are implementing sanctions effectively.

D.

Disposal of seized items
92. When interdicting and seizing items pursuant to paragraphs 14 and 15 of
resolution 1929 (2010), States face challenges such as costs, and safe and secure
storage of potentially hazardous materials. States may be reluctant to stop shipments
and dispose of items where there are concerns about the legal and financial
implications of such actions.
93. Because of these challenges, and on the basis of their interpretation of
paragraph 16 of resolution 1929 (2010), some States have returned seized items to
the originating State. On several occasions, some States have disposed of interdicted
shipments before the Panel has carried out an inspection. The Panel encourages
States to wait until an inspection by the Panel has been conducted before disposing
of seized shipments.

E.

Designations of individuals and entities
94. During the current mandate the Panel has continued to study the practical
impact of designations of individuals and entities under the relevant resolutions. All
such individuals and entities are connected with the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
prohibited activities, including senior members of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard
Corps and certain IRISL entities.

30/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Travel by designated individuals
95. The Committee has not been notified during the mandate period of any
reported violations of the travel ban. The Panel is unable to establish whether this is
because designated individuals have not travelled, or such travel has not been
identified and reported. However, the Panel was informed that Major General Qasem
Soleimani, Commander of the IRGC Quds Force, has travelled regularly over the
mandate period to at least two of the countries neighbouring the Islamic Republic of
Iran. 49 Then-Brigadier General Soleimani is designated under resolution 1747 (2007).
Khatam al-Anbiya construction company
96. Khatam al-Anbiya (KAA) is designated under resolution 1929 (2010) as an
IRGC-owned company involved in “large-scale civil and military construction
projects and other engineering activities”. The designation further notes that KAA
subsidiaries were “heavily involved in the construction of the uranium enrichment
site at Qom/Fordow”. In January 2014 a media report published a document
containing a directive from the Special Economic Directives Division of the
Supreme National Security Council of the Islamic Republic of Iran ordering Iranian
banks and State firms to facilitate the establishment of new front companies related
to Khatam al-Anbiya in order to help IRGC evade United Nations and other
sanctions. 50 The order, which was issued in April 2013, is reportedly intended to
obscure the relationship of such companies to Khatam al-Anbiya and make the
activities of the company appear innocent.
Irano Hind Shipping Company
97. The Panel continues to assess that the designation of the Irano Hind Shipping
Company (IHSC) under resolution 1929 (2010) has had little impact on the
operations of the company’s vessels. It remains difficult for States to identify
vessels that belong to IHSC, or other designated entities, because of frequent
changes of name and registered ownership.
98. IHSC was dissolved by shareholders in April 2013, although the process of
dissolution and liquidation of the company has been slow. The dissolution further
complicates efforts to identify vessels because some of them are now owned by
Indian entities.
99. During the current mandate, there were no changes in ownership of the six
remaining IHSC vessels. Despite the dissolution of IHSC, two crude oil tankers, the
Amin 2 and Tour 2, and one bulk carrier, the Sinin, remain active under the ownership
of shell companies for IHSC. During this period, those vessels anchored at the ports of
three States and sailed through the territorial waters of a number of others. No activity
was noted for the three other vessels, the Attar, Sattar and Teen (annexes VIII and IX).
100. Some States avoid freezing assets of IHSC or other designated IRISL
subsidiaries by disallowing their entry into their territorial waters for a variety of
reasons. One reason might be a lack of clarity regarding ownership of the vessel.
__________________
49 Dexter Filkins, “The shadow commander”, The New Yorker, 30 September 2013; Mushreq

Abbas, “Iran looks to Iraq for Syria support”, Al-Monitor, 13 September 2013; Ben Hubbard,
“Angry over Syrian war, Saudis fault U.S. policy”, New York Times, 25 October 2013.
50 See Sharq al-Awsat article on Iranian directive, 18 January 2014, available from
http://www.aawsat.com/details.asp?section=4&article=758036&issueno=12835#.U2eWqPldVqM.

14-04008

31/54

S/2014/394

Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
101. IRGC as a whole is not designated under the relevant resolutions. Its senior
leadership is designated under resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007). In addition,
some entities designated under the resolutions are owned, controlled, or acting on
behalf of IRGC.
102. Some designated individuals no longer hold the positions referred to in the
designation lists of resolutions 1737 (2006) and 1747 (2007). The designation lists
have not been amended or updated since the adoption of resolution 1929 (2010). Many
States have expressed frustration that the current lists do not reflect these changes.
103. The following table, based on open-source information, illustrates these
changes. In providing this information, the Panel is not seeking to propose additional
names for designation.
Designated individual (current position)

Position

Current commander

Major General Yahya Rahim Safavi
(Senior Military Aide to the Iranian
Supreme Leader) a

Commander of IRGC Major General Mohammad Ali Jafari

Brigadier General Morteza Rezaie

Deputy Commander
of IRGC

Brigadier General Mohammad Reza Zahedi
(Commander of Quds Force Lebanon) c

Commander of IRGC Brigadier General Mohammad Pakpour
Ground Force

Major General Hossein Salimi

Commander of IRGC Brigadier General Amir Ali Hajizadeh
Air Force d

Rear Admiral Morteza Safari

Commander of
IRGC Navy

Rear Admiral Ali Fadavi

Brigadier General Mohammad Hejazi
(Deputy Chief of Staff of the Iranian
Armed Forces)e

Commander of Basij
Resistance Force

Brigadier General Mohammad Reza Naqdif

Brigadier General Qasem Soleimani

Commander of
Quds Force

Promoted to Major General

Vice Admiral Ali Akbar Ahmadian

Chief of IRGC
Joint Staff

(Position eliminated)

Brigadier General Hosein Salimi b

a

“Leader’s adviser blames certain Arab States for fueling extremism”, Tasnim News, 10 January 2014; “Leader’s military aide:
first bullet on Iran means Israel’s destruction by Hezbollah”, Fars News, 11 February 2014.
b
Designated as IRGC Air Force Commander under resolution 1737 (2006).
c
Will Fulton, The IRGC Command Network: Formal Structures and Informal Influence (American Enterprise Institute, Critical
Threats Project, July 2013).
d
The IRGC Air Force was renamed as IRGC Aerospace Force, as a result of IRGC restructuring late in 2009.
e
“Commander: change in enemies’ tone testifies Iran’s might, stability”, Fars News, 1 October 2013; “Commander: Iran ready
to assist Iraq in countering terrorism”, Tasnim News, 5 January 2014.
f
Designated as a former Deputy Chief of Armed Forces General Staff for Logistics and Industrial Research under resolution
1803 (2008).

32/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

104. States have conveyed to the Panel their interest in receiving additional
information regarding designated individuals, in particular bio-identifiers, passport
numbers, and dates of birth. The Panel notes that there is limited information
regarding some of the designated individuals available in the public domain.
105. While the economic activities of IRGC have been affected by sanctions,
difficulties in accessing foreign technology have driven them to develop indigenous
technical capabilities. 51 On a number of occasions such as the Festival of the Armed
Forces’ Industrial Researches, IRGC has demonstrated improvement in military
technological capability and new armaments, including missiles and drones. 52
106. Although IRGC remains politically and economically powerful, President
Rouhani has recently taken steps to limit its influence by reducing the number of
former IRGC officials in his Cabinet. 53 The Rouhani Government decided not to
grant a contract to Khatam al-Anbiya for the construction of a highway from
Tehran. 54

IV. Activities of the Panel
107. The Panel’s activities have been carried out in conformity with its programme
of work for the period from 9 June 2013 to 8 June 2014, as required under paragraph 2
of resolution 2105 (2013).
108. The Panel’s composition at the time of the submission of the report is as
follows: Salomé Zourabichvili (France), Coordinator; Jonathan Brewer (United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland); Chunjie Li (China); Thomas Mazet
(Germany); Jacqueline Shire (United States of America); Kazuto Suzuki (Japan);
Elena Vodopolova (Russian Federation); and Olasehinde Ishola Williams (Nigeria).
109. In addition to the activities described in paragraph 3, the Panel contributed to a
number of seminars and workshops (annex X).
110. The Panel also met, held teleconferences, or corresponded with experts
affiliated with international organizations, think tanks and universities, trade
associations, and representatives of many private companies (manufacturers, freight
forwarders, shippers, banks, consultancies and others). These include the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Financial Action Task Force, IHS Jane’s,
the Aluminum Association, the London Metal Exchange, the Industrial Bank of
Korea, Woori Bank, Standard Chartered Bank, Toray Ltd., Vacon, Parker Hannifin
__________________
51 Zachary Keck, “Iran to unveil new submarine, UAVs, fighter jets and missiles”, The Diplomat,

24 August 2013; “Iran can build any kind of missiles: Defense min”, Press TV, 1 March 2014;
“Iranian army unveils new home-made military equipment”, Fars News, 20 April 2014; Arthur
Holland Michel, “Iran’s many drones”, Center for the Study of the Drone, 25 November 2013;
Sam LaGrone, “Iran launches new submarine class”, U.S. Naval Institute News, 27 November
2013.
52 “DM underlines Iran’s fast progress in achieving new military technologies”, Fars News,
24 February 2014; “President Rouhani visits exhibition on defensive achievements”, Tasnim
News, 1 March 2014; “Iran DIO research projects 3th festival”, IBIR News, 24 February 2014
(accessed 21 April 2014).
53 Ali Alfoneh, “President Rouhani’s Cabinet: MOIS vs. IRGC?”, Foundation for Defense of
Democracy Policy Brief, 7 August 2013.
54 Babak Dehghanpisheh, “Iran deal raises tension with IRGC”, The Daily Star (Lebanon),
11 February 2014.

14-04008

33/54

S/2014/394

SSD Drives, Gambica, Brian Ellis (consultant), Siemens plc United Kingdom,
Dubai Ports World, Markus Schiller (Schmucker Technologie), British Iran Chamber
of Commerce, ASAN Institute for Policy Studies, International Strategic Research
Organisation (USAK), Centre for Information on Security Trade Controls, Istituto
Affari Internazionali, Ignazio Messina and C., Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Asexma
Chile A.G., and Håkan Andersson (Saab AB).
111. The Panel submitted to the Committee its midterm report on 9 November
2013. Annex XI contains a list of all reports submitted by the Panel during the
current mandate.
112. No national implementation reports were received under resolution 1929
(2010) during the reporting period. More than half the States have yet to report.
113. The Committee, with the assistance of its Panel of Experts, held an open
briefing for Member States, in New York, on 15 July 2013. This exercise enabled
States to hear from the Committee and the Panel, ask questions, and better
understand issues related to sanctions implementation and the work of the
Committee.
Acknowledgments
114. The Panel wishes to acknowledge the continuing high degree of cooperation
from many States during the course of its work. It also acknowledges valuable and
proactive engagement from many private sector entities. The Panel wishes to
express gratitude for the continuing support from the United Nations Secretariat.

34/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Annex I
Member States visited by the Panel
1. Albania

26. Greece

51. Qatar

2. Armenia

27. Guatemala

52. Republic of Korea

3. Australia

28. Hungary

53. Romania

4. Austria

29. India

54. Russian Federation

5. Azerbaijan

30. Iraq

55. Saudi Arabia

6. Bahrain

31. Israel

56. Serbia

7. Belarus

32. Italy

57. Singapore

8. Belgium

33. Japan

58. Slovenia

9. Brazil

34. Jordan

59. Spain

10. Bosnia and Herzegovina

35. Kazakhstan

60. Sweden

11. Bulgaria

36. Kenya

61. Switzerland

12. Canada

37. Kyrgyzstan

62. Tajikistan

13. Chile

38. Lithuania

14. China

39. Luxembourg

63. The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia

15. Colombia

40. Malaysia

64. Togo

16. Croatia

41. Malta

65. Turkey

17. Cyprus

42. Morocco

66. Turkmenistan

18. Djibouti

43. Namibia

67. Ukraine

19. Ecuador

44. Netherlands

68. United Arab Emirates

20. Egypt

45. New Zealand

69. United Kingdom

21. Ethiopia

46. Nigeria

70. United States

22. Finland

47. Norway

71. Uruguay

23. France

48. Oman

72. Viet Nam

24. Georgia

49. Panama

73. Yemen

25. Germany

50. Philippines

States visited by the Panel during the current mandate are in bold.

14-04008

35/54

S/2014/394

Annex II
Items inspected by the Panel
Table 1
Finished goods
(1) Manufactured in
(2) Shipped from

Item

Quantity

Consignee according to documentation where available

1

Electrical discharge
machine toolsa, *

Seven

(1) Spain
(2) Spain

A front company in Turkey

2

Electromagnetic
equipment

Four items and
software

(1) Poland
(2) Poland

Electronic Afzar Az, No. 1
Rooz Alley Tavanir St.,
Vali-Asr Ave., Tehran b

3

Pressure reducers
(rupture discs)

24

(1) Canada, Brazil
(2) United Kingdom

Abadan Petrochemical Co,
No 6 Naft Street, Mirdamad Ave,
Tehran 191898553

4

Electronic chips
No information
and circuits (printed available
circuit boards)

(1) Islamic Republic of
Iran
(2) China

Pooya Kong Port Trading Co. (Ltd),
Unit 1, 4th Flr, No. 704 BTW c Shariati
& Bahar St, Engehlab Ave, Tehran.

5

Electronic chips
and circuits

No information
available

(1) Not known
(2) United States

No information available

6

Electronic chips
and circuits

38 items, 549 kg

(1) Not known
(2) Malaysia

An individual in Tehran

7

Stainless steel
bellows

7,000

(1) China
(2) China

Shahab Jamili d

8

Lead acid batteries

No information
available

(1) China
(2) China

No information available

9

Cold pilger

One

(1) Not known
(2) China

(a) Prime Star Shipping LLC, PO Box
42238, Dubai, UAE,
(b) Zamanian Zeinali General Trading
Co LLC

10

Electric oven

One

(1) Not known
(2) China

Telecommunications Corporation
Muhafaza Co, Iran

11

Bobbin inductors

150 items

(1) China
(2) Syrian Arab
Republic

An individual in Tehran

12

Inverters (frequency 670 items
changers)

(1) China
(2) China

An individual in Tehran

36/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

13

Item

Quantity

(1) Manufactured in
(2) Shipped from

Measuring devices

Several hundred
different items

(1) Not known
(2) China

Consignee according to documentation where available

Solaleh Tejarat Astara Co.
Ms. Darian, Unit 7, 4th floor
No. 18 Ahmadian St.; Khaled Eslamboli
St., Arjantin Square, Tehran

14

Fibreglass
reinforced plastic
cable carriers*

2,528 packages (ten (1) India
40 ft containers)
(2) India

Oil Industries Engineering and
Construction (OIEC) Group, No 2,
Pirooz Street,
South Kamranieh Ave, Tehran e

15

Fibreglass
reinforced plastic
cable carriers*

2,131 packages (six
40 ft containers)

(1) Not known
(2) India

Kala Tond Bar International Transport
Co., No 11, 2nd Flr, Lotfi St., Haft E
Tri Sq,
Tehran

16

Fibre optic cable
(fibre optic
gyroscopes)*

Three

(1) Russian Federation
(2) China

An individual in Tehran

17

Aluminium parts
(type 7075)
(machined parts)*

Several hundred
assorted

(1) China
(2) China

An individual with no further details

* Inspection reports on these items are still pending.
a
The end user of the tools was identified as Mapna Turbine Blade Manufacturing Equipment Co., 231 Mirdamad Avenue,
Tehran, P.O. Box 15875-5643.
b
The end user of the equipment was identified by the manufacturer to be the School of Electrical Engineering, Sharif
University of Technology, Tehran.
c
BTW in this context means “between”.
d
Shahab Jamili is listed in Trade Directories as Managing Director of Nicaro Engineering Co Ltd, Head Office Unit 13, Third
Floor, No 154/2, Dolatshad Bldg, Africa Street, Tehran. Nicaro Engineering has been associated by a Member State with
procurement for Iran’s prohibited nuclear activities.
e
According to State which carried out the interdiction, for re-shipment to Neka Novin Co. (known as Neksa Nero) Iran.

14-04008

37/54

S/2014/394

Table 2
Raw and semi-finished materials
(1) Manufactured in
(2) Shipped from

Item

Quantity

Consignee according to documentation where available

18

Sodium silicoflouride

1,000 boxes

(1) Not known
(2) China

No information available

19

Nitrogen
phosphorus devices

No information
available

(1) Not known
(2) United States

No information available

20

Aluminium alloy
2024 T3 cylinders
(controlled item)

21 cylinders,
625,000 kg

(1) Not known
(2) China

No information available

21

Chopped carbon

693 kg

(1) Not known
(2) China

No information available

22

Stainless steel bars

73 bars of different
dimensions

(1) Not known
(2) China

No information available

23

Pure iron bars
(DT4A)

1,002 kg

(1) Not known
(2) China

An individual in Tehran

24

Carbon fibre
(controlled item)

1,800 bobbins,
7,200 kg

(1) Japan
(2) China

Mina Tejarat Sanabad, of Mashad, Iran
(for attention of Hamidreza Afzalian
Shirvan)

25

Aluminium 7075*

507 kg of sheets

(1) China
(2) China

Towsan Tarabar Int’l Transport Co.,
No 01 West No 53 after Kordestan
Bridge, Mollasadra Ave., Tehran, Iran
P.O. Box 1991614661

26

Steel pipes*

Approx 22,000 kg
(including other
items in shipment)

(1) China
(2) China

Ocean Lotka International Shipping and
Forwarding Co. Unite 1602, 16th Floor
No 2230 Valiasr St, Sepehr Saee Tower,
Tehran

27

Titanium tubes
(concealed inside
steel pipes above)*

Ten

(1) China
(2) China

Ocean Lotka International Shipping and
Forwarding Co. Unite 1602, 16th Floor
No 2230 Valiasr St,
Sepehr Saee Tower, Tehran

28

Aluminium rods
(7075)*
(controlled item)

Approx 7,600 kg

(1) Not known
(2) China

An individual in Tehran

29

Zircon sand*

100,000 kg

(1) India
(2) India

Silicate Gostar Kaveh, 3rd Floor, Apt
No. 18, 181 North Shiraz Street,
Mollasadra Street, Tehran

30

Zircon sand*

208,000 kg

(1) South Africa
(2) South Africa

Kalayee Saree International Shipping &
Forwarding Co., No 296, Taleghani
Avenue, 8th Floor, Tehran

* Inspection reports on these items are still pending.

38/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Annex III
Attempted procurements of carbon fibre tow and fabric
The following cases illustrate the range of claimed end uses, procurement methods,
and inconsistencies which raised the suspicions of the authorities or manufacturer.
In no case did exports of carbon fibre take place.
Case 1. In December 2010, a South Asia-based trader forwarded an order placed by
a company in Tehran for 20,000 kg of carbon fibre tow. This material falls below the
control thresholds contained in the relevant resolutions. The stated end use was for
production of core conductor for electrical transmission cables. The company’s
website listed amongst its business partners several Iranian entities which were
sanctioned or designated under various different sanctions regimes on the Islamic
Republic of Iran. The stated end use for the carbon fibre tow appeared unusual in
the context. Separately, an independent expert noted that use of core conductor in
electrical transmission cables was fairly new technology which would normally be
used in construction of a new electricity distribution system, rather than in a country
with an existing system.
Case 2. In September 2010, an Iranian company attempted to purchase 100,000 kg
of carbon fibre fabric of a type controlled under lists in the relevant resolutions. The
stated end use was repairing and strengthening concrete structures. The company’s
website contained references to the role of composite fibre reinforced polymers in
maintenance and reinforcement of structures. The company was listed in at least one
online trade directory as a purchaser of carbon fibre fabric, textile and leather
products.
Case 3. In September 2010, a company in a State neighbouring the Islamic Republic
of Iran attempted to purchase 15,000 kg of carbon fibre fabric. This material falls
below the control thresholds contained in the relevant resolutions. The stated end
use was concrete reinforcement and repairing of concrete structures at civil
constructions in the State concerned. The purchaser’s commercial license appeared
to be falsified and the stated address and telephone numbers of the purchaser could
not be matched to any known data. The purchaser also could not be found in a
company registry.
Case 4. In November 2011 a company in a State neighbouring the Islamic Republic
of Iran attempted to buy 10,000 kg of unidirectional carbon fibre fabric. This
material falls below the control thresholds contained in the relevant resolutions. The
stated end use was rehabilitation and composite repair of structures such as
buildings and bridges. The end-use certificate was not initially signed or officially
endorsed but was subsequently signed on behalf of both consignee and end user by
the same person, a branch manager. The company had no obvious connection with
the carbon fibre trade, or use of carbon fibre. A registry of companies in the State
concerned revealed that the two owners were Iranian nationals. The branch manager
was also Iranian and turned out to be a former branch manager of the company in
Tehran. The managing director of the company denied that any order for carbon
fibre had been placed. Separately, authorities in the State neighbouring the Islamic
Republic of Iran carried out an investigation which showed that “the company had
never exported carbon fibre”.

14-04008

39/54

S/2014/394

Annex IV
Technical document regarding IR-40 heavy water
research reactor
The following are excerpts from an engineering and construction document
consisting of design specifications for the IR-40 reactor at Arak. It was submitted by
prosecutors in Germany as part of a legal proceeding against individuals who were
part of an overseas procurement network to obtain valves and other parts for the
reactor. This document came from the computer of an Iranian national who was
responsible for overseeing the procurement network. The case was investigated by
the Panel in its 2013 report (see S/2013/331, paras. 18-22).
There are four excerpts below: (1) a description of Project 200, the Islamic Republic
of Iran’s name for the IR-40 reactor project; (2) background describing the reactor
design; (3) a statement regarding the reactor’s location; and (4) information
regarding procurement which is to take place in the name of a petrochemical
company.

40/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

14-04008

41/54

S/2014/394

Descriptions of reactor background, and reference to deuterium
oxide, or heavy water

…………..

42/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Location of reactor

14-04008

43/54

S/2014/394

Procurement for reactor project as petrochemical company

44/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Annex V
Case studies illustrating financial transactions involving
Iranian entities
Case study 1. A foreign national set up a trading company in a State in the Middle
East and opened a series of accounts on behalf of the company at an international
bank in the State concerned. These accounts were denominated in local currency and
in euros, United States dollars, and other foreign currencies. Monitoring by the
international bank showed that the trading company’s account received funds in
local currency from only one source (a second company set up by another
foreigner). These local currency funds were then quickly switched into foreign
currencies and transferred overseas. This activity triggered investigations by the
bank, which indicated that the owners of the companies involved had links to the
Islamic Republic of Iran. The bank suspected the funds were coming from the
Islamic Republic of Iran and being channelled through the trading company into the
global financial system.
Case study 2. A foreign national set up a trading company in a State in the Middle
East and opened an account on behalf of the company at an international bank in the
State concerned. Monitoring by the bank showed a high turnover of funds, and the
bank suspected money-laundering was taking place. Investigations by the bank
showed that the foreign national’s stated employment was as a member of staff in a
second company, which had the same telephone number as the trading company.
Further investigation revealed that this telephone number was the same as that
belonging to two other companies previously identified by the bank as having
Iranian shareholders and being involved in Iranian business. The bank therefore
suspected the trading company was being used as a front for Iranian business.
Case study 3. A national of a State in the Middle East set up a company in that State
in partnership with a foreign national as a minority shareholder, and opened an
account on behalf of the company at an international bank in the State concerned.
Multiple large payments were being made from this account to several companies at
the same address in one State in Europe, and also to a second set of companies
sharing the same address in a second State in Europe. The bank’s monitoring
identified this pattern as possible money-laundering, and further investigation
revealed that the national of the State in the Middle East was also a manager of
another company that did business with the Islamic Republic of Iran.
These methods of transferring funds might be adopted by Iranian entities involved
in legitimate procurement. They could also be used by Iranian entities involved in
illicit procurement. They may therefore be of assistance to States implementing
obligations under paragraph 22 of resolution 1929 (2010) to require their companies
to exercise vigilance when doing business with Iranian entities if they have
information that provides reasonable grounds to believe that such business could
contribute to the Islamic Republic of Iran’s proliferation-sensitive nuclear activities,
its development of nuclear weapon delivery systems or to violations of Security
Council resolutions.
Many banks and other financial institutions already have in place strict due
diligence procedures to ensure they do not unwittingly process transactions that
might be subject to sanctions on the Islamic Republic of Iran. Such procedures

14-04008

45/54

S/2014/394

include prior screening of transactions that ensure no party involved is listed. In
addition many banks also carry out additional monitoring to detect patterns of
financial activity which might not be consistent with the declared activities of their
account holders. Some of the patterns of sanctions evasion may be similar to
patterns of criminal activity, such as money-laundering. Where such patterns are
detected banks will normally carry out further investigations. In many such cases it
is not possible to confirm whether a breach of Security Council sanctions has
occurred.

46/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Annex VI
Alumina-aluminium barter transaction
According to information obtained by the Panel, the Islamic Republic of Iran has
engaged in a number of barter transactions with international companies in which it
receives alumina in exchange for aluminium ingot. Alumina is the raw material
necessary for the production of aluminium.
The Panel understands that such transactions are routine in the case of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and have pre-dated the imposition of international sanctions.
In one example studied by the Panel, the Iranian smelter received 30 tons of
alumina, which would yield approximately 15 tons of aluminium.
Under the terms of the swap, the international company received approximately one
third of the yield, or 5.4 tons of aluminium ingot in exchange, leaving the Islamic
Republic of Iran with the balance of just under 10 tons.
Such arrangements offer advantages to both parties: the international company is
able to obtain aluminium ingot at an advantageous price, while the Islamic Republic
of Iran is able to obtain alumina without accessing the international financial
system.
The Panel wishes to emphasize that there are no prohibitions under Security Council
resolutions concerning the Islamic Republic of Iran that would prohibit such trades,
where there is no involvement of designated individuals or entities, or prohibited
programmes. The Islamic Republic of Iran has legitimate demand for raw materials
and there are no sanctions that prohibit barter or swaps in aluminium or other
materials.

14-04008

47/54

S/2014/394

Annex VII
Reporting and disposal — requirements and challenges

Difficulties in
technical
identification

Disposal prior to
Panel inspection

Delays in
reporting

Second
report
Disposal
of Items

Intelligence

Interdiction

Seizure

First
report

Inspection
by the Panel

Inspection
by State

No action taken

Possibly, no
suspicious item
was found

Few second
reports
submitted
Panel’s
inspection
report

State decides
not to report

Action by the
Committee

Note: Green gears are for States; blue ones for United Nations bodies.

48/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Implementation of United Nations Sanctions on Iran
The following outlines the steps necessary for effective implementation of measures from the seizure to disposal of interdicted items. Such steps
require strong political will, due diligence, international and domestic coordination, technical capabilities to identify and analyze suspicious items,
and prompt, appropriate actions.

Paragraphs
14, 15,
16, 17 of
Security
Council
resolution
1929 (2010)

14-04008

49/54

S/2014/394

50/54

Annex VIII
Changes in Irano Hind Shipping Company fleet since April 2013
Current name

Previous name

Current flag

Previous flag

Registered owner

Previous registered owner

Movement summary

Attar
IMO 9074092

Parisian
Trader

United Republic
of Tanzania

Malta

Alicia Marine
Company Limited*

– ISIM ATR Limited

At Bandar Abbas
since November
2012

– ISI Maritime Limited
– IHSC Limited
– Orientsea Shipping
Corporation
– Ratu Shipping Company
S.A.

Sattar
IMO 9040479

Belstar

Unknown

United Republic
of Tanzania

Alicia Marine
Company Limited*

– ISIM Sat Limited
– ISI Maritime Limited

At Bandar Abbas
since February 2013

– IHSC Limited
– Belstar KS
Sinin
IMO 9274941

Laurinda

Teen
IMO 9101649

Oriental
Dream

Togo

Unknown

Unknown

United Republic
of Tanzania

Alicia Marine
Company Limited*

– Isim Sinin Limited

Alicia Marine
Company Limited*

– Biis Maritime Limited

Eun Ji

– Pro Shipping Incorporated

– Doric Maritime
Corporation

Amin 2
IMO 9422366

Amin

Islamic Republic Togo
of Iran

Auris Marine
Company
Limited**

– Isim Amin Limited

Tour 2
IMO 9364112

Tour

Islamic Republic Unknown
of Iran

Auris Marine
Company
Limited**

– Isim Tour Limited

At Bandar Abbas
since February 2012

14-04008

14-04008

Current name

Previous name

Current flag

Previous flag

Ramtin
IMO 9003237

Volga

Islamic Republic Togo
of Iran

Registered owner

Previous registered owner

Tabuk Maritime
Incorporated

– Auris Marine Company
Limited

Movement summary

– ISIM Olive Limited
– ISI Maritime Limited
– Neste Oil Oyj
Desh Shobha
IMO 9459046

Taj Mahal

India

Malta

The Shipping
Corporation of
India Limited

– IHSC Limited

Note: Yellow denotes change, gray denotes ownership change to Indian companies.
* Address: c/o Irano Hind Shipping Co Ltd, PO Box 15875, Mehrshad Street adjacent to Sedaghat Street, opposite Park Mellat Vali-e-Asr Avenue, Tehran
(Source: IMO Company & Registered Owners Identification Numbers Database).
** Address: c/o Irano Hind Shipping Co Ltd, PO Box 15875, Mehrshad Street adjacent to Sedaghat Street, opposite Park Mellat Vali-e-Asr Avenue, Tehran
(Source: IMO Company & Registered Owners Identification Numbers Database).

S/2014/394

51/54

S/2014/394

Annex IX
Movement of Irano Hind Shipping Company vessels
2013.2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Banias Port
(Syria)

12 2014.1

2

3

4

Dongshan Port
(China)

Amin2 (oil tanker)

Banias Port
(Syria)

From Tartous
Port (Syria)

Banias Port
(Syria)

Banias Port
(Syria)

Tour2 (oil tanker)

Mongla Port
(Bangladesh)

Dafeng /Lianyungang
ports (China)

Zhoushan Port
(China)

Jiangyin Port
(China)

Sinin (bulk carrier)
Chittagong
Port
(Bangladesh)

Legend
: Iranian ports or surrounding ports
: Syrian Ports

Among the three active vessels of IHSC, Tour2 and Sinin are the most
active. Compared to previous years, the frequency of Tour2 visits to Syrian
ports has increased since the second half of 2013, which suggests that the
Tour2 has few obstacles in sailing through the Suez Canal even while flying
the Iranian flag. The Sinin sails largely between Iran and Asian countries.

: Other Ports

52/54

14-04008

S/2014/394

Annex X
Seminars and Workshops Attended by the Panel
No.

Seminar/Workshop

Country

Date

1

Financial Action Task Force plenary and working group
meetings

Norway

June 2013

2

Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering Annual
Meeting and Technical Assistance Forum

China

July 2013

3

International Institute for Strategic Studies Workshop on
United Nations sanctions on Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea

United Arab Emirates

September 2013

4

Wilton Park Conference on Evolving Challenges of Illicit
Nuclear Procurement

United Kingdom

September 2013

5

Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task
Force Workshop on implementation of Security Council
resolutions and combating money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism and proliferation

Jordan

October 2013

6

Women’s International Shipping and Trading (HK)
Association Workshop on Iran sanctions

China

October 2013

7

World Exports Control Review Forum

United Kingdom

November 2013

8

Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering Secretariat
Meeting on asset freeze requirement of Security Council
resolutions

Thailand

December 2013

9

International Institute for Strategic Studies Workshop

China

December 2013

10

China Arms Control and Disarmament Association
Workshop on international non-proliferation regime and
regional arms control

China

December 2013

11

Asia Pacific Group on Money Laundering Secretariat
Meeting on targeted financial sanctions

United States of America

December 2013

12

African Union Workshop for African States on
Implementing Security Council resolutions

Ethiopia

December 2013

13

United States Department of State Conference on the
financing of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction

Qatar

December 2013

14

Institut de relations internationales et stratégiques
Seminar on conventional arms embargo

France

December 2013

14-04008

53/54

S/2014/394

No.

Seminar/Workshop

Country

Date

15

Financial Action Task Force plenary and working group
meetings

France

February 2014

16

Center for Information on Security Trade Control
Seminar on Asian export control

Japan

February 2014

17

King’s College address on the scope of United Nations
sanctions

United Kingdom

March 2014

18

China Arms Control and Disarmament Association
Workshop on non-proliferation and export compliance in
the composites

China

March 2014

19

Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering
Group Workshop on Implementation of Security Council
resolutions

United Republic of Tanzania

April 2014

20

Workshop on Security Council resolution implementation

Saudi Arabia

April 2014

21

Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
Middle East and North Africa Financial Action Task
Force Regional Workshop on asset freeze requirement of
Security Council resolutions

Tunisia

May 2014

54/54

14-04008
