120

General Assembly-Thirty-second Ses~ion

that the outflow of such personnel represents a significant loss to those countries,
Taking into account the fact that a Group of Governmental Experts on Reverse Transfer of Technology will
be convened by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development in accordance with resolution 2 (I) of the Committee on
Transfer of Technology,
Taking note of the constructive proposal made by
His Royal Highness Crown Prince Hassan bin Talal of
Jordan at the sixty-third session of the International
Labour Conference on 10 June 1977, concerning the
establishment of an international labour compensatory
facility to compensate labour-exporting countries for
their Joss of highly trained personnel,
1. Recommends that the Member States concerned
and the competent international organizations should,
as a matter of urgency, give due consideration to the
formulation of policies with a view to mitigating the
adverse consequences associated with the "brain drain";
2. Urges the developing countries to make a thorough evaluation at the national level of the special
characteristics of the "brain drain" problem;
3. Also urges the developing countries to give immediate consideration to the modalities for promoting
collective self-reliance among themselves with a view
to using and developing their human resources on the
basis of mutual advantage within the broader framework of co-operation in the field of trade, technology
and capital;
4. Further urges the developed countries to support
measures designed to encourage the absorption of
trained personnel within the developing countries and
to support the activities of the international organizations aimed at finding solutions to this problem without
prejudice to existing international agreements;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the International Labour Organisation
and bearing in mind the recommendations made by
the Group of Governmental Experts on Reverse Transfer of Technology, to undertake an in-depth study of
the "brain drain" problem. taking into account specific
proposals made on this subject, including the proposal
referred to in the eighth preambular paragraph above;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit the
results of the study to the Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fifth session and, through it, to the
General Assembly at its thirty-third session, taking into
account the relevant work being undertaken in other
parts of the United Nations system.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/193.

United Nations Negotiating Conference
on a Common Fund under the Integrated Programme for Commodities

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order and 3362 (S-VII)

of 16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling resolution 93 (IV) of 30 May 1976 of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development17u on the Integrated Programme for Commodi~ics
and the agreed time-table in that resolution concernmg
negotiation of a common fund and for the completion
of all preparatory meetings and negotiations on individual commodities,
Noting the intensive work at the three preparatory
meetings, held under the auspices of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development during the
period from November 1976 to March 1977, to provide
the necessary technical basis for the United Nations
Negotiating Conference on a Common Fund under the
Integrated Programme for Commodities,
Concerned that the first part of the Negotiating Conference, held from 7 March to 2 April 1977, failed to
produce any result,
Noting the agreement of Governments that a common
fund should be established as a new entity to serve as
a key instrument in attaining the agreed objectives of
the Integrated Programme for Commodities, as embodied in resolution 93 (IV) of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the agreement
that the specific purpose and objectives of a common
fund, as well as its other constituent elements will
continue to be negotiated in the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and the pledge to
secure a successful conclusion at the second part of
the Negotiating Conference, which was scheduled to
be held from 7 November to 2 December 1977 at the
plenipotentiary level,
Deeply concerned that the second part of the Negotiating Conference had to be suspended on 1 December
1977 because of failure to agree on even the basic elements of a common fund which would make it a key
instrument of the Integrated Programme for Commodities, in clear contradiction of the commitments made at
the Conference on International Economic Co-operation, held in Paris, and subsequently reaffirmed within
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Mindful of the serious repercussions which this lack
of result will have on the current negotiations on individual commodities and on the implementation of the
Integrated Programme for Commodities as a whole,
Acutely aware that the failure of the negotiations
on a common fund will adversely affect the course of
international economic co-operation, with serious consequences for the future relationships between developed
and developing countries,
Noting also that the developing countries and many
developed countries are agreed on those basic elements
of a common fund which will indeed make it a key
instrument for attaining the agreed objectives of the
Integrated Programme for Commodities, and expressing
appreciation to those countries which have announced
pledges to the common fund,
176 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Fourth Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.11.D.10
and corrigendum), part one, sect. A.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

1. Calls upon those countries which have not yet
done so to take the necessary political decisions on
such basic elements in order to enable the United
Nations Negotiating Conference on a Common Fund
under the Integrated Programme for Commodities to
resume its work within a clearly established negotiating
framework;
2. Reaffirms the urgency of establishing the common fund and, to that end, requests the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development to undertake consultations with a
view to reconvening the Negotiating Conference early
in 1978.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/197.

Restructuring of the ef'onomic and
social sectors of the United Nations
system 177

121

---------------

Member States, a Director-General for Development
and International Economic Co-operation, at a high
level which he determines as commensurate with the
functions outlined below, who, acting under the
authority of the Secretary-General, would effectively
assist him in carrying out his responsibilities as chief
administrative officer. under the Charter of the United
Nations. in the economic and social fields. Accordingly. the Director-General, under the direction of
the Secretary-General, should be in charge of:
"(a)
Ensuring the provision of effective leadership to the various components of the United
Nations system in the field of development and international economic co-operation and in exercising
over-all co-ordination within the system in order
to ensure a multidisciplinary approach to the probkms of development on a system-wide basis;

"( b) Ensuring, within the United Nations, the
coherence, co-ordination and efficient management
of all activities in the economic and social fields financed by the regular budget or by extrabudgetary
resources. 1 Ho

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order and 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling also its resolution 3362 ( S-VII) of 16
September 1975, by which it established the Ad Hoe
Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic and
Social Sectors of the United Nations System for the
purpose of preparing detailed action proposals with a
view to initiating the process of restructuring the United
Nations system so as to make it more fully capable of
dealing with problems of international economic cooperation and development in a comprehensive and
effective manner, in pursuance of General Assembly
resolutions 3172 (XXVIII) of 17 December 1973 and
3343 (XXIX) of 17 December 1974, and to make it
more responsive to the requirements of the provisions
of the Declaration and the Programme of Action on
the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order as well as those of the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States,
Reaffirming its desire to continue the process of restructuring the United Nations system, of which the
results of the work of the Ad Hoe Committee constitute
a valuable initial contribution,
I. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on the Restructuring of the Economic and Social
Sectors of the United Nations System 178 and expresses
its deep appreciation to the Chairman of the Ad Hoe
Committee for the excellent manner in which he conducted its work;
2. Decides that paragraph 64 179 of the recommendations contained in chapter III of the report of the Ad
H oc Committee should read as follows:
"64. The General Assembly should invite the
Secretary-General to appoint, in full consultation with

7. Requests all organs, organizations and bodies
within the United Nations system to implement these
recommendations within their respective spheres of
competence and to submit progress reports, including
plans for further implementation, to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session through the Economic
and Social Council at its sixty-fifth session;

1 7 1 See also sect. X.B.4, decision 32/447, and sect. X.B.7,
decisions 32/450 A to C.
1 7 8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-second
Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/32/34 and Corr.]) and Supplement No. 34A (A/32/34/ Add.]).
l 79 Paragraph 5 of section VIII of the provisional mimeographed text (A/32/34 (Part I)), p. 27.

180 This applies equally to all services and organs within the
United Nations without prejudice to their respective spheres
of competence or terms of reference as contained in their
relevant legislative mandates.
1H1 Comments made in the Ad Hoe Committee, at the resumed sixty-third session of the Economic and Social Council
and at the thirty-second session of the General Assembly.

"In addition, the Secretary-General could entrust to
the Director-General other tasks in areas of responsibility related to the ensemble of the economic and
social activities of the United Nations. The DirectorGeneral should be appointed by the Secretary-General for a period of up to four years. He should be
provided with the necessary support and resources.";

3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations
of the Ad Hoe Committee. as amended in paragraph 2
above and reproduced in the annex to the present
resolution;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to appoint a Director-General for Development and International Economic Co-operation as soon as possible, preferably
during the first quarter of 197 8;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to implement
those recommendations which are addressed to him,
to assist the organs, organizations and bodies involved
in the restructuring process and to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session, through the Economic and Social Council, within the scope of its competence, at its sixty-fifth session;
6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fourth session
a report giving further details on how he plans to
implement the conclusions and recommendations annexed to the present resolution in the light of comments
made 1 H1 and to seek guidance, as necessary, on issues
requiring further clarification;
