General A.11emhly-Twenty-firat Se11ion

60

Article 13
lrrespective of the notifications made under article 8, paragraph S, of the present Protocol, the Secretary-General of
the United Nations shall inform ali States referred to in
article 48, paragraph 1, of the Covenant of the following
particulars :
(a) Signatures, ratificatio11s and accessions under article 8;
(b) The date of the entry into force of the present Protocol
under article 9 and the date of the entry into force of any
amendments under article 11;
(e) Denunciations under article 12.

Article 14
l. The present Pr_otocol, of which the Ghinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish texts are equally authentic, shall
be deposited in the archives of the United Nations.
2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
transmit certified copies of the present Protoool to all States
referred to in article 48 of the Covenant.

B
The General Assembly,
Considering that the text of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the text
of the International Covenant on Civil and Poli.tical
Rights and the text of the Optional Protocol to the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
should be made known throughout the world,
l. Requests the Governments of States and ;iongovernmental organizations to publicize the text of
these instruments as widely as possible, using every
meaos at their disposal, including all the appropriate
media of information ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the immediate and wide circulation of these instruments and,
to that end, to publish and distribute the text .thereof.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

e
The General Assembly,
Considering the advisability of the proposals for the
establishment of national commissions on human rights
or the designation of other appropriate institutions to
perform certain functions pertaining to the observance
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights,
1. Invites the Economic and Social Council to request the Commission on Human Rights to examine
the question in all its aspects and to report, through
the Council, to the General Assembly;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member
States to submit their comments on the question, in
order that the Commission on Human Rights may
take these comments into account when considering
the proposals.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2214 (XXI). United Nations Cbildren's Fund
The General Assembly,
Taking the opportunity of the twentieth anniversary
of the United Nations Children's Fund to congratulate
Governments, organizations and individuals on their

support of and partnership with the Fund in its two
decades of significant contribution to the well-being of
children throughout the world and to international
solidarity,
Recognizing the value of aid from the United Nations
Children's Fund in helping developing countries accelerate and improve the operation of services benefiting children,
N oting with approval that the United N ations Children's Fund is helping Governments, as part of their
national development plans and programmes, not only
to protect their children and young people, but to ensurc
that they receive a suitable preparation for making their
contribution to the economic and social progress of their
countries,
W elcoming the fact that the training of national personnel in services benefiting children is now one of
the major features of aid from the United Nations
Children's Fund,
Commending the continued close co-operation between
the United N ations Children's Fund and .the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United
Nations Secretariat and the relevant technical and other
agencies in the United Nations family,
Deeply concerned, however, at the magnitude of the
unmet needs of children and youth in the developing
countries and the ever-increasing demands on the resources of the United Nations Children's Fund,
N oting with approval the support in the Economic
and Social Council and the Executive Board of ,the
United Nations Children's Fund for an income goal
of $50 million to be reached by the end of 1969, at
the clase of the United Nations Development Decade,
l. Endorses the activities and objectives of the
United Nations Children's Fund;
2. Urges Governments to increase their contributions to the United Nations Children's Fund and calls
upon supporting organizations, groups and individuals
to intensify their efforts so that the new income goal
may be reached ;
3. Recommends that Governments should includ.e
projects to meet the needs of children and youth in
their over-all development plans.
1498th plenary meeting,
19 December 1966.

2215 (XXI). World social situation
The General Assembly,
Reatfirming the solemn undertaking embodied in the
Charter of the United Nations to promote economic
and social progress and better standards of life in la.rger
freedom,
Recalling its resolutions 1916 (XVIII) of 5 December 1963 and 2035 (XX) of 7 December 1965,
N oting again with deep concern that, despite past
efforts, the world social situation is far from satisfactory,
N oting that progress in the achievement of the goals
and objectives set for the United Nations Development
Decade has been disappointingly slow,
Recognizing the importance of concerted practica!
action in the social field for attaining the goals of the
United Nations Development Decade,
