S/PV.8743

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8743rd meeting

Wednesday, 11 March 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Zhang Jun. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(China)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Allen
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Countering terrorism and extremism in Africa
Letter dated 26 February 2020 from the Permanent Representative of China to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2020/161)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-06352 (E)
*2006352*

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

Ms. DiCarlo: I commend the People’s Republic of
China for organizing this important meeting.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace and security in Africa
Countering terrorism and extremism in Africa
Letter dated 26 February 2020 from
the Permanent Representative of China
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2020/161)
The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Algeria,
Angola, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Guinea, Japan, Kenya, Morocco, Nigeria,
Senegal, Sierra Leone, the Sudan and Togo to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, on behalf of Secretary-General
António Guterres; Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, on behalf of Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union
Commission; and Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye, AssistantSecretary-General and Special Adviser to the United
Nations Development Programme Administrator, on
behalf of the Administrator.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite His
Excellency Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, to participate in
the meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2020/161, which contains a letter dated
26 February 2020 from the Permanent Representative
of China to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.
2/32

11/03/2020

Today, Africa is moving forward with its own
agenda of progress, peace and prosperity. Across
the continent, countries are growing and addressing
complex structural challenges, in line with the African
Union Agenda 2063. Civil society, communities and
Governments are working together as never before. The
United Nations is fully committed to supporting those
efforts and important progress has already been made in
implementing the United Nations-African Union (AU)
Joint Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security, and the AU-United Nations Framework
for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
However, the continent continues to face
vulnerabilities that threaten its peace and security,
hinder its economic development and undermine human
rights and the rule of law. Among those threats is that
of terrorism and violent extremism, which continues
to grow in various parts of the continent, despite our
efforts to prevent and counter it at the national, regional
and international levels. Al-Shabaab continues to pose
the most persistent threat to security in Somalia and
East Africa, despite the intensified military operations
against it in recent years. Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida affiliates collaborate with
each other to undertake increasingly sophisticated
attacks in West Africa, especially in Burkina Faso,
Mali and the Niger. ISIL also continues to operate in
Libya, despite recent setbacks, and is restructuring
and empowering its affiliates in Eastern, Southern and
Central Africa.
In the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin, the Islamic
State in the Greater Sahara, Boko Haram and its
splinter faction, the Islamic State West Africa Province,
continue to terrorize local populations and attack
security forces. I would like to take this opportunity
to remember the tens of thousands of African victims
of terrorism and to express my solidarity with the
affected Governments and people. Terrorism causes
deep lasting scars, and victims and survivors need not
only protection but a chance to heal through justice and
support for rebuilding their lives.
We know that women bear a disproportionate
burden of that violence, including through sexual
slavery. Just as misogyny is at the heart of so many
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8743

terrorist groups’ strategies, so must women be at the
centre of our responses.

cooperation and respect for human rights and the rule
of law.

The High-level Conference on Counter-Terrorism
and the Prevention of Violent Extremism Conducive
to Terrorism, which the United Nations co-organized
with the Government of Kenya in Nairobi last July,
has reinvigorated our common efforts to understand
and address terrorism in Africa. As the SecretaryGeneral has stated, we cannot address terrorism
without addressing its underlying factors. The threat
of terrorism is often a consequence of development,
humanitarian, human rights and security challenges
that terrorist groups seek to exploit. Security and
military solutions are therefore not sufficient.

We cannot overemphasize the importance of support
for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel), which can play a critical role in combating
terrorism, especially in the three border areas of Mali,
the Niger and Burkina Faso. The Pau summit in January,
convened by President Emmanuel Macron, put forth an
enhanced and focused strategy that could significantly
reduce the terrorist threat. I reiterate the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the international community to
provide strong support for the efforts of the G-5 Sahel.

We must address poverty, weak governance,
intercommunal tensions, gender inequality, youth
unemployment, illicit activities, such as the trafficking
in weapons and people, and the use of new technologies
and social media to recruit, inflame and incite. We
also need to better understand the specific threat
and priority needs of each country and subregion.
There is no one-size-fits-all solution; comprehensive
and inclusive all-of-Government and all-of-society
approaches are essential.
As terrorism has no borders, preventing and
combating it requires strong multilateral cooperation.
The United Nations remains committed to bringing
Member States together to share counter-terrorism
best practices, expertise and resources. The United
Nations works closely with African organizations
and Member States to promote a comprehensive
and balanced implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We supported the
development of regional counter-terrorism strategies
in the Sahel and Central and Southern Africa and we
support the implementation of the strategy adopted by
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development for
the Horn of Africa and Tanzania.
Further to requests from Member States, we
are supporting African-led and African-owned
initiatives in priority thematic areas, including
protecting vulnerable targets; countering terrorists’
travel; developing coordination mechanisms for law
enforcement; enhancing the capacity of Member States
to investigate and prevent cyberattacks; engaging
with parliamentarians to implement relevant counterterrorism obligations and promoting South-South

Terrorism is an evolving and pervasive
multidimensional threat. I encourage Member States
and other partners to take advantage of the upcoming
review of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism
Week, to strengthen our efforts and partnerships.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mohammed.
Ms. Mohammed: On behalf of the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission, His Excellency
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, I wish to start by
congratulating your delegation, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and thank you for extending an invitation to
a representative of the African Union (AU) to speak at
today’s timely and very important debate. You also have
our support as we work to strengthen the partnership
between China and Africa for the benefit of peace,
security and stability on the continent. We congratulate
your delegation on the successful conclusion of the
negotiations of the presidential statement to be adopted
later today.
Today’s meeting is indeed taking place at a time
when terrorism and violent extremism are assuming
unprecedented scales of expansion and intensity within
and beyond the African continent. In addition to the
situations in the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin and the
Horn of Africa, terrorism is now spreading to other
parts of the continent previously spared by the menace.
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo elaborated on that
fact in great detail.
We cannot ignore the fact that those regions are at
war today — a real war in which dozens of soldiers
and civilians die almost every week. Thousands of

20-063523/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

children have seen their schools closed either because
they are destroyed or because teachers and pupils
alike have been forced to flee. Populations have lost
their homes and livelihoods, while basic infrastructure
has been devastated, reversing development gains and
threatening prospects of any kind of future for the
people of those regions for decades to come.
In the meantime, the tools employed by terrorist
groups are becoming increasingly sophisticated.
The double-edged sword of technology is a reality
we have to grapple with as techniques become more
sophisticated, as we have seen with the reality of drone
terrorism. Terrorist groups have also perfected the art of
recruitment, facilitated by the use of cyberplatforms and
structural vulnerabilities, such as poverty, ethnic and
religious fissures and competing political ideologies.
Extremist and other criminal groups use social media
and online recruitment platforms to spread radical
propaganda to the general public in various languages.
We must also recognize that the sophistication of
terrorist groups does not stop at their radicalization
and recruitment strategies. Over the years, they have
morphed into well-organized shadow Governments,
providing services and in some cases acting as the
judge, jury and executioner.
Terrorism is also fuelling intercommunal
violence. We have seen in the past how terrorist
groups have exploited tensions among communities in
several countries.
The complexity of terrorism and violent extremism
on the African continent defies generalizations and
one-size-fits-all policy responses. The AU approaches
have therefore evolved in response to such complexities.
As early as 1992, the AU took steps to address terrorism
through the adoption of resolutions and declarations on
strengthening cooperation among its member States.
In the late 1990s, the continent recognized the need
for a robust multidimensional approach and therefore
adopted the 1999 Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism, which provides, among
other things, measures to counter terrorist financing,
strengthen the criminal justice response to terrorism
and foster inter-State police and judicial cooperation.
In 2004, the Convention was supplemented by
a Protocol, which addresses the convergence of
terrorism and organized crime. That was done at a
time when piracy and kidnap-for-ransom appeared
as new means of securing funds for terrorist groups.
4/32

11/03/2020

The AU institutions have also continued to build the
capacities of intelligence services, law enforcement
agencies and other institutions to prevent and combat
terrorism, in line with the African Union instruments
and frameworks. Those institutions include the African
Centre for the Study and Research on Terrorism, the
Committee of Intelligence and Security Services
of Africa and, most recently, the AU Mechanism for
Police Cooperation. Furthermore, the Nouakchott and
Djibouti Processes for Enhancing Security Cooperation
in the Sahel and East Africa regions, established under
the auspices of the AU, have served as catalysts for
cooperation among the intelligence services of the
countries and regions concerned.
In addition to that, AU peace support operations,
such as the African Union Mission in Somalia and adhoc security coalitions, such as the Multinational Joint
Task Force and the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel, have demonstrated to the rest of the world
the commitment of Africa to eliminate terrorism. The
international community has therefore understood
the urgent need to provide those mechanisms with
the predictable and sustainable support that is
commensurate with the challenges at hand. Against that
background, I would like to emphasize three points,
based on our experience in Africa.
First, as we manage this scourge, we have recognized
more than ever that reinforcing our efforts to ensure the
conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism must be
addressed in an integrated and comprehensive manner.
There is a need to focus more on prevention, while
integrating security and law-enforcement responses,
as well as sustainable post-conflict stabilization
and reconstruction.
Secondly, more work is needed to understand
the motivation, particularly for young people, to join
the ranks of violent extremist groups. The dominant
and stereotypical explanation has been that they are
unemployed and marginalized individuals who have
succumbed to the appeal of charismatic fanatical leaders
who provide opportunities otherwise unavailable to
them. But research conducted on the continent indicates
that that is not always the case. In fact, there is often
a combination of factors, some of which are neither
religious negotiationsor ideological. That is not to say
that ideology and religion do not play an important
role in many instances. Nonetheless, there is a need
for policy responses that are specifically designed to
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

address the local realities and the multiplicity of factors,
whether economic, ethnic, political or religious.
Thirdly, concerning the international community
as a whole, we need to pay more attention to the factors
that lie beyond the immediate local context. From the
conflict in the Middle East to the rise of Islamophobia
and right-wing extremist groups in the West, these
issues are craftily integrated into the narrative of
violent extremist groups to portray a global injustice
and instil fear and hatred. We should therefore be
mindful of the fact that conditions that provide fertile
ground for violent extremism have to be addressed both
locally and globally.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the AU’s
commitment to fully assume its share of responsibility
in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
However, we should also be mindful of the fact that
the responsibility rests on all of us and that we need
to act collectively to confront this scourge, which not
only undermines international peace and security
but also the very values and principles that have long
characterized our diverse and democratic societies.
All Member States must continuously seek to work
together through approaches that do not cause harm,
but rather reflect the principles that bind together our
international community, with a sense of solidarity and
responsibility for the immediate and long-term welfare
of all societies across the globe.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Ms. Mohammed for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Dieye.
Mr. Dieye: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to brief the Security Council today. I
would like to highlight the need to prevent violent
extremism through an approach grounded in sustainable
development and human rights. I will highlight how the
United Nations is using such an approach to successfully
address violent extremism in Africa.
We stand ready to support you, Mr. President, in
your efforts to support peace, prosperity and progress in
Africa. Let me first state emphatically that development
effort is yielding an economic renewal, peace and
prosperity on the continent. Countries even in the Sahel
are showing significant economic growth potential,
with a projected 6 per cent in Burkina Faso and the
Niger, 5.6 per cent in Chad, 3.6 per cent in Mauritania
and 4.8 per cent in Mali. All countries in the region

S/PV. 8743

have undertaken voluntary national reviews at the
High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development
and are making progress to achieve many Sustainable
Development Goals. Let us not forget the progress in
Africa and the promise of Africa, and let us celebrate
the development investments that underpin them.
Yet we see that the African continent is increasingly
challenged by instability, especially in what is now
referred to as the arc of instability spanning the Sahel,
the Lake Chad region and the Horn of Africa, with
epicentres in the Liptako-Gourma triangle, central
Mali, the Lake Chad basin and Somalia. We in the
international system are also challenged to address
that instability, given our lack of empirical evidence.
So often, we do not know with absolute certainty the
specific needs of communities and institutions, the
strategies that work to meet those needs or how we can
invest to achieve measurable, sustained impact.
That is why the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) serves the system by investing in
quality research and evidence-based programming to
enable action. For example, our approach to preventing
violent extremism is based on groundbreaking research
that draws on interviews with more than 700 former
members of violent extremist groups to understand
the drivers of recruitment. Our 2017 study Journey
to Extremism in Africa: Drivers, Incentives and the
Tipping Point for Recruitment finds that 55 per cent
of voluntary recruits express frustration over their
economic condition; 83 per cent believe that their
Government looks only after the interests of a few;
more than 75 per cent have zero trust in politicians
and law-enforcement institutions; many have a low
level of education; and the majority of recruits come
from borderlands or peripheral areas that have suffered
generations of marginalization.
In those ungoverned and neglected spaces, which
are hotspots of violence, communities experience a
lack of access to services, such as education, health
care, justice, security, livelihoods, the opportunity
to influence the decisions that affect their lives and
the opportunities they need to thrive. Those are the
challenges that underpin violent extremism.
In addition, our 2019 report Invisible Women:
Gendered Dimensions of Return, Rehabilitation and
Reintegration finds that many violent extremist groups
in Africa have co-opted the message of women’s
empowerment and improved socioeconomic conditions.

20-063525/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

11/03/2020

Many women who voluntarily join are attracted by that
message. If these root causes of violent extremism are
not addressed, the risk of the continued recruitment of
women, including the re-recruitment of many thousands
of female returnees, will continue.

Fundamentally, that would entail fostering community
ownership, sustained investment in human capital,
strengthening regional governance mechanisms and
kick-starting economic prosperity through scaled-up
investments at the local, national and regional levels.

Allow me to reiterate the primacy of prevention
in addressing those root causes of violent extremism.
Investing in prevention is good economics. A report
jointly published by the United Nations and the World
Bank shows that every $1 invested in prevention
reduces the cost of conflict by over $16 in the long
run. Investing in prevention protects a State against a
loss of 2 to 8 per cent of gross domestic product per
year. And yet the majority of funding is not allocated
to prevention and peacebuilding, but to crisis response.
According to a 2018 report issued by the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, only
2 per cent of the total official development assistance
to fragile countries went to prevention, and only 10 per
cent to peacebuilding.

UNDP is a global leader in providing support to
address the root causes of violent extremism. We
bring development solutions to complement security
measures through a practice of global prevention of
violent extremism, with regional and national projects
for 34 countries.

Investment also tends to overly focus on securitized
approaches, even though we know that such approaches
carry a risk of increased violent extremism. Our research
demonstrates that the trigger for 71 per cent of people
who join violent extremist groups is their experience of
law enforcement committing human rights abuses.
A purely securitized approach to violent extremism
ignores the evidence about what must be done to
effectively address that challenge. We know that
development solutions are needed to address the proven
root causes of violent extremism, and we know that
they are effective. We have data to show that dialogue
supports significant attitude and behaviour change
among people from different political, religious and
social groups. We have empirically demonstrated that
projects integrating psychosocial support, skills training
and education reduce extremist tendencies among youth
and increase tolerance in communities. We have data
to show that investing in women’s empowerment and
gender equality promotes peace and security.
Hence an integrated and balanced approach to
security and development is needed to effectively
address the challenges posed by violent extremism.
Security interventions should aim to reinforce human
security — mending the social contract between the
State and society where it has eroded and strengthening
social capital among communities where it has
frayed — thus leading to more robust social cohesion.
6/32

Since 2015, our regional project to prevent violent
extremism in Africa has supported 21 countries across
the continent. Based on research from the Journey to
Extremism in Africa report, UNDP’s regional project
has a reputation as a thought leader, trusted partner
and innovator on the prevention of violent extremism
in Africa. The project has shown that political will
for collaboration in preventive cross-border activities
is key to addressing spill-over effects. The Chinese
philosopher Lao Tzu used to say that war horses breed
in the frontiers. Neglecting one’s frontiers leads to war
and violent extremism.
At UNDP, we cherish the importance of
partnership. We believe in the “all of United Nations”
approach. We work closely with the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, the Peacebuilding Fund and
other members of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact. We also ensure close
collaboration with members of civil society, the private
sector and faith-based organizations.
Let me conclude by saying that we applaud the
African Union (AU) for its visionary support to the
Silencing the Guns campaign to promote prevention,
management and resolution of conflicts in Africa
through the control of illegal weapons. We salute the
AU for recognizing the need for whole-of-society
approaches to address violence in all its forms. We
invite the AU’s Peace and Security Council to unify
supporters of the diverse perceptions and interpretations
of the concept of the prevention of violent extremism.
We also call on all Member States to strongly invest
in, and to scale-up, risk-informed development and
prevention to sustainably address violent extremism by
tackling its root causes. The United Nations system will
continue to play a decisive role in support of Africa.
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank Mr. Dieye
for his briefing and for his review of the philosophical
ideas of Lao Tzu.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to the statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2020/5.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of China.
China thanks the briefers, namely, UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, speaking
on behalf of Secretary-General António Guterres;
Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed, speaking on
behalf of Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of
the African Union Commission; and Mr. Abdoulaye
Mar Dieye, Assistant-Secretary-General and Special
Adviser to the United Nations Development Programme
Administrator, speaking on behalf of the Administrator.
Terrorism is the common enemy of all peoples of
the world. At present, the context of the international
counter-terrorism effort is complex and challenging.
The threat of terrorism is such that no country is immune
or untouched by it. What affects one country affects all.
As a continent blessed with the greatest development
potential, Africa has been deeply troubled by terrorism
and violent extremism in recent years. While old
problems persist, new threats have been emerging.
Africa is increasingly becoming the front line in the
global response to terrorism. Terrorist organizations,
taking advantage of the instabilities in some parts of
Africa, have been infiltrating and spreading across
the continent, disrupting regional stability and
socioeconomic development and undermining world
peace and security at large. It behoves the international
community to take swift, effective and coordinated
actions to help put African countries in a better position
to address terrorist threats with greater capabilities,
resources and means in order to eradicate the breeding
grounds for terrorism once and for all and to combat
terrorism and extremism in a comprehensive and
integrated manner.

S/PV. 8743

In that vein, China takes note of presidential
statement S/PRST/2020/5, just adopted, regarding
capacity-building, training and sharing of best
practices and lessons learned, as well as strengthening
the internal coordination of United Nations agencies.
The statement reflects the key points of consensus we
have reached. China believes that it can provide critical
guidance for our next steps. I would like to take this
opportunity to underscore the following points.
First, we must apply uniform standards across
the board and forge consensus on counter-terrorism.
Counter-terrorism in Africa is an important part of the
global fight against terrorism. In helping Africa fight
this scourge, the international community should uphold
uniform counter-terrorism standards. All terrorist
activities must be dealt with unflaggingly, regardless
of the flags the perpetrators fly, the countries the
perpetrators target or the tactics they employ. Linking
terrorism with specific religions or ethnicities should
be avoided.
China supports the United Nations in playing a
central coordinating role in helping African States build
greater counter-terrorism capacity and in prioritizing
counter-terrorism
capacity-building
in
African
countries. We support the international community
in providing counter-terrorism assistance to African
countries with no political strings attached.
Secondly, we should take a holistic approach
and tackle terrorism and extremism root and branch.
Underdevelopment in the socioeconomic sphere is a
major driver for the breeding and spread of terrorism
and extremism in some parts of Africa. Many African
countries are confronted with a whole raft of challenges
in infrastructure, development, poverty eradication,
employment, education, public health and social
protection. It is incumbent upon the international
community to help African countries continue to
implement the Agenda 2063 of the African Union (AU)
and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development to achieve lasting peace and stability
through economic development, poverty eradication
and improvement of peoples’ livelihoods.
In particular, attention should be focused on
education and employment of African youth. The
briefers today all referred to issues in this area. We
should do everything we can to help African youth
not fall prey to the pernicious influence of extremist
ideologies. During the Beijing summit of the Forum on

20-063527/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

China-Africa Cooperation, China launched eight major
initiatives, many of which are designed to provided
African youth with assistance and training, so that they
are better educated and more employable.
Thirdly, we must respect Africa’s leadership and
ownership consistently. When helping Africa in its fight
against terrorism, the international community should
support African countries in finding African solutions
to African problems. When providing counter-terrorism
assistance, the international community should respect
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of the countries concerned, take fully on board the
views and ideas of African countries and regional
organizations, support their priorities, feel compassion
with them as they face their anxieties and concerns, and
focus on solving those issues considered most urgent
by the countries concerned. It is particularly important
to help African countries acquire improved capabilities
and means for, inter alia, fighting terrorism, enhancing
information-sharing, combating foreign terrorist
fighters, and putting an end to terrorist financing and
the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes. We hope
that the implementation on the ground of the relevant
measures articulated in the presidential statement will
be possible.
Fourthly, we should give play to the role of regional
organizations and create synergy for fighting terrorism.
African countries cannot go it alone in combating
terrorism and extremism in Africa. The African
Union and other relevant regional and subregional
organizations have a more comprehensive knowledge of
the countries in the region and their counter-terrorism
needs. They are uniquely positioned to help to solve the
continent’s issues. China supports African countries in
coming together to empower themselves and tackle the
threat of terrorism as one. We shall continue to support
the AU Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative.
It is our hope that the United Nations will scale
up its coordination and cooperation with the African
Union and other regional and subregional organizations,
support African countries in actively implementing
relevant Security Council resolutions and the United
Nations global counter-terrorism strategy, step up
the sharing of best practices and lessons learned, and
work in synergy. China attaches great importance to
the concerns of African countries and stands squarely
behind African countries and regional organizations
in their tireless efforts to combat terrorism and
violent extremism.
8/32

11/03/2020

Through the China-United Nations Peace and
Development Fund we provide financial support for the
United Nations counter-terrorism training programmes
in Africa. During the Beijing summit of the Forum on
China-Africa Cooperation mentioned earlier, we decided
to establish the China-Africa Peace and Security Forum
and the China-Africa Peace and Security Cooperation
Fund in support of cooperation in peace and security
between my country and the African continent. We have
provided, through the African Union, ¥300 million of
assistance to counter-terrorism operations in the Sahel
region and the development of the Group of Five for the
Sahel Joint Force. We shall continue to provide materiel
and capacity-building systems to African countries for
the purposes of combating terrorism to the best of our
capabilities. China is ready, along with the rest of the
international community, to support and assist African
countries in combating terrorism and extremism, and
continue our constructive contributions to peace,
stability and development in Africa.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, we extend special thanks
to the Chinese presidency for convening this debate
on such a critical and worrying topic, which deserves
our full attention and commitment. We are pleased
with the presence and the words of Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and the briefings by Ms. Fatima
Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, and Mr. Abdoulaye
Mar Dieye, Assistant-Secretary-General and Special
Adviser to the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme.
The dramatic deterioration of security in
West Africa, particularly in the States of the Sahel
region — in Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger — as a
result of violence caused by terrorism is simply alarming,
having increased fivefold — according to known
official estimates, to more than 4,000 reported deaths in
2019 compared to 2016. Together with the international
community, the Dominican Republic expresses its
strongest condemnation of the terrorist attacks that have
caused these regrettable deaths, with the expression of
our most heartfelt condolences to the families of the
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

victims and our solidarity with the affected countries.
Such a high number of unjustified deaths is an urgent
call to be attentive and take bold and seamless measures,
based on a profound reflection that not only assesses
the limitations of these States in effectively confronting
the presence and threats of terrorist groups and violent
extremism leading to terrorism in their territories as
an additional element that exacerbates conflicts in the
region, but more importantly considers the causes that
give rise to it, its spaces and its followers.
We must pay particular attention to the dangerous
connection and collaboration of terrorist groups among
themselves and with transnational organized crime
syndicates that engage in trafficking in drugs, human
beings, illicit arms and cultural property, piracy,
exploitation of natural resources, among many other
crimes. It is a true synergy of evil that is weakening
the structures of States, slowing their development and
distorting their social fabric.
Consequently, we advocate, as we always do,
especially in the context of peace and security in
Africa, a proactive and broad participation of women in
the development of comprehensive strategies to address
the structural causes of the security crisis and actions to
combat terrorism and prevent violent extremism leading
to terrorism, recognizing the role of women in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, in peacebuilding
and in the management of post-conflict situations.
It is also important to strengthen the role, in
particular in decision-making, and to address the
needs of youth, who represent the vast majority of
the population. This will require a holistic approach,
with a focus on the whole of Government and all of
society, including civil society organizations, in efforts
to combat terrorism and violent extremism conducive
to terrorism, by creating development opportunities,
such as education and jobs, and minimum guarantees
of governance and security.
At the same time, we continue to be concerned
about the threat posed by the number of foreign
terrorist fighters returning to their countries of origin
or relocating to terrorist groups, which represents
an enormous challenge for African countries both in
terms of resources and logistics. In that regard, we
call for ongoing international support to strengthen
their capacities for prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration, among many other areas.

S/PV. 8743

The fight against terrorism and violent extremism
conducive to terrorism requires the full and effective
implementation of the relevant resolutions, including
those on the prevention and suppression of the financing
of terrorism, as well as all relevant sanctions measures
against individuals, groups, enterprises and associated
entities. That is where cooperation among States and
the support of subregional and regional organizations
becomes indispensable.
We therefore commend the efforts and progress
made in that regard by African countries, the African
Union and other subregional and regional entities, as
well as the ongoing support of relevant entities of the
United Nations system.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, allow me to express my gratitude
to the Chinese delegation for the initiative to convene
a Security Council debate on the urgent issue of
countering terrorism and extremism in Africa. We
would like to thank today’s briefers, Ms. DiCarlo,
Ms. Fatima Mohammed and Mr. Abdoulaye Dieye, for
their interventions. We align ourselves with presidential
statement S/PRST/2020/5, which was promptly
prepared by our Chinese colleagues. Along with the
other Council members, we reaffirm our solidarity with
the Governments of the countries of the Sahel, the Lake
Chad basin and the Horn of Africa in their legitimate
efforts to combat the threat of terrorism. At the same
time, we would like to emphasize that the challenges
and security threats that we are discussing today are
unfortunately becoming just as relevant to the entire
African continent.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our
sincere condolences to the families and friends of the
civilians and military and law enforcement personnel
of African countries whose lives were taken in the
wave of violence and terrorism that has swept across
the continent in recent months.
The devastating impact of extremism and terrorism
is today particularly evident in West Africa, where there
has been a significant increase in the number of terrorist
crimes in just a few years. The situation is complicated
by a number of radical forces joining the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), its transformation into
an extensive underground terrorist network and the
establishment of new regional affiliates. In that regard,
the presidential statement adopted today highlights the
need for comprehensive implementation of Security

20-063529/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

Council sanctions against ISIL cells in West Africa, the
Greater Sahara and Libya.
Following the military defeat of ISIL in Syria and
Iraq, the flow of foreign terrorist fighters into Africa
has increased. Disguising themselves as migrants and
refugees, they carry out sabotage and recruitment
activities, spreading extremist and terrorist ideology
among young people and vulnerable groups. Our
Western colleagues regularly promote numerous
technical assistance projects for African countries
based on the politicized concept of preventing violent
extremism. In that regard, we would like to note a
few points.
First, any technical assistance in that area should
be provided only at the request of the States concerned.
It should also be borne in mind that not all States
have prevention mechanisms in which non-State
actors play a leading role. Civil society should clearly
be involved in preventing extremism and terrorism.
For example, the clergy, opinion leaders, the media,
educational institutions and sports organizations make
a significant contribution to that task. However, all that
will be meaningless if Government agencies do not
coordinate such efforts, acknowledging their primary
responsibility for maintaining public safety. I will not
focus in detail on Russian approaches to preventing the
spread of terrorist ideology, since that topic will be the
subject of a separate open briefing, organized jointly
with the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism,
on 16 March.
Secondly, in assessing the external assistance
needs of States in the region, priority should be given to
implementing universal counter-terrorism conventions
and protocols and Security Council resolutions, as
well as regional instruments. We note the African
Union’s own efforts in that context. In addition, we
call on States of the region to look more closely at
the innovative Shanghai Convention on Combating
Terrorism, Separatism and Extremism of the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, which is open to accession
by all interested parties.
Thirdly, in line with the presidential statement
adopted today, States and the relevant international
organizations should take a balanced approach to
analysing conditions conducive to the spread of
terrorism, paying equal attention to internal and
external factors. Clearly, resolving socioeconomic
problems, including reducing unemployment, would
10/32

11/03/2020

help to eradicate the breeding ground for terrorism.
At the same time, as I have already noted and as the
presidential statement rightly states, the current rise in
terrorism is largely due to the phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters and the expansion of major terrorist
groups, that is, external reasons. In fact, there are many
more such factors. In the past, certain countries did not
take into account that attempts to establish a system
of “managed chaos” would inevitably be followed by
a loss of control over the situation. The destruction of
statehood in Libya determined the nature of the current
terrorist threat in Africa. It is evident that it is difficult
to talk about progress in the fight against terrorism in
the region without progress in the reconstruction of
that country.
The Libyan context can also not be overlooked
with regard to the priority task of combating the flow
of arms to terrorists, in accordance with the document
adopted today. In his most recent report on small arms
and light weapons (S/2019/1011), the Secretary-General
expressed serious concern about the enormous quantity
of weapons from Libyan stockpiles that illegally enter
the countries of the Sahel and beyond. In other words,
that flow has not decreased even nine years since the
beginning of the civil war in Libya. Unfortunately, not
all countries are equally concerned about that problem.
In conclusion, I would like to note that Russia is
closely monitoring developments in key regions of
Africa. We already provide appropriate military and
technical assistance to a number of countries and
training to military and police personnel. We call on the
international community to pool its efforts in providing
technical assistance to African countries and to focus it
on the truly important aspects of combating extremism
and terrorism.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): I thank the briefers,
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador Mohammed and
Mr. Dieye, for their valuable interventions.
I am delivering this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council — the Niger,
South Africa and Tunisia — and Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines.
At the outset, we would like to thank China
for choosing to focus on the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism in Africa during its current
presidency of the Security Council. We welcome the
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5
on this issue, which constitutes a testimony of the
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

unified efforts of the Council to address and combat
this scourge.
Terrorism and violent extremism remain among
the most serious threats to Africa’s stability and
development. The threat is manifesting itself in
both small- to large-scale attacks on civilians
and infrastructure. In many instances, it evolves into
open armed confrontations, unprecedented in terms
of scale and impact, between terrorist groups and
State security institutions, leaving hundreds killed
or maimed, thousands displaced and living in poor
humanitarian conditions, disrupting economic activity
in the affected areas, instilling fear among populations,
creating confusion and, most of all, exhausting
the already limited capacities of State institutions
and forces.
It is important to note that terrorist groups in
Africa, while driven primarily by a local agenda, have
colluded with groups that existed beyond the continent,
as evidenced by the emergence of Al-Qaida and Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) local affiliates to
carry out their agendas in Africa. These dynamics
are having serious ramifications on the continent
with ISIL’s attempts to resurface on African territory,
particularly the Sahel region, while being driven out of
Iraq and Syria.
In fact, foreign terrorist fighters are increasingly
relocating into the continent. They are mainly attracted
to conflict zones and territories where Government
presence is weak, particularly along the porous borders.
They exploit local grievances, poverty, lack of public
services and security. They resort to the use of barbaric
force against populations and engage in cross-border
criminal activities.
In short, terrorist groups in Africa have become
a key factor of instability, exacerbating conflicts and
increasing their complexity, seriously challenging State
authority and threatening regional and international
peace and security. Certain Al-Qaida and Islamic State
groups appear to be working together and coordinating
attacks to grab large swaths of territory.
The ongoing war in Libya, fuelled by foreign
players who keep sending weapons and fighters, is
feeding this terrorist dynamic on the continent and
continues to reinforce terrorist groups and to affect the
situation in Africa, especially in the Sahel region. We
call on concerned States to respect their obligations
and to refrain from violating the Security Council arms

S/PV. 8743

embargo imposed on Libya. Likewise, we call on the
Security Council to take up its responsibility to ensure
full compliance with its related resolutions.
Similarly, the recurrent attacks suffered today by
the populations of the Sahel countries, the Lake Chad
basin and the Horn of Africa must challenge us all and
encourage us to take measures to maintain international
peace and security before it is too late.
No later than last Sunday, a terrorist group attacked
the villages of Dinguila and Barga, in northern Burkina
Faso, killing 43 people and wounding many others. We
condemn in the strongest terms this terrorist attack. We
extend our deepest condolences and sympathy to the
families of the victims and to the people of Burkina
Faso and express our solidarity and full support to
the Government of Burkina Faso in its efforts to
fight terrorism.
African States and communities have shown great
resilience and courage in standing in the face of terrorism
and violent extremism. However, the situation urgently
calls for the international community to strengthen
its active and coordinated action in support of these
efforts. In this regard, we would like to highlight the
need for further action in the following areas.
First, it is crucial to detect, disrupt and prosecute
all means of support for terrorism in Africa, including
providing financial resources to terrorist groups,
supplying them with weapons, including small
arms and lights weapons, facilitating the return and
relocation of foreign terrorist fighters to conflict zones,
as well as the exploitation of religion to radicalize
and recruit young people and to justify the use of
violence. Capacity-building programmes need to be
reinforced to counter terrorist narratives and the use of
information and communication technologies to spread
the terrorist propaganda.
Secondly, we must address the root causes
and conditions conducive to terrorism in Africa.
Terrorism and violence find a particularly conducive
breeding ground in negative national or regional
circumstances such as poor socioeconomic conditions,
marginalization, lack of education, unemployment,
gender inequality, human rights violations, political
instability, social unrest and armed conflict. It is
therefore important that States adopt comprehensive
and integrated strategies to counter terrorism by
promoting sustainable development, tackling poverty
and inequality, protecting and promoting human

20-0635211/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

rights, improving governance, including in the security
sector, cracking down on corruption and bolstering the
participation and leadership of youth and women at all
decision-making levels. These strategies need to adopt a
whole-of-Government and whole-of-society approach,
including through public-private partnerships and
cooperation with civil-society organizations in the
development, implementation and assessment of
counter-terrorism measures.
Thirdly, it is vital to address the existing and evolving
interlinkages between transnational organized crime
and terrorism. The operational efficiency of terrorist
groups in the region is enhanced by de-confliction
and collaboration between them and criminal groups,
as both use similar smuggling routes and invest in
lucrative illicit activities, including trafficking in arms,
drugs, cultural property and natural resources, as well
as through kidnapping for ransom, extortion, moneylaundering and robbery.
Fourthly, we must strengthen the capacity of States
to mitigate attacks on soft targets by establishing
effective means to develop and further implement
contingency and response plans in order to protect,
investigate, respond to and recover from damage from
terrorist attacks against soft targets.
Finally, we must enhance inter-agency, bilateral
and regional coordination and information-sharing,
particularly in the fields of border security and
management, criminal justice, travel information and
police and intelligence cooperation. In this regard, we
reiterate the importance of the efforts and initiatives of
the African Union, including the “Silencing the Guns”
campaign, aiming to achieve a conflict-free Africa,
prevent genocide, make peace a reality for all and rid
the continent of wars, violent conflicts, human rights
violations and humanitarian disasters. We also welcome
the cooperation with the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism in the organization of the African
Regional High-Level Conference on Counter Terrorism
and Prevention of Violent Extremism Conducive to
Terrorism, held in Nairobi in July 2019.
We seize this opportunity to call for stronger
and more coordinated international cooperation
to implement counter-terrorism measures and
initiatives in the region, particularly with regard to
the implementation of the international coalition for
the Sahel.
12/32

11/03/2020

In conclusion, we reiterate our commitment to
spare no effort in combating terrorism and violent
extremism on our continent and to renew our will to
do so, in accordance with the goals and principles of
the United Nations Charter and with respect for our
obligations under international law, including human
rights law, humanitarian law and refugee law. We stand
ready to cooperate with our partners and all relevant
stakeholders to achieve an Africa free from terrorism
and violent extremism.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): We are grateful to
China for organizing this meeting on an extremely
important topic, and we very much welcome today’s
adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5.
We are pleased in particular that it recognizes the
importance of a holistic approach, regional strategies
and action plans, as well as the importance of human
rights, the use of sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism
and tackling that, and the importance of building
inclusive and meaningful partnerships to counterterrorism, bring perpetrators to justice and prevent
violent extremism. It is relevant not only to Africa, but
beyond. I also thank our briefers for their very rich and
informative presentations.
As we have heard previously in this Chamber,
the terrorist threat in Africa is rapidly evolving, and
the threat of foreign terrorist fighters and returnees
highlights the risks posed by Da’esh and Al-Qaida
affiliates, including groups in Mali, the Niger and
Burkina Faso, among others. We are very pleased that
the United Nations has listed the Islamic State West
Africa Province and the Islamic State in the Greater
Sahara under the sanctions regime of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999).
But we also know that the threat of terrorism
does not follow boundaries. The United Kingdom
therefore stresses the value of international and
regional cooperation to identify threats, strengthen
responses and ensure that those responses align
with international norms and standards. Having the
right mechanisms and partnerships in place is key
to ensuring that we can exchange information about
plots and ensure that the perpetrators can be arrested,
investigated and prosecuted, in accordance with
national and international legal obligations. Too often,
information-sharing, even within Governments, is
inadequate, let alone between countries. But there is
a simple equation: the greater the information-sharing
and cooperation, the worst terrorists do. I am afraid that
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

the inverse is also true. Relations between countries
can be complex, but terrorism should always be a
common cause.
The Security Council has developed a robust
counter-terrorism framework. Member States must
continue to implement relevant resolutions. We stress
the important role of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) in working with States
to strengthen compliance with counter-terrorism
obligations and identify technical assistance needs.
We encourage the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
United Nations Development Programme and others
to follow up on CTED’s recommendations and help
Member States to strengthen their capacities. We
believe that the United Nations should continue to
work to enhance capacity-building efforts in Africa,
which also complement bilateral support given by
members of the Council and other States Members of
the United Nations.
For our part, the United Kingdom supports
counter-terrorism capacity-building projects through
bilateral programmes in countries throughout Africa,
which tackle different dimensions of counter-terrorism
and the prevention of violent extremism, including
through development, police, military and other
forms of security cooperation. A few examples, if
I might, are as follow. In East Africa, we have been
working with the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime to construct detention facilities in Somalia, in
line with international standards, while in Kenya,
we are collaborating to strengthen crisis response
and crime-scene management. In West Africa, we
are working with prosecutors in Nigeria on counterterrorism cases at the pretrial stage, with the aim of
a higher conviction rate, and we have collaborated on
aviation security.
I would also say, if I may, as the Foreign Office’s
National Security Director, I took control of the
Government’s response to the attacks in Tunis and
Sousse, where over 30 British nationals were killed. We
have worked tirelessly since with our Tunisian friends
to build capacity and support their — and I stress the
word “their” — security priorities. Elsewhere, we are
also working with local law enforcement and criminal
justice officials across different African countries to
build robust cases based on evidence to process those
terrorist cases through the court system to hopefully
achieve conviction and imprisonment and develop
rule-of-law-based operational responses.

S/PV. 8743

As highlighted by the presidential statement we
adopted today, tackling terrorism is not simply a matter
of security. Of course, security is vital, and, in all our
countries, it is crucial that we provide a proportionate
security response to stopping attacks and arresting
known terrorists. But it is not of itself sufficient. An
issue we face in many countries is the provision of
essential services by terrorist groups in particular
areas. Our approach must therefore be security-led,
while providing services and ensuring a positive impact
in communities.
What about those whom our security forces have
not been able to individually identify as terrorists
or as conducting terrorist attacks? That is where the
prevention agenda comes into play to prevent people
from becoming or supporting terrorists or violent
extremists. I want to stress Rosemary DiCarlo’s point
here: there cannot be a one-size-fits-all solution.
Prevention needs to be, above all, a local endeavour,
taking account of local factors and developed with
local communities and local authorities. What works in
London will not necessarily work in Manchester. What
is needed in Eastleigh will not necessarily be what is
needed in Mombasa.
Earlier I talked about counter-terrorism being a
common cause, even when relations between countries
are difficult. I can say, as the Foreign Office’s National
Security Director, that I also had the honour to visit
Moscow, and I have regularly discussed this issue
with my Russian colleagues. I feel that it is important
to keep dialogue open and work together on counterterrorism issues. We have enough arguments with our
Russian friends here, and I do not see any need to do
so on this issue. I am therefore not going to respond to
the Russian representative’s political points. But I do
want to say that, when I listen to the concerns that he
expressed, I want to reassure our Russian friends that
the prevention of violent extremism — the prevention
agenda — can never be an externally driven approach.
It can work only in cooperation with States, whether
at the national level or the local level, and it is not a
dichotomy between the two. State involvement and
community involvement should not be thought of as
exclusive. I hope that provides some reassurance as to
the United Kingdom’s view on the approach that we are
trying to take.
Let me draw to an end by saying that the nature
of the threat today calls for not just a whole-ofGovernment but also a whole-of-society approach,

20-0635213/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

11/03/2020

based on strong partnerships among Governments,
communities and international and regional actors.
But we also know that measures that infringe upon
human rights and put citizens at odds with their
own Government can exacerbate tensions and fuel
radicalization and recruitment by terrorist groups.
While States have legitimate concerns about terrorism,
we must stress that all responses must be proportionate.
As we so often reiterate in the Council’s resolutions,
measures must not foster association between terrorism
and any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic
group. That is not just what is the right thing to do, but
it is the most effective approach. Mass stigmatization
or repression of a minority or a religion is only likely to
fuel grievances and create a narrative that can further
radicalize individuals, locally and globally.

and other speakers, in particular the representative
of the United Kingdom, and that is prevention. It is
important to understand the reasons and drivers behind
individuals, specifically young people, joining terrorist
and extremist groups in order to then enable societies
and individuals to become resilient to terrorism and
extremist ideologies. What are resilient societies? They
are societies that respect the rule of law and human
rights, are inclusive and protect rather than marginalize
minorities, ensure the meaningful participation of
women and provide economic prospects. As Mr. Dieye
mentioned, not enough money is spent on prevention.
He gave us statistics on the much greater results yielded
by one dollar spent on prevention compared to the large
sums spent on crisis response.

Let me conclude by saying that the threat picture
is changing in Africa, and terrorists everywhere
continue to adapt their techniques and operations.
We see a fast-evolving situation on the continent,
with violent extremism spreading outside of terroristaffected countries and incipient groups forming in new
locations. That will have major long-term implications,
not just for the continent but also for security and
prosperity more widely. The United Kingdom stands by
our African partners and friends in this fight. It is one
that we must win.

Of course, the long-term approach of making
societies resilient has to be complemented by the work
of law enforcement agencies and by security sectors
that counter terrorism and prosecute perpetrators.
Moreover, it is very important how that is done and how
enforcement agencies act, that they be held accountable
for human rights and that they respect the rule of law.
I would like to pick up a figure cited by Mr. Dieye that
we should bear in mind, and that is that 71 per cent of
the respondents in the study he mentioned stated that
Government action, including human rights violations
and disrespect for fundamental principles such as
the rule of law, had triggered their joining a terrorist
or violent extremist group. The authors of the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) study came
to the conclusion that

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for putting this very important issue
on the agenda of the Security Council. We heard from
the three wonderful briefers as they gave a very bleak
picture of where we stand with regard to terrorism.
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo mentioned Al-Shabaab, Boko
Haram, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Al-Qaida affiliates. Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye
mentioned the arc of instability. And Ms. Fatima
Mohammed mentioned that whole regions are at war,
with infrastructure and livelihoods destroyed. She also
mentioned the technological advances by terrorists,
with the use of drone techniques, among others.
Ms. DiCarlo, as well as others, including Mr. José
Singer Weisinger, mentioned the number of victims,
reaching into the tens of thousands, who have been
killed. I agree with Ms. Mohammed that there are
very complex situations, which necessitate complex
solutions — or, as presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5
states, a holistic approach.
In terms of what we must do, I see significant
coherence in the responses provided by the briefers
14/32

“dramatic reappraisal of state security-focused
interventions is urgently required, including more
effective oversight of human rights compliance,
rule of law and state accountability”.
We should take that advice very seriously. The study
also points out that socioeconomic marginalization
fosters radicalization, though it draws the very important
conclusion that socioeconomic marginalization is not
the main driver of terrorism. In other words, poverty
does not automatically lead to terrorism, but on the
other hand prosperity does not immunize societies and
individuals against recruitment by terrorists. Thus,
again, the key is prevention, respect for human dignity,
the creation of an environment where young people can
earn a living, support families and have opportunities
for social, economic and political participation.
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Dieye also mentioned quality education in
his presentation. The UNDP study calls for childhood
education “enabling critical thinking, social cohesion,
peace education and civic engagement values”. In that
respect, what Ms. Mohammed said in her statement
about the fact that thousands of schools are closed is
rather depressing and extremely worrying because
the spaces created in schools are not intended for
the individual.
Furthermore, it is important to include gender
equality and a gender perspective in counterterrorism efforts. We say this frequently — in fact,
we said it yesterday in relation to Afghanistan (see
S/PV.8742) — gender equality and meaningful
participation in decision-making and peace processes
are crucial. We should also mention sexual violence.
We all remember the horrible acts of Boko Haram, a
group that has abducted hundreds of girls. One issue
that was new to me in reading the study, and which
Mr. Dieye mentioned, is female radicalization. That is
also something we have to look at.
I do not want to take up too much time. We need to
work on regional cooperation. That is clear. Germany
is co-Chair of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum,
and we actively participate in regional cooperation, in
particular with the Group of Five for the Sahel, about
which my French colleague will say more. In addition,
we work on disarmament and arms export control and
promote the Silencing the Guns initiative. However,
what remains the most important is national action
and national responsibility for counter-terrorism and
respect for human rights and international humanitarian
law. It is very important that the values we demonstrate
as Governments also strengthen our credibility in the
fight against terrorism.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chinese presidency for organizing this
debate on one of France’s major priorities, as well as
Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Mohammed and Mr. Dieye for their
introductory statements.
While the terrorist threat persists throughout the
world, the African continent has not been spared and is
even increasingly exposed to it, whether in the Sahel,
the Lake Chad basin, the Horn of Africa or, now, in
certain regions of central and southern Africa. Terrorist
groups continue to attack the authority of States and
civilian populations, and this threat is not distinct from
the international terrorist movement. Terrorist groups

S/PV. 8743

operating on the African continent are tied to Al-Qaida
and Da’esh and have links to organized criminal groups.
Our first priority must therefore be to develop
a global approach to the fight against terrorism,
involving all actors and addressing all the causes of the
phenomenon. In that regard, I welcome once again the
growing strength of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which, after 11 operations
in 2019, is pursuing its operational engagement
in close coordination with Operation Barkhane,
in particular through the establishment of a joint
command mechanism in Niamey. The strengthening
of international cooperation, in particular among the
States of the region, is a key prerequisite for a concerted
and effective approach to the fight against terrorism.
I also recall the outcomes of the Pau summit
of 13 January, which brought together the Heads
of State of the G-5 Sahel countries and their main
multilateral partners — the United Nations, the
African Union and the International Organization
of la Francophonie — and called for the launch of a
coalition for the Sahel with the aim of strengthening the
coordination of the international community’s efforts.
The coalition is based on four pillars — the fight
against terrorism, building security sector capacity in
the G-5 Sahel States, support for the redeployment of
sovereign services and development aid — in order
to address all the causes of terrorism. Finally, our
collective commitment also extends to the fight against
Al-Shabaab in Somalia and against Boko Haram in the
Lake Chad basin region, where we support, bilaterally
and via the European Union, the operations conducted
by our African partners.
Beyond the security response and the restoration
of State authority, we must act side by side with the
African population. Without action tailored to the
populations most exposed to the terrorist threat, namely,
women and youth, we will not be able to address the
root causes of the threat or respond effectively. Five
years ago, the Council recognized the role of women in
the fight against violent extremism in resolution 2242
(2015). It is time to translate that recognition into action.
Moreover, as nearly half of Africa’s population will be
under the age of 25 in 2050, we must take into account
that terrorist groups are recruiting among those young
people, some of whom are still children. Education, on
the one hand, and socioeconomic development, on the
other, are the keys to combating such recruitment.

20-0635215/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

In addition to education and respect for human
rights, we must also combat the spread of terrorist
propaganda that targets women and young people in
particular, especially on the Internet. The Christchurch
Appeal, launched in Paris in May 2019, is a new and
important contribution to our country’s efforts to
combat the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes.
Senegal was one of its early supporters and I am pleased
that several others have joined the Appeal.
Lastly, drying up the sources of funding is key
to the fight against terrorism. Resolution 2462 (2019)
reaffirms the obligations of States to combat terrorism
financing. For the first time, it also proposes solutions to
establish the necessary balance between criminalizing
financial support for terrorist activities and protecting
the humanitarian space. Its full implementation is
a priority.
The fight against terrorism, radicalization and
violent extremism must be carried out in accordance
with international humanitarian law, refugee law and
human rights law We reject the use of threat of terrorism
as a pretext for violating freedom of expression, the
right to protest and freedom of religion or belief.
Similarly, the fight against terrorism cannot be used as
justification for attacks on civilians or the repression of
humanitarian actors in Africa or elsewhere.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): First, we would like to
express our gratitude to Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo, Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed and
Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye for their insightful briefings.
Terrorism is a global threat and the international
community is united in the fight against it. Much has
been done in terms of legal instruments, cooperation
framework and concrete actions at all levels — national,
regional and global. In addition, considerable resources
have been mobilized for the fight. Yet, terrorism remains
a serious threat in many corners of the world, including
Africa where, for decades, people have longed for and
badly needed peace and stability. For that reason, we
would also like to thank the Chinese presidency for
organizing today’s timely and very important debate.
We are deeply concerned about the growing
number of attacks by Islamic State and Al-Qaida
affiliates in the Sahel, especially on the borders of
Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger. As stated in the most
recent report of the Secretary-General, those countries
suffer heavily from attacks against their Governments’
security and defence forces, humanitarian actors and
16/32

11/03/2020

even the Blue Helmets. The number of people killed
by terrorists every year in those countries is estimated
to have increased fivefold since 2016. In other parts of
Africa, including North Africa, the Lake Chad basin
and the Horn of Africa, terrorist groups, including
foreign terrorist fighters, are actively operating and
recruiting. Terrorism denies African countries and
people their rights to peace, stability and development.
With the existence and larger operation of terrorist
groups, the presence of State authorities will continue
to face serious limitations, making the fight even
harder Against that backdrop, my delegation would like
to stress the following points.
First, it is vital to address the root causes of
terrorism and the drivers of violent extremism
conducive to terrorism. Without that, terrorism will
persist and have a fertile breeding ground. We therefore
support the holistic approach to preventing terrorism
by strengthening governance, settling unresolved
conflicts, addressing exclusion, poverty and inequality,
enhancing sustainable socioeconomic development and
so on.
Secondly, to fight the spread of terrorism and
violent extremism, we need to step up our efforts to
reject their ideologies, narratives, hatred, division and
violent incitement, while promoting a culture of peace
and tolerance. The roles of world leaders, eminent
persons, the media, community leaders and so on in
that regard cannot be overemphasized.
Thirdly, terrorism cannot survive without finance.
It is therefore of the utmost importance to tear down
terrorist financing networks and further strengthen our
legal and institutional capacity to effectively prevent,
detect, stop and punish illegal acts. We urge all parties
to fully implement resolution 2462 (2019) on combating
terrorism financing, as well as other relevant documents.
Fourthly, we must effectively implement
international instruments and Security Council
resolutions on combating terrorism. At the same time,
we need to strengthen international cooperation,
assistance and solidarity for affected countries,
especially in terms of capacity-building and providing
resources. Cooperation among countries of the
region is vital, particularly in terms of a coordinated
response, strengthening data, intelligence and
experience-sharing, border security and management,
and cross-border coordination. We commend the
regional and subregional efforts of the African Union
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

(AU) in that regard, including the Organization of
African Unity Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism and the AU Plan of Action on
the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism in Africa,
the establishment of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel and the Multinational Joint Task Force in
the Lake Chad basin, and the Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020 initiative.
In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm our
strong condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We would also like to reiterate our
solidarity and readiness to cooperate with and support
our African brothers and sisters in their fight against
terrorism for peace, stability and development for all.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): First of all, I would like to commend the
Chinese presidency for convening today’s debate on
such a timely and important topic.
I also welcome the adoption of presidential
statement S/PRST/2020/5.
I thank Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Mohammed and Mr. Dieye
for their enlightening briefings.
As we have heard, Da’esh and Al-Qaida affiliates
are entrenched in conflict zones, in particular in the
Sahel, Somalia and the Arabian peninsula, where
they target, with misleading rhetoric, those who are
often marginalized and disillusioned by the dearth of
economic opportunities. Local conflicts are exploited
by terrorist movements, such as Boko Haram, Al-Qaida
in the Islamic Maghreb and Al-Shabaab. Such groups
appropriate functions generally conducted by States
by imposing their ideology of violent extremism. We
are concerned about the increase in the number of
attacks perpetrated by Da’esh and Al-Qaida affiliates
in the Sahel. The fact that such groups increasingly
work together, despite their rivalry in the Middle
East and elsewhere in the world, is also worrisome.
They attack civilian infrastructure, military convoys
and Government buildings. Terrorism on the African
continent dovetails with transnational crime and is
compounded by other sources of instability, such as the
proliferation of armed groups and human trafficking.
The challenges are formidable. We must overcome
them by working with the African continent. The
continent needs our support. Africa can count on
the support of my country and, as Belgium is a State

S/PV. 8743

member of the European Union, I can also say that of
the European Union.
As many representatives brought up earlier, I recall
the importance of following a comprehensive approach
in the fight against terrorism. It is indeed clear that the
phenomenon of terrorism in Africa extends far beyond
the area of maintaining law and order. It is also deeply
rooted in the challenges specific to the region and
requires an integrated and comprehensive approach
on the part of society. We will not succeed by simply
putting in place increasingly sophisticated surveillance
systems, or by creating a culture of repression at the
hands of security forces.
African countries in which terrorism finds fertile
ground are also in need of economic development
and political prospects rooted in quality education. It
is imperative therefore to continue increasing young
people’s resilience to withstand the toxic rhetoric of
Da’esh and Al-Qaida affiliates, while at the same time
providing them with sustainable and inclusive economic
opportunities and prospects for the future.
In that regard, I would like to refer to the joint
communication of 9 March from the European
Commission and the High Representative of the
Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, entitled
“Towards a comprehensive strategy with Africa”,
which highlights in particular the importance of our
cooperation on peace and governance.
In order to increase the resilience of African
communities to withstand the harmful influence
of terrorism, it will be imperative to strengthen
governance, address the sense of exclusion and the
lack of trust in Government institutions, enable civil
society to operate in a safe and thriving space, promote
political inclusion, including that of women, in the
development of strategies to combat violent extremism,
develop counter-terrorism policy that does not prevent
individuals and civil society from enjoying their human
rights and basic freedoms, acknowledge the significant
role to be played by non-governmental organizations
in the impartial delivery of humanitarian aid, and,
lastly, mitigate the negative effects of the fight against
terrorism on those humanitarian activities.
I welcome the fact that African countries are
increasingly coming together on this difficult issue,
with several regional and subregional initiatives in
partnership with the United Nations from which the
same conclusions are being drawn. The points that I just

20-0635217/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

brought up are reflected in the Charter of the United
Nations, numerous Security Council resolutions and
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. Belgium more
than ever supports the United Nations efforts in the
fight against terrorism on the African continent and the
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
organizations within that framework.
Lastly, the fight against terrorism can be effective
only if all measures taken by Member States to counter
it comply with all obligations under international
law, human rights law, international refugee law and
international humanitarian law. We stand ready to
continue our efforts in the fight against terrorism,
side by side and together with our African partners in
full solidarity.
Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Mohammed and Mr. Dieye for
briefing us on the evolving terrorist threat in Africa,
as well as on continuing United Nations and African
Union (AU) efforts to counter that threat.
By working together as a part of a coalition, the
United States and its allies deliver crushing blows to
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) in the
Middle East. Yet ISIS has shown a dangerous ability to
adapt by establishing ISIS branches around the world.
It usually does that by co-opting existing insurgencies
and filling the spaces that Governments either cannot
reach or to which they turn a blind eye.
While the phenomenon is not unique to Africa,
parts of the continent are especially vulnerable to this
growing threat. The Sahel and the Horn of Africa are
experiencing frequent attacks. We have seen that with
the Al-Qaida-affiliated group known as Jama’a Nusrat
al-Islam wal-Muslimin, which aims to carve out its own
territory in Mali and expand its sphere of influence
in the Sahel. Last month, Somalia-based Al-Shabaab
attacked an airfield in Kenya, killing three Americans.
Such terrorist groups prey upon innocent civilians,
kidnap foreigners and work to undercut legitimate
Governments or moderate voices, all while trying to
destroy basic human freedoms.
In order to tackle this threat in a comprehensive
fashion and eliminate the conditions conducive to
the spread of terrorism, it is imperative that we work
together. This starts with leadership, sound governance,
the rule of law and respect for human rights. As a study
from the United Nations Development Programme on
violent extremism in Africa found, State violence and
18/32

11/03/2020

abuses by police and military were often the catalyst
for radicalization to violence. That is true in Africa and
other parts of the world.
We must ensure that any measures that we take to
counter terrorism fully comply with our obligations
under international law to respect human rights,
fundamental freedoms and the rule of law. Counterterrorism efforts, including on the Internet, fuel
radicalization to violence when they do not respect
basic human decency. That means that counterterrorism can never justify the arbitrary incarceration
of dissidents, journalists or members of religious and
ethnic minority groups. Effective counter-terrorism
must be firmly rooted in full and complete respect
for human rights. They are mutually reinforcing, and
respect for fundamental freedoms is the essential part
of a successful counter-terrorism effort. Collective
security does not override individual rights.
The United States is working to build the capacity
of its African partners to prevent, detect, deter, disrupt
and prosecute terrorists across the continent. The
bottom line here is that terrorism can be beaten. This
is a fight that Governments and citizens can win. We
are working closely with our partners, like the Niger, to
train the military and police on how to transfer physical
and digital forensic evidence from the battlefield to
civilian law-enforcement authorities, thereby enabling
the prosecution of terrorists.
We are working throughout Africa to strengthen
criminal justice systems, empower women and girls at
risk of violent extremism, facilitate civilian security
and community cohesion, and cut financial flows to
terrorists, most of whom come from outside Africa.
We are also working with our multilateral partners to
address the evolving threat of terrorism globally, but
especially in Africa.
We are pleased that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate has prioritized
the region. In the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities, we
successfully listed ISIS in the Greater Sahara, ISIS
West Africa and ISIS Libya last month. We thank
the many countries that co-sponsored those listings,
and we encourage other Member States to join us in
identifying, sanctioning and targeting every ISIS
affiliate around the world.
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

However, Governments alone cannot prevent and
counter violent extremism. Civil society organizations
often have crucial knowledge of, and engagement
with, local communities to confront the challenges of
recruitment and radicalization to violence. Together we
can build communities resilient to terrorist narratives.
We need to broaden our efforts to include leaders in the
religious, education and youth development sectors who
can help contest the destructive vision that terrorists
are trying to advance.
In doing so, we must reject those who seek to bring
violent extremist ideology into schools or social systems.
For example, the United States recently partnered with
the Mauritian Government to help officials identify
risk factors of terrorism, speak out against terrorism
and reach vulnerable youth and offer them relevant,
positive and appealing alternatives. A comprehensive
approach to countering terrorism has proven more
effective over the long term, primarily because it draws
from a variety of disciplines and promotes whole-ofgovernment and whole-of-society efforts. That is why
the United States continues to support the United
Nations Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism,
as well as United Nations efforts to help Member States
develop national and regional plans of action to prevent
violent extremism.

S/PV. 8743

Terrorism and violent extremism in Africa are a
cross-border phenomenon, exacerbated in areas where
borders are porous and State authority insufficient. A
year ago, the Council adopted resolution 2462 (2019),
on terrorist financing, which highlighted the reliance
of terrorists on illegal, often cross-border activities.
Therefore, a truly effective response can come only
through closely coordinated regional and international
action. In Africa, the role of the African Union and
subregional organizations is essential. Estonia further
welcomes the cooperation of the countries of the Group
of Five for the Sahel and continues supporting these
efforts by contributing with military personnel to the
French-led Operation Barkhane.
States carry the primary responsibility for the safety
of their people. Effective State engagement includes
enabling access to basic services, such as health care
and education, and ensuring an adequately trained
security presence. States must ensure that all counterterrorism measures comply with their obligations under
international law, in particular international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. Ignoring
these obligations can undermine counter-terrorism
activities and lead to increased radicalization, fed by
violence and a sense of impunity.

Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the briefers
for their comprehensive overviews and the Chinese
presidency for organizing today’s debate. We welcome
efforts to move the Security Council more into
prevention mode and discuss solutions over symptoms.

We need a holistic approach that addresses the root
causes of violent extremism. To build truly resilient
communities, more attention needs to be given to
lowering intercommunal tensions and nurturing
reconciliation processes. Such activities often start at
the level of a local village or a town’s neighbourhood
and, to succeed, they must be inclusive. It is important
to support forums for intercommunal dialogue. Only
through the equal and meaningful participation of
women, youth and other relevant stakeholders will we
be able to achieve a lasting solution. It is not a quick fix,
but it is the only way forward.

The discussion today is very timely in the light
of the nearly daily reports about attacks and killings
by violent extremist groups. Sexual and gender-based
violence against women and girls, as well as the use
and recruitment of children, have become systematic
features of terrorism in Africa. We are seeing an
uptick in violence in the Sahel region that is now
threating to spread to the wider West Africa, including
to the coastal States. Moreover, the blurring of lines
between groups in the Lake Chad basin and the Sahel is
extremely concerning.

Improving the socioeconomic situation and
ensuring access to resources and governmental
services reduces the space for violent extremist groups
to act. People who have alternatives to earn their living
will be less vulnerable to the recruitment efforts of
violent extremist groups. Research shows that the
main reasons for joining violent extremist groups
revolve around people’s sense of identity, perceptions
of neglect and lack of opportunities. Most recruits give
up violent extremism when given the chance of a better,
peaceful life.

We encourage our African partners to continue
working together to counter that growing threat. I
look forward to hearing from our partners today and
to continuing our discussions to advance our shared
counter-terrorism objectives in the region and around
the world.

20-0635219/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

For improving people’s livelihoods throughout
Africa, the effects of climate change need to be taken
into consideration. This is especially relevant in the
Lake Chad basin, the Horn of Africa and the Sahel
region. It is important to track the roots and impacts of
climate-related tensions and assist key stakeholders in
providing support to those most affected. The United
Nations has an important role to play here. Estonia
supports the innovative initiatives adopted by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, such
as drought coordination and the appointment of an
environmental security adviser, and encourages further
efforts in this line of work that will proactively address
the threats.
Finally, the question of accountability and
denying impunity to the perpetrators of crimes against
civilians is an essential part of countering terrorism.
It is also a vital part of a holistic approach to healing
communities, restoring trust and creating conditions
for sustainable peace.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I should like first to thank
you, Sir, for organizing this important meeting, which is
also quite timely. I also thank Under-Secretary General
Rosemary DiCarlo, my sister Ambassador Fatima
Kyari Mohammed and Assistant Secretary-General
Dieye of the United Nations Development Programme
for their briefings.
We in Indonesia remain deeply concerned over
the ongoing attacks and expansion of terrorist-related
groups across Africa, which have caused many
casualties among innocent civilian victims. We note
from recent related reports of the Secretary-General that
attacks by terrorist-related group have been increasing,
both in numbers and in sophistication. Many speakers
have alluded to that important fact. We also concur
with Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo, in particular
on the point that we cannot address terrorism without
addressing the underlying root causes and factors,
including development, humanitarian, human rights
and security challenges. I believe that that is quite an
important point.
Indonesia commends the efforts of African
countries in combatting terrorism, including through
initiatives such as the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel, the Multinational Joint Task Force
and others. We are of the view that such efforts must
continue to be supported. We therefore also welcome
the adoption of presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5
20/32

11/03/2020

earlier today. Having said that, allow me to share
three points.
First, there is no one-size-fits-all approach to
combatting terrorism. Each country and each region
faces different challenges with regard to terrorism.
They also have different capacities and priorities, which
calls for assistance in different forms. It is important
to take into account these specificities in each region
in designing counter-terrorism approaches. Similarly,
the nexus between transnational organized crime and
terrorism also often has unique characteristics in each
and every region. It should therefore be addressed
through tailor-made measures and in accordance with
applicable international law. It is also important to give
our support to Africa’s efforts to combat terrorism
and violent extremism conducive to terrorism, as
elaborated in the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
Secondly, we must enhance regional cooperation. It
is important to advance regional dialogue, to share best
practices and expertise, and to learn from each other’s
experiences in combatting terrorism. In addition, we
need to facilitate collaboration in order to strengthen
the capacity of African countries in addressing common
and pressing challenges. One such challenge is the
relocation and return of foreign terrorist fighters (FTFs),
relocators and returnees, including their accompanying
family members, which present significant challenges
to Member States.
It is important to ensure adequate national
and regional capacities in terms of prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration. In this regard, as
mandated by resolutions 2178 (2014) and 2396 (2017), it
is crucially important for Member States to develop and
implement comprehensive and tailored prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies, not only for
FTFs but, most importantly, for home-grown terrorists.
It is also important for countries of the region to be
supported in the Silencing the Guns in Africa initiative
so as to ensure lasting stability and development, as
envisioned in the African Union Agenda 2063.
Thirdly, we must promote a soft approach to
counter-terrorism, in addition to other approaches.
Apart from law enforcement, we need to continue
promoting a soft approach in preventing and countering
terrorism and to adhere to a comprehensive approach.
This can be done, inter alia, by spreading the message
of peace, moderation and tolerance in order to turn back
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

negativity and, at the same time, by amplifying credible
positivity. We should also enhance the involvement of
religious and community leaders, women and young
people in combating terrorism. It is equally important
to limit the environment in which terrorist groups can
operate and address the underlying grievances that can
be exploited by terrorist groups.
Preventing and combating terrorism is one of our
priorities as a non-permanent member of the Security
Council. We are also at the forefront in promoting
tolerance and an integrated approach in combating
terrorism and extremism, in line with the four pillars of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
To conclude, all countries of Africa, supported
by the international community, should work together
in advancing integrated and coordinated strategies to
counter terrorism so as to achieve the goal of a peaceful,
stable and prosperous Africa. The international
community should lend its utmost support, including
in development and humanitarian assistance, so that
terrorists do not have an excuse to exploit gaps in
development. Indonesia is in solidarity with the people
of Africa and will maintain its support for Africa
through various initiatives and projects.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the observer of the European Union.
Mr. Skoog: I thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this very important debate. I also thank
the briefers this morning. I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of
North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, as
well as Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
Countering terrorism is a shared priority for Africa
and Europe. In partnership, we remain committed to
tirelessly mitigating this scourge. African partners have
paid a huge price. I want to express our full solidarity
with the victims of the recent terrorist attacks in Africa.
Despite tremendous efforts, the threat has not
been curbed. The twenty-fifth report of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team submitted
pursuant to resolution 2368 (2017) concerning ISIL
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals and
entities (S/2020/53), issued in January, emphasizes the
spread of the threat in West Africa as well as to new
areas, including in East Africa.

S/PV. 8743

I want to make a crucial point of departure in this
entire discussion. In all our counter-terrorism efforts,
respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms and
the rule of law has to be the basis. That must go hand
in hand with gender- and child-sensitive measures.
The failure to comply with human rights contributes
to increased radicalization and further violence and
fosters a sense of impunity. All our counter-terrorism
efforts must therefore be framed in a human rightsbased approach.
Terrorism is a transnational issue. As stressed
by the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Smaïl Chergui, terrorists have globalized
their means and have a “new modus operandi”. The
globalization of terrorism calls for more coordinated
and integrated responses. Terrorists benefit from
various factors, including weak Government
institutions, poor governance and border porosity,
all of which foster corruption, illicit trafficking and
exploitation of natural resources. The nexus between
organized crime and the expansion of violent extremist
ideologies further endangers the stability of fragile
States, whose resilience needs to be enhanced in a
comprehensive manner, as many around the table have
said this morning.
In that regard, the European Union supports
the efforts of its African partners to address the full
spectrum of challenges that terrorism brings. The
broad and growing range of our programmes in the
field of preventing and countering terrorism and violent
extremism have focused on the Horn of Africa, the Lake
Chad basin and the Sahel regions. We are deepening
our support to African peace efforts, with a focus on a
holistic and integrated approach to conflict and crises,
investing in prevention, the fight against radicalization,
building stabilization and better linking humanitarian,
development, peace and security efforts.
We also continue to strengthen our cooperation
with United Nations agencies with regard to counterterrorism and prevention measures in African countries
and regions. For example, we work with the Office
for Counter-Terrorism to support the Sudan’s efforts
towards reform and reinforcement of the country’s
counter-terrorism structures. That includes assisting
the transitional Government’s counter-terrorism efforts
and contributing to normalization of relations with
the international community. We are also expanding
contacts with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, with the aim of strengthening

20-0635221/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

our own understanding of the African region and better
tailoring EU programming to local needs.
More focus is needed on diagnosis of the root
causes of violent extremism. An integrated approach is
key. The Pau summit of 13 January brought together
the members of the Group of Five for the Sahel and
launched the coalition for the Sahel. That is a good
example of regional cooperation in the context of
counter-terrorism in Africa. The EU is acting with the
full range of policy, security and stabilization measures,
development cooperation and humanitarian aid.
In conclusion, the European Union is fully
committed to continuing to support and work with its
partners in Africa and beyond. We look forward to the
outcome of the African Union’s extraordinary summit
on counter-terrorism, to be held in South Africa in May.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Kabba (Sierra Leone): I am honoured to
address the Security Council at this debate on peace and
security in Africa: countering terrorism and extremism
in Africa. At the outset, let me congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of March and for
hosting this very important debate. Let me also thank
Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
and Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye for the insightful
overarching framework that they provided earlier in
order for us to understand the situation in Africa.
The scourge of terrorism and violent extremism is
a grave challenge to peace and security not only for
Africa but also for the wider international community.
Terrorism and violent extremism have jointly
undermined Africa’s development prospects, with
shocking humanitarian consequences and a massive
loss of lives across the continent. Terrorism and
violent extremism, in all their facets, are a threat to
international peace and security. Sierra Leone therefore
appreciates the convening of this debate, which provides
the opportunity to put forward multidimensional
approaches and solutions to combating terrorism and
violent extremism in Africa.
While governance and economic challenges and
marginalization from political processes have been some
of the root causes of terrorism and violent extremism
across much of Africa, there is a need to focus on
22/32

11/03/2020

prevention as a way to address both the proximate and
the remote causes of terrorism. Clearly, solutions to this
threat must therefore be expressly diagnosed and the
root causes targeted and addressed. A comprehensive
and inclusive approach to preventing and countering
terrorism and extremism should involve adopting
tenets of good governance, including the promotion
and protection of human rights, implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals and climate adaptation
and resilience measures as a way of addressing or
preventing terrorism and extremism.
Many concrete resolutions have been adopted
on the prevention and eradication of terrorism and
violent extremism across Africa, particularly in the
Sahel region and other affected areas. Africa has
demonstrated courage and resilience in dealing with
the challenges of terrorism and extremism so as
to sustain peace and security across the continent.
However, given the transnational nature of terrorism,
multilateral cooperation with Africa must be enhanced
and the United Nations should step up its support to
Member States to strengthen national capabilities and
capacities against terrorism and extremism. There is
therefore a need for well-equipped and well-resourced
Members of the United Nations to provide both the
technical and financial support to enable Africa to
strengthen its counter-terrorism efforts, as well as for
the international community to offer its full support
in the implementation of mechanisms adopted for the
prevention and eradication of terrorism and extremism
in Africa.
Sierra Leone has taken a number of measures to
guarantee the full implementation of the counterterrorism strategy of the Economic Community of
West African States. These measures include but are
not limited to the development of a communication
strategy that involves radio and television discussion
programmes and press conferences to counter
radicalization. In addition, the Government of Sierra
Leone, in February 2020, organized a national workshop
for religious leaders from across the country in a bid to
strengthen collaboration between the Government and
the religious community.
In support of the Government’s efforts, some
of those religious leaders have also embarked on a
nationwide tour, delivering sermons on topics delinking
Islam from terrorism and underscoring the Islamic
precept of a religion of peace. Furthermore, counterterrorism training for security personnel is ongoing, and
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8743

anti-terrorism legislation has been drafted and validated
and is currently with the Office of the Attorney General
and Minister of Justice for consideration ahead of its
promulgation into law. Moreover, in June last year the
Anti-Money-Laundering and Combating of Financing
of Terrorism law was amended and strengthened to
ensure clarity on issues related to the financing of
terrorism activities.

continent. There is no doubt that the threat of terrorism
has reached many parts of the continent, from east to
west, in addition to the Sahel, North Africa and Libya.
However, there are other areas as well, but to save time
I will focus in my statement on two main elements:
the terrorist threat in the Sahel and the terrorist threat
in Libya. Both threats are closely related. I will also
outline Egypt’s efforts to address these threats.

The Government is also strengthening the capacity
of the Ministry of Youth Affairs to provide training and
job opportunities for young people in order to counter
the threat of terrorism.

With regard to the terrorist threat in the Sahel
region, Egypt has closely followed the development
of movements that have carried out extremist and
terrorist activities in the Sahel for many years. These
movements have exploited the economic, social and
political circumstances in sisterly nations in order to
emerge, recruit youth and terrorize the people with
a view to achieving primarily political objectives.
The weak institutional context in certain States
of the region has allowed some of those terrorist
organizations and organized crime groups to emerge,
proliferate and gain strength. There are close links
between organized-crime groups and terrorist and
extremist organizations, whereby they fuel each other.
We see terrorist organizations in the Sahel region, for
example, benefiting financially from various forms
of organized crime, such as the traffic in drugs and
human trafficking, by collecting fees from criminal
terrorist groups. This helps those groups to increase
their capacities and hence the vicious circle between
terrorism and crime continues indefinitely.

Countering terrorism and extremism, especially
within the context of peace and security in Africa,
should also seek to address the human rights of victims
of terrorism. Addressing and promoting the needs of
victims of terrorism within the context of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy is not only
reassuring to victims of terrorism but also represents
a significant measure in contributing to peace and
security in Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): It is my
pleasure to begin by congratulating you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March. I wish you and the dear
People’s Republic of China every success in your tasks.
I also thank you for the invitation to participate in this
meeting, at which we are discussing one of today’s most
important issues pertaining to international peace and
security, namely, countering terrorism and extremism
in Africa. I further commend the tireless efforts
undertaken by the Government of China to address
the current global health threat, and express solidarity
with all countries and peoples facing this challenge
with determination and persistence. In addition, I
thank Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo,
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations, and Assistant
Secretary-General Abdoulaye Mar Dieye for their
valuable briefings.
The issue of terrorism and extremism in Africa is
a very detailed and complex one. Egypt, as an African
State, and given its geographical proximity to the most
unstable areas on the continent, has in-depth knowledge
of the nature of the terrorist threat and its causes, as
well as the means to address it on our beloved African

In this regard, Egypt supports all United Nations
and regional efforts aimed at addressing the root causes
of terrorism and extremism in the Sahel region. We also
support all efforts to achieve security and enforce the
law in the States of the region, particularly the efforts
of the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force. Egypt is
also providing every possible support to the States of the
region to increase their capacities to address this threat
at many levels, such as by countering extremist thought
by sending enlightened religious leaders to promote the
real values of religion, or through peacebuilding efforts.
Egypt has hosted a workshop focused on the challenges
to peacebuilding in the Sahel, and is also host to the
African Union Centre for Post-Conflict Reconstruction
and Development, on which we rely heavily in our
efforts to build peace in the States of the region and to
increase States’ capacity to counter terrorism.
Egypt believes in the role of the strong States in
countering terrorism through their national institutions,
which are capable of imposing and implementing law

20-0635223/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

and security. Accordingly, Egypt has granted 1,000
training scholarships in recent years to personnel
from the Sahel and Saharan States. We also continue
to provide specialized training courses for personnel
from the States of the region. This is an effort that we
hope will be developed in the coming period through
assistance from the Sahel-Saharan Anti-Terrorism
Center, hosted by Egypt.
In Libya, Egypt believes that the recent terrorist
threat requires the international community and the
Security Council to take a decisive stance, as it seriously
threatens not only United Nations efforts to achieve
peace and stability in the countries concerned but also
regional and international peace and security. In this
regard, Egypt expresses its deep concern at the fact
that some States are recruiting and transferring foreign
terrorist fighters from Syria to Libya. This is an overt
and explicit violation of a number of Security Council
resolutions on Libya and counter-terrorism, adopted
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.
This violation also undermines efforts to achieve peace
in Libya following the Berlin conference.
In that regard, I would like to refer to the hundreds
of Da’esh and Al-Qaida terrorist fighters being
transferred from Idlib, Syria, to Libya in order to join
the armed militias that are active in areas controlled by
the reconciliation Government in Libya. They receive
direct and overt logistical support and large amounts
of money in a manner detailed in my statement to
the Council today. It is unbelievable that this blatant
violation of international law and Security Council
resolutions is taking place openly and before the eyes
of all, as stated explicitly in the Security Council’s
meetings on Libya and as detailed and documented in
the twenty-fifth report of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions
1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) (S/2020/53). Some of
those terrorists had been transferred earlier to the Sahel
States and European countries as well. They will use the
same methods to achieve the same objectives, thereby
creating long-term problems for the international
community. That would further complicate already
complex issues.
In that regard, Egypt calls on the Security Council
to uphold its responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security by ensuring
accountability for violations of relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially with regard to paragraphs 2 and
3 of resolution 2396 (2017), on the prevention of the
24/32

11/03/2020

movement of terrorists and the necessary notifications
to make in that regard. Unfortunately, those obligations
are not being implemented. No respect is being shown
for the Council or its resolutions. Resolutions alone are
not enough. Resolutions are not the solution. However,
implementation and accountability are necessary.
Egypt notes that the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015)
concerning Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities has recently included Da’esh
of Libya, Da’esh of West Africa and Da’esh of the Greater
Sahara in the sanctions list. We stress the importance
of the terms outlined in paragraph 3 of resolution 2253
(2015), on the criteria for adding organizations and
individuals effectively linked to Da’esh and Al-Qaida
on a sanctions list, following coordination with the
relevant States. Egypt also takes note of resolution
2462 (2019), on countering the financing of terrorism,
as well as resolution 2482 (2019) on the linkage
between terrorism and organized crime. We call on the
Council to pursue its efforts to enforce its resolutions
on combating terrorism, in particular resolution 2396
(2017), on preventing the movement of terrorists and
foreign terrorist fighters.
In conclusion, I would like to mention that I
am honoured to co-facilitate the seventh review
of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy, together with my friend His Excellency the
Ambassador of Spain. The review process is scheduled
to hold its first informal consultations with the Member
States on 16 March. We hope that, together, we will
be able through the current review to reach a new
international consensus on the review resolution in a
manner commensurate with the terrorist activities that
have taken place since the last review in 2018. That
consensus would underline the will and determination
of the States to decisively counter terrorism with a view
to achieving a world that is more stable and secure. That
is an important message for the United Nations to send
this year, as we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the establishment of our international Organization.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this very important meeting. It is a
great pleasure for my delegation to have participated in
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

this extremely important debate. Our thanks also go to
Ms. DiCarlo, Ms. Mohammed and Mr. Dieye for their
comprehensive briefings.
For the first time ever in my country, the Prime
Minister, Mr. Abdullah Hamdouk, was targeted by a bomb
on Monday morning, 9 March. Such an assassination
attempt is an extraneous phenomenon to the Sudanese
people. The Prime Minister escaped unscathed while
he was going to his office, although some members
of his convoy were injured. If that cowardly terrorist
attack had succeeded, it would have torpedoed security
and stability in my country. It goes without saying that
instability and insecurity in the Sudan would pose a
threat to the stability and security of the broader region
and thereby threaten international peace and security.
The Sudanese authorities are currently carrying out
an investigation to identify the parties operating in the
dark that orchestrated and attempted to carry out that
ignoble act. Those responsible for it will be prosecuted
and held accountable.
My delegation sincerely thanks the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, the Secretary-General
of the African Union (AU), the League of Arab States
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC),
along with all sisterly and friendly countries that have
condemned that heinous act.
I would like to express our solidarity with the
victims of terrorism around the world and also with
all the countries that have suffered terrorist attacks.
The Sudan reaffirms the vital importance of having
in place an effective multilateral regime, in line with
international law, with a view to better addressing the
multifaceted and correlated challenges and threats
that face our world. We also emphasize the main role
played by the United Nations, particularly in view of
the fact that we live today, more than ever before, in an
interconnected and globalized world. No country can
live isolated. We therefore recognize that our collective
security depends on effective cooperation to withstand
transnational challenges.
The Sudan has ratified all international conventions
related to counter-terrorism, in addition to regional
conventions at the African and Arab levels. My country
is working hard within the context of the efforts
undertaken by the OIC to counter terrorism. We consider
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
to be one of the most important legal frameworks for

S/PV. 8743

offering guidance to national mechanisms that deal
with anti-terrorism laws and legislations.
The war that we are waging against terrorism
today is one that we wage first and foremost to defend
our humanitarian values and principles, as well as to
consolidate human rights, the rule of law and peaceful
and prosperous coexistence. The Sudan therefore
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
and we emphasize our involvement and cooperation
in implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy within a comprehensive, sustained
and coordinated approach based on the four pillars of
the Strategy, with a view to achieving a balanced and
comprehensive approach. The primary responsibility
for the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy is borne by the Member
States, while taking into consideration that the United
Nations must play an important role in enhancing
coordination and consistency at the national, regional
and international levels. The United Nations is to
provide support to Member States, upon their request,
in order to ensure the balanced implementation of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The Sudan was one of the first countries to
submit its report on the implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in line with the report of
the Secretary-General (A/74/677) on the activities of
the United Nations system in implementing the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. There is a
need more than ever before for the Security Council
to participate alongside Member States and regional
organizations and institutions in efforts to prevent
conflict in Africa. The Security Council plays an
important role in ongoing coordination and cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, in
particular the institutions of the African Union.
Putting an end to conflict throughout Africa will
depend on the participation of the parties concerned.
Efforts to prevent and end conflict require a unified
international position and a commitment to our
common goals. The partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union on issues of peace and
security must be strengthened, particularly in light
of the fact that the African Union and its institutions
are making great efforts to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals included in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. Those Goals are aimed at
addressing poverty and inequality, strengthening State
institutions and promoting the principles of human

20-0635225/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

rights, among others, in line with the mission included
in the African Union Agenda 2063.
Our national efforts to counter terrorism and
further regional and international cooperation within
the context of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy require technical support to build
capacities and enable national mechanisms to play their
role to the fullest, on the basis of mutual cooperation
and respect, without undermining national ownership
and sovereignty. That is a joint effort between the State
and various civil society organizations, in addition to
the media and research and study centres that monitor
various phenomena and provide in-depth studies, while
leading awareness and enlightening campaigns.

11/03/2020

In the face of those security hazards, it is important
to move from ad hoc solutions to responses based on
a multidimensional, better coordinated approach and
on strategies that address the root causes of terrorism
and violent extremism. Côte d’Ivoire therefore calls
for greater mobilization and stronger commitment on
the part of the international community to support
States in investing in the building of more resilient
societies. For their part, those States, which bear the
primary responsibility, must respond to the many
concerns of their populations by developing policies
that take security imperatives and humanitarian and
development needs into account.

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate China, your
great country, Mr. President, on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March and to thank it for organizing this debate
on terrorism and violent extremism in Africa, two
of the main challenges to peace and security on the
continent. I would also like to commend Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye, Ms. Fatima Kyari
Mohammed and all those who have spoken before me
for the quality of their statements and the relevance of
their recommendations.

Prevention is also a priority task in strategies to
combat terrorism and violent extremism and should be
based on the decisive role that civil society and the media
can play. With particular regard to the media, social
networks can be used to raise awareness of all forms
of violence, to combat radical ideology and rhetoric of
terrorist groups and to help spread messages of peace,
tolerance and social cohesion. Leveraging education
can likewise help to prevent those scourges. Indeed,
the idleness of young people and a lack of education
make them vulnerable to fundamentalist discourse.
Furthermore, the transnational nature of terrorism
and violent extremism requires enhanced cooperation
among States and at the regional and subregional levels
in the fields of security, defence and economic and
social development.

In recent years, the African continent has been
confronted with an intensification of the threat of
terrorism and violent extremism, which are sowing
desolation among civilian populations and undermining
the stability and development of States. In that regard,
2019 was one of the most tragic years for West Africa
and the Sahel owing to the increase in terrorist
attacks, which have resulted in many human casualties
and massive internal displacement of persons.
Despite the efforts made by African Governments
to combat those phenomena, with the support of the
international community, terrorist organizations and
their fundamentalist ideology continue to thrive in
the unfortunately fertile soil of some States’ fragility
and of recurrent communal conflicts. Similarly,
youth unemployment, weak security systems, lack
of basic social infrastructure and corruption create
an environment conducive to the entrenchment of
terrorism and extremism with proven resilience in West
Africa and the Sahel, in particular.

In recognition of that need, five West African
countries — Benin, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Togo and
Côte d’Ivoire — launched the Accra initiative in
September 2017 to respond to the spread of terrorism
and violent extremism. The initiative has led to the
creation of a platform for the exchange of information
and intelligence among the police, gendarmerie and
security services of those countries. In the same vein,
the Heads of State and Government of the Economic
Community of West African States and the West
African Economic and Monetary Union made financial
commitments of $1 billion on 14 September 2019 in
Ouagadougou and of $100 million on 1 December
2019 in Dakar, respectively, to strengthen the capacity
to combat terrorism. Furthermore, the imperative
of effective regional cooperation has led to the
establishment of such organizations as the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the Lake Chad Basin
Commission. In that regard, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its
plea for increased support for the operationalization of

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Côte d’Ivoire.

26/32

20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and the Multinational
Joint Task Force, as well as for development initiatives
in areas affected by terrorism and violent extremism.
In addition to its strong involvement in the
subregional initiatives mentioned earlier, Côte d’Ivoire
is resolutely committed to fighting terrorism through
a strategy focused on prevention, the strengthening of
logistical and human resources and the promotion of
social cohesion. Thus, with the support of France, an
international anti-terrorism academy focused on the
region is being established near Abidjan. Intended for
the actors in the fight against terrorism, the academy
will seek to promote a comprehensive handling of the
phenomenon, from intelligence gathering to specialized
force operations and judicial procedures. In addition,
the Government is introducing various measures to
address the social needs of vulnerable populations,
particularly in the areas of education and health.
In view of the serious threat posed by terrorism and
extremism to peace and security in Africa and the rest
of the world, it is important to pool all our logistical,
material, financial and intelligence resources. My
delegation welcomes the commitment of the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, in that
regard and calls for the effective implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the relevant Council resolutions. It also calls on the
international community to support the Silencing the
Guns initiative with a view to ending conflict on the
African continent.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its call for
a global, coordinated and sustainable strategy for
the prevention of terrorism and violent extremism. It
also reiterates its plea for the strengthening of States’
operational and intelligence capacities and, lastly, urges
the Security Council to find a rapid and lasting solution
to the Libyan crisis, which would, if not eradicate, then
at least improve the state of marked insecurity in Africa.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to express my delegation’s deep
appreciation to the presidency for organizing this
debate and, above all, for choosing the fight against
terrorism and extremism in Africa as its theme, which
demonstrates the importance that China attaches to
Africa, its development and the prosperity of its peoples.

S/PV. 8743

Moreover, the choice is timely. As emphasized
by the Secretary-General in his latest report on the
activities of the United Nations system in implementing
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (A/74/677),
terrorism has become one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security, to the achievement
of the Sustainable Development Goals and to the
realization of universal human rights.
That is particularly true for our continent, Africa.
In particular in the Sahel, terrorists increasingly attack
critical infrastructure and vulnerable targets, such
as schools, hospitals and economic facilities, with
disastrous consequences, both for the political stability
and the socioeconomic development of those countries.
Moreover, separatists and non-State armed groups, in
particular those with proven links to terrorist groups,
pose a genuine threat to peace and security in Africa.
Even more worrisome is the recent rapprochement
between Al-Qaida and Da’esh in the Sahel. Sworn
enemies in the past, they now work together and conduct
joint operations.
By spreading fear, hatred and divisions within
communities, today’s terrorists aim to incite violence
and create a vacuum they hope to then exploit. That
is why it is imperative to address the root causes that
drive people to join terrorists. Aware of the impact
of the proliferation of transnational threats linked
to terrorism on security and stability, Morocco is
resolutely committed to promoting a comprehensive
and coherent approach to the scourge that covers, in
a complementary and integrated manner, security and
military dimensions, the achievement of economic
and human development, the safeguarding of
cultural and religious identity and international and
regional cooperation.
Morocco’s approach is in line with the guidelines
of the African policy, as set out by His Majesty King
Mohammed VI, which advocates the emergence of a
new model of South-South cooperation that is both
effective and supportive. That approach seeks to
strengthen resilience in the light of the complex and
multidimensional nature of the challenges faced by
the continent. Lastly, it is based on principles and
values, thereby making continental and interregional
integration and solidarity key factors in responding
to the changes occurring on our African continent.
To that end, Morocco has always strongly advocated
for economic and human development on the African
continent. That dimension is crucial to ensuring that

20-0635227/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

11/03/2020

stability on the continent is irreversible and that peace
is sustainable.

terrorism, as well as to information-sharing and the
exchange of good practices.

It is in that context that Morocco has made the
prudent choice to promote and invest, with strength
and conviction, in tangible and concrete projects for the
benefit of several brotherly African countries. Those
projects, which are structural in nature, aim to target
the most disadvantaged populations with an inclusive
and participatory approach. They include the launch
of several public-private partnerships and considerable
investments in areas as diverse as financing, banking,
insurance, telecommunications, infrastructure, mining,
city planning, low-income housing and so on.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Ethiopia.

In addition to socioeconomic development, Morocco
has always advocated the preservation of the cultural
and religious identity of African citizens. That lever is
essential for countering the shameless and reprehensible
use of the authentic spiritual frame of reference that
fuels and unduly justifies the violent manifestations
of extremism and the spread of obscurantism. Under
the leadership of His Majesty King Mohammed VI,
Commander of the Faithful, Morocco has invested in
protecting and promoting moderate, tolerant and open
Islam, which has been historically prevalent in the
region. In that regard, the Mohammed VI Institute for
the Training of Imams, Morchidines and Morchidates
has trained 1,754 Imams from several African countries.
In addition, the Kingdom of Morocco established the
Mohammed VI Foundation for African Ulema, whose
main objective is to unify and coordinate the efforts
of Muslim ulemas in African States to promote, spread
and consolidate the values of tolerance, which are
enshrined in and promoted by Islam.
The threat of terrorism is multifaceted, evolving
and enduring. To address it, we must focus on building
peaceful, inclusive and prosperous societies based on
the rule of law, human rights, good governance and
sustainable development. Resolute and proportionate
responses to terrorist threats are also essential, but
they must be complemented by medium- and long-term
investments in prevention and resilience-building. In
line with that approach, States need strong institutions,
effective governance and respect for human rights to
deny terrorists and their criminal supporters the scope
they need to carry out their activities and to bring them
to justice.
Lastly, special attention must be paid to regional
and international cooperation in the fight against
28/32

Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): Let me begin by warmly
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your country’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. We also appreciate your
thoughtful invitation to hear from African voices on
today’s very important topic.
We thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador
Fatima Mohammed and Mr. Abdoulaye Dieye for their
insightful briefings.
We welcome the adoption earlier today of
presidential statement S/PRST/2020/5, on the issue of
countering terrorism and extremism in Africa.
Terrorism is a global menace. Terrorists continue
to adapt their tactics, generate financing, wreak
havoc and retain considerable sway across national
boundaries. May I take this opportunity to denounce,
in the strongest terms, the assassination attempt on the
Prime Minister of the Sudan. We express our solidarity
with the people and the Government of the Sudan.
The enormous challenges we face in the fight
against terrorism should compel us to forge meaningful
international cooperation to counter and prevent violent
extremism. However, it is important to note that the root
causes of radicalization and extremism are very much
local. Terrorists thrive where there is social exclusion
and socioeconomic marginalization of minorities and
disadvantaged groups, and where State authority is
either weak or inexistent.
The rise of intolerant speech and hate-filled
narratives, disseminated through the Internet and
social media, also contribute to increasing social and
political polarization, at times leading to communal
conflicts. Unless we deal with those and other
underlying causes, our efforts will always come
up short. Accordingly, our strategies and efforts to
combat terrorism and extremism must be holistic and
comprehensive. Those efforts should be deployed in
tandem with proactive steps to promote socioeconomic
development, especially employment for youths, as
well as effective poverty reduction and intercommunal
violence-prevention strategies.
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

Young people are often portrayed as the unfortunate
victims or perpetrators of terrorism. However, as we have
seen across Africa, young people are at the forefront of
demanding change and better opportunities. They are
our strongest partners in socioeconomic development.
We must listen to their hopes and worries about the
future. Most important, we must ensure that women
and youth are actively and meaningfully involved in
decision-making at all levels of society.
The Security Council has continually emphasized
the need for the full implementation of international
legal frameworks and sanctions regimes by all Member
States. That is indeed vital for the strengthening of
global cooperation. However, it is equally important
that stakeholders recognize that developing countries
continue to face huge difficulties in properly
implementing those legal frameworks. We believe that
tangible capacity-building and technical assistance are
needed for the effective implementation of international
legal frameworks and to help Member States stay
one step ahead in countering the ever-evolving
terrorist threat.
The rise of terrorism and violent extremism in
Africa continues to cause enormous loss of life and
widespread destruction. The United Nations should
continue to reinforce its partnership with the African
Union (AU) and other regional and subregional
organizations through dialogue, technical support
and joint activities to respond to terrorist threats. The
United Nations-AU partnership on the Silencing the
Guns in Africa by 2020 — one of the flagship projects
under Agenda 2063 — must be further strengthened
and expanded to other areas in line with all the targets
of the Sustainable Development Goals.
Climate change is further exacerbating competition
over increasingly scarce resources, leading to
communal conflicts and creating opportunities for
terrorists to exploit. The effects of both terrorism
and climate change transcend national boundaries.
We need robust inter-State cooperation to deny the
merchants of terrorism safe havens. Stronger regional
cooperation is needed in the areas of information- and
intelligence-sharing and mechanisms for joint-border
management. Such cooperation could also take the form
of regional economic integration, the development of
joint infrastructure projects and investment corridors.
The Horn of Africa has turned a page for the better.
Countries in the region are engaged in robust cooperation

S/PV. 8743

to consolidate peace and promote economic and social
development, including through a comprehensive plan
to combat and neutralize terrorism and other common
threats they face, such as arms and human trafficking
and drug smuggling. The international community
must encourage and support those efforts.
Al-Shabaab continues to inflict destruction in
Somalia and remains a serious threat to the wider
region. It continues to possess a significant capacity to
raise revenue and conduct lethal attacks. To eliminate
that threat once and for all, we must continue to
support the African Union Mission in Somalia, invest
in strengthening the capacity of the Somali National
Army and redouble our support for the Government of
Somalia in this pivotal election year.
The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
is coordinating a regional response to the threat of
terrorism through its comprehensive regional strategy,
in line with the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action
to Prevent Violent Extremism. International partners
should reinforce their efforts through technical support
and capacity-building, including in areas involving
strategic communications.
Finally, Ethiopia is currently engaged in
considerable legal, economic and political reforms. A
number of repressive laws, such as the charities and
societies proclamation, the anti-terrorism law, the
national election law and the mass media proclamation,
have been revised and fundamentally amended to
close gaps in the implementation of counter-terrorism
measures. Measures have also been taken towards
establishing a system of accountability for serious
human rights abuses and accelerating the reform of the
criminal justice system and the security service to make
them independent of political control and influence.
We understand that we must not remain complacent
as a result of our modest successes. My Government
is committed to building a just and equal system of
governance that genuinely upholds the rights of citizens
and ensures that the benefits of economic development
are equally shared by all of our citizens.
Let me take this opportunity to underline Ethiopia’s
commitment to multilateralism, counter-terrorism
collaboration and regional partnerships to address the
structural root causes of extremism and terrorism.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Djibouti.

20-0635229/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I join the representatives who spoke before me in
congratulating the delegation of the People’s Republic
of China on its assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of March. Djibouti is
grateful for the holding of this important debate and the
excellent concept note (S/2020/161, annex). Our thanks
go to Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador Fatima
Kyari Mohammed and Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye for
their briefings.
Djibouti reiterates in the strongest of terms its
condemnation of the assassination attempt on the
person of the Prime Minister of the Sudan, Mr. Abdalla
Adam Hamdok.
The scourge of terrorist and extremist groups in
Africa has been growing steadily since the early 1990s.
The continent is in particular extremely concerned
about the escalation of terrorist acts. They year 2019
was particularly deadly, with an alarming number of
victims who fell victim to terrorists’ bullets. To date,
we do not have reliable statistics, but only estimates. We
would benefit from a statistical analysis of the attack
patterns of terrorist groups, the nature of the terrorist
groups concerned and the responses that have been
used so far, based on innovative analytical strategies.
The thirty-third Summit of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union, held in Addis Ababa
on 9 and 10 February, declared 2020 as the year during
which the continent would commit to silencing the guns.
There have been positive developments in that regard,
the most recent of which hail from South Sudan, where
the Revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity was just formed in line with the deadlines decided
by the various Southern Sudanese stakeholders.
However, the terrorist threat constitutes the greatest
threat to the implementation of the continental strategy,
as it calls into question the encouraging progress made
in the areas of crisis and conflict management. Of even
greater concern, the ever-increasing flow of foreign
terrorist fighters coming from other regions of the
world to bolster small groups already on the African
continent has enabled the latter to strengthen their
capacity to adapt and change, as well as diversify their
sources of funding.
African forces deployed on the ground are faced with
fighting an asymmetrical war against non-State actors
that are enjoying an increasing amount of resources. We
are urgently in need of finding appropriate solutions
30/32

11/03/2020

to the untenable situation involving underequipped
African peacekeeping forces, which nevertheless must
ensure control and security of vast swaths of territory.
The exponential increase in those groups’ use of
improvised explosive devices, mass casualty terrorism
and targeted assassinations should also be highlighted.
Faced with that situation, the thirty-third Summit
of Heads of State and Government of the African
Union endorsed a landmark decision emanating from
the recommendation of the African Union Peace and
Security Council under the presidency of the Djibouti
for the month of February. The Heads of State decided to
deploy, in cooperation with the Ministers of Defence of
the Group of Five for the Sahel, an African operational
force made up of 3,000 soldiers in the Sahel region.
Africa has concerted its efforts and is committed
to jointly responding to the terrorist groups in order to
destroy them once and for all. Africa, however, is asking
for the full and unequivocal support of the international
community, in particular the members of the Security
Council. Allow me to therefore take this opportunity to
call once again, on behalf of the African Union Peace on
the Security Council, in accordance with its mandate,
for the taking of new measures commensurate with the
seriousness of the threat in the Sahel region and the
Lake Chad basin.
Beginning in the 1990s, the region of East Africa,
in which my country is located, was one of the first to
suffer the unbridled ideological onslaught and attacks
perpetrated by extremist and terrorist groups, such as
Al-Qaida and Al-Shabaab, which have now pledged
allegiance to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.
In having understood the dimensions of the lethal role
played by groups that promote extremist ideologies,
the Republic of Djibouti, since the early 2000s, has
contributed to regional, continental and international
efforts to combat the scourge of terrorism and maritime
piracy in the Gulf of Aden.
In order to deal with this ever-evolving threat,
the Djibouti authorities have continued to ensure
maintaining the highest degree of vigilance based on
a three-part dynamic involving a theological dialogue
to promote the dissemination of religious ideals as a
shield against extremist speech; massive investment in
priority social sectors; and, lastly, the strengthening of
the arsenal of legal tools and preventive mechanisms.
Accordingly, the need to be able to constantly
adapt and the high level of vigilance that this urgent
20-06352

11/03/2020

Peace and security in Africa

S/PV. 8743

challenge requires calls for substantial financial and
technological resources.

Special Adviser to the United Nations Development
Programme Administrator.

In order to eradicate terrorism and extremist groups,
we believe that developing countries, particularly
African countries, should benefit more from sustainable
financial support and a suitable level of technology
transfer. We propose four courses of action.

Terrorism today is emerging as a global
phenomenon that challenges the sovereign efforts of
States to defend the territory and the property of their
citizens. Terrorism is not a new phenomenon in Africa.
It has gradually taken hold on the continent, which is
plagued by destructive conflicts, climate change and
endemic poverty. Terrorist activities thrive and spread
in that environment, undermining the efforts of States
to promote peace and security.

First, we call for the fulfilment of development
aid commitments to meaningfully meet the targets
of the Sustainable Development Goals, as the first
victims of terrorist and extremist groups’ ideological
indoctrination are often those who are intellectually or
socially vulnerable and exploited in order to serve the
sinister plans of terrorist groups.
Young people continue to be a primary target. It is no
coincidence that the main terrorist group in Somalia is
called Al-Shabaab, which means “the youth” in Arabic.
In the war against terrorism, sharing experiences,
coordination and response are the key elements for
which we must take joint political decisions.
It would therefore be fitting to consider opening
an outpost of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism at African Union headquarters. Finally,
it is essential to ensure predictable funding for
peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, if we are not careful, the African
continent could become a revolving door for
transnational terrorism. This threat, which affects us all
at the highest level, is becoming increasingly complex,
dynamic and structured, and is ever-changing. It is
only through better organization that we will be able
to launch a sustainable and effective response. That is
why we must mount a coordinated response. Time is
against us and there is a lot at stake.
The President (spoke in Chinese): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guinea.
Ms. Kaba (Guinea) (spoke in French): I would like
to congratulate the People’s Republic of China on its
presidency of the Security Council and to express our
appreciation for the choice of the theme of this meeting
on combating terrorism and extremism in Africa, which
is a topical issue. I also wish to thank Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, Ambassador Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations, and Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye,

Africa has been ineffectively facing the challenges
of terrorism and violent extremism for many years due
to their multiple and complex causes and the constantly
evolving strategies of terrorist groups in transnational
spaces. The activities carried out by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, the Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb organization, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram in
the Lake Chad Basin and the various terrorist groups
operating in northern Mali and Central Africa compel
us to find adequate strategies to combat the phenomenon
at the international level.
The number of civilian and military victims
of terrorist activities in Africa is estimated in the
thousands. In addition, millions have been displaced
and State services do not extend to affected areas. This
situation significantly undermines development efforts
and forces States to allocate a substantial part of their
budgets to security, to the detriment of their economic
and social development.
It is regrettable to note that, in the face of the tragic
events in Africa and worldwide, with their attendant
loss of human life, destruction of infrastructure,
proliferation of organized crime and drug trafficking and
massive displacement of populations, the international
community is struggling to find a consensual definition
of terrorism and an appropriate response to it. That
is one of the obstacles to the implementation of a
comprehensive and effective strategy to combat the
scourge. Security challenges related to the activities of
terrorist groups, organized crime, piracy and communal
violence threaten security and stability in Africa.
Given the scale and complexity of the terrorist
groups operating in Africa, it is high time for the
Security Council to pay due attention to combating
terrorism in Africa. The African continent is facing
major socioeconomic and security challenges. In that
context, it is necessary to assess the counter-terrorism

20-0635231/32

S/PV.8743

Peace and security in Africa

11/03/2020

efforts undertaken within the framework of the African
Union and to propose solutions to bolster its fight
against terrorism.

raise awareness about terrorism and hate speech, in
partnership with civil society, religious leaders, women
and young people.

In that regard, my delegation believes that
counter-terrorism efforts in Africa should focus on
a number of measures, in particular: the prevention
and peaceful resolution of conflicts, the urgent
settlement of ongoing conflicts within the framework
of the African Peace and Security Architecture,
and the effective implementation of the relevant
instruments on democracy and governance — because
the effective entrenchment of the values and principles
of democracy and respect for human rights is a safe
response to the conflicts that are shaking Africa. In
addition, Africa needs enhanced cooperation between
regional organizations and the United Nations because
the cross-border nature, complexity and scale of the
threat require new approaches to combat terrorism and
violent extremism. Moreover, Africa must enhance the
capabilities of African armed forces through training
and equipment, freezing the assets and sources of
financing for terrorist activities on the continent and
sharing relevant information. In that connection,
Guinea welcomes the establishment of the African
Police Cooperation Organization.

My country also stresses the need to support
international counter-terrorism forces — particularly
the Multinational Joint Task Force against Boko Haram
and the Group of Five for the Sahel Joint Force — and
to strengthen the strategic partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations in the fight
against terrorism. All those measures must be taken
in the framework of the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions. The actions taken by
Secretary-General Guterres, specialized bodies and
partners for an effective coordinated implementation
of those resolutions and the Global Counter-terrorism
Strategy are a source of hope in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism in Africa.

Africa must also enhance its border control and
procedures for identifying foreign terrorist fighters.
We must leverage new information technologies
in the fight against the scourge. We must fight
against endemic poverty in Africa by mobilizing the
necessary resources for the implementation of the
African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development worldwide. Africa must
also focus on strengthening subregional, regional and
international cooperation, combating the illicit trade
of and trafficking in small arms and light weapons as
one of the priorities of the African Union’s strategy, and
implementing its Silencing the Guns by 2020 initiative.
Aware of the risk of the spread of terrorism in our
subregion, Guinea has taken the following national
measures — the establishment, in 2007, of a national
committee to review financial information in order
to combat money laundering and terrorist financing,
the adoption of Law L-2019-033, on the prevention
and repression of terrorism, enacted on 4 July 2019
by the President of the Republic, and of policies to

32/32

The establishment of the United Nations Support
Plan for the Sahel to help 10 countries, including
Guinea, is an innovative approach by the SecretaryGeneral. It aims to establish a close link between the
issues of peace, security and climate change and those
of socioeconomic development. This new approach
to the issues of peace, security and development
will contribute to the fight against extreme poverty,
inequality and the perverse effects of climate change,
all of which are foster breeding grounds for terrorism.
That is why the President of the Republic of
Guinea, Mr. Alpha Condé, has stated that it is through
economic development, respect for human rights, social
justice and the improvement of the living conditions
for young people and women that terrorism will be
definitively defeated.
The President (spoke in Chinese): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on the list of speakers
for this meeting. I will make sure that they have an
opportunity to deliver their statements in the afternoon
meeting. I would also like to reassure everyone
that the statements made in the afternoon meeting
will be as important as the ones made this morning,
and that they will be considered on a par with this
morning’s statements in the follow-up actions of the
Security Council.
The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.

20-06352
