A /72/PV.60*

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-second session

60th plenary meeting

Thursday, 30 November 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lajčák . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Slovakia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Llorentty Solíz
(Plurinational State of Bolivia), Vice-President,
took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 38 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Report of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
(A/72/35)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/72/368)
Draft resolutions (A/72/L.13, A/72/L.14,
A/72/L.15 and A/72/L.16)
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its efforts and its report (A/72/35). I would
now like to read out a statement on behalf of the
President of Iraq, Mr. Muhammad Fuad Masum, on the
occasion of the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People.
“Today the world is celebrating the International
Day of Solidarity with our brother Palestinian
people, which coincides with the anniversary of
United Nations resolution 181 (II), adopted in
1947, on the partition of Palestine. That annual
celebration represents the unwavering recognition
of the United Nations of responsibility for the plight
of the Palestinian people that has endured almost

70 years. It is also a recognition of the righteousness
of their cause and the international community’s
commitment to supporting the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people in their long and legitimate
struggle for self-determination and to bring an end
to the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territory
and other Arab territories.
“This year also marks the fiftieth anniversary
of the start of the Israeli aggression against
Arab States, on 5 June 1967. Indiscriminate
bombardments continue, together with the
demolition of houses and expropriation of land in
the occupied West Bank and Gaza by the occupying
Power. Furthermore, the continuing expansion
of settlements is undermining any opportunities
for peace, while other actions are obstructing the
international community’s efforts to establish
a viable and sovereign Palestinian State with the
same rights as every other country in the world.
“Today, the Republic of Iraq, which has
persisted in its support for the cause of the
Palestinian people and their just struggle for their
legitimate rights, is concerned about the Israeli
authorities’ indifference to the relevant United
Nations resolutions and its ongoing destructive
military activities in the Gaza Strip, especially as
they claim the lives of civilians, including women,
children and the elderly. Israel’s attacks have also
destroyed infrastructure, schools — including
those administered by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East — and holy places. Israel continues to

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-40508 (E)

*1740508*
*

Reissued for technical reasons 24 July 2019

A/72/PV.60

accompany those acts of aggression through its
expansionist policies by building settlements in
the heart of Palestinian villages and cities in the
West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, thereby
worsening the suffering of the Palestinian people,
who have lost all hope of seeing the establishment
of a just and lasting peace, given Israel’s continued
occupation of Palestinian territories for more than
60 years.
“Today, on the International Day for Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, the Republic of Iraq
reiterates its principled position that a fair and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question
can be achieved only by establishing an independent,
full-fledged Palestinian State, along the lines of
the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with the Arab Peace
Initiative and based on international legitimacy.
“Meanwhile, we urge the international
community to work unremittingly to implement the
relevant international conventions, the Charter of
the United Nations, the Human Rights Declaration
and international humanitarian law. We call on
countries that have not yet recognized the State
of Palestine, including some in Europe, to do so
immediately and to support the Palestinian people’s
aspirations to realize their legitimate rights,
including the right to peace, security and stability
in the Middle East.
“The Republic of Iraq strongly condemns all
acts of aggression by Israel on Palestinian territory.
We also express our full support to the Palestinian
National Authority and our solidarity with the
Palestinian people. We call on the international
community to support the efforts of the Palestinian
National Authority in combating the negative
consequences of the Israeli occupation, especially
at the socioeconomic level, in the occupied
territories and in East Jerusalem, which have led
to very high losses every year. We urge all our
Palestinian brothers to continue their democratic
dialogue and efforts to achieve consensus with a
view to consolidating Palestinian unity, which is
the essential backbone for the defence of Palestine’s
right to move forward by building and protecting
Palestine’s future.”
Ms. Radwan (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, we would like to thank the Secretary-General
2/25

30/11/2017

for his report (A/72/368) on the situation in the Middle
East and the question of Palestine and for his personal
efforts in that regard. We would also like to thank the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People for the commendable efforts
it has made. Within the context of the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, I have
the honour to affirm the support of the Saudi Arabian
Kingdom to the Palestinian people in their historic
struggle to exercise their inalienable rights, especially
self-determination and the establishment of an
independent and sovereign Palestinian State.
We condemn the continuing Israeli attacks on
the Palestinian occupied territories. We believe that
Israel alone is responsible for these acts — killing
innocent Palestinians, expanding colonization, stealing
Palestinian property, destroying thousands of houses
and infrastructure and inflicting human and material
damage on the Palestinian people. In the 70 years since
the Nakba of 1948, the 50 years of occupation and
the past 10 years of an unjust blockade, Palestinians
have been subject to flagrant violations that could be
considered war crimes and crimes against humanity,
which humankind will never forget. Israel must end its
acts of aggression, but so far it has ignored all of the
international community’s calls to halt its violations. We
urge it to respect the relevant international resolutions
and international law.
In Saudi Arabia’s view, the question of Palestine
should be a top priority for the international
community in all its legal, humanitarian and political
ramifications, including the effects of Israel’s acts of
aggression, with a view to ensuring that the relevant
international resolutions are implemented and that
all of Israel’s violations of international law and
human rights are ended. Palestinians in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Al-Quds Al-Sharif,
must be afforded international protection so that
they can live in dignity, peace and security within
their own territory. Saudi Arabia reaffirms the Arab
identity of the Palestinians in the occupied territories,
including East Jerusalem, which is an integral part of
the Palestinian territories that Israel, the occupying
Power, has annexed since 1967, in an illegal act that the
international community has condemned. We condemn
it, as we condemn Israel’s attacks on the Al-Aqsa
Mosque. We call for an end to those repeated violations
and demand that Israel respect freedom of religion and
17-40508

30/11/2017

the sanctity of the holy sites and of the Muslims and
Christians who worship in them.
If the colonizing Power Israel continues its illegal
settlements, seizing Palestinian territory and expelling
Palestinians, that is a flagrant example of ethnic
cleansing. Its building of settlements undermines the
possibility of a two-State solution and is proof that
Israel has no interest in peaceful solutions but rather
is aiming to change the facts on the ground through
its occupation, depriving the Palestinian people of
their rights. We call on Israel to end its expansion of
settlements and implement the relevant international
resolutions, which state that such settlements are
illegal and must be dismantled. In our view, the
occupying Power, Israel, is fully responsible for the
atrocities committed by extremist settlers against the
Palestinian people. We ask that the settlement leaders
and the extremist settler groups be placed on a terrorist
list, in accordance with the demands of international
justice vis-à-vis States and those bodies charged with
combating international terrorism.
My country not only supports our Palestinian
brothers but in Beirut in 2002 helped to launch the
historic initiative for peace that has evolved into the Arab
Peace Initiative, adopted by the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, representing a significant development in
the peace process that laid the foundations for a new
phase in the efforts to end the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The Amman Declaration, adopted at the Arab League
Summit in March, reaffirmed the Arab Peace Initiative
and confirmed the view of Arab stakeholders that a
two-State solution is the only possible path to peace.
Despite all these attempts to achieve peace on the basis
of the Arab Peace Initiative, Israel, the occupying
Power, continues to take unilateral measures designed
to damage Jerusalem and Al-Haram Al-Sharif. It
continues its brutal blockade of Gaza and its violations
of international law and the human rights of the
Palestinian people. We all know what the path to peace
is. It requires an effective international mechanism
for ending the Israeli occupation based on a clear road
map and the creation of an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital along the 1967
borders, and accompanied by the liberation of all the
occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan.
The Palestinian people have suffered for decades
under this unique occupation and its discriminatory and
oppressive policies. We commend Palestine’s efforts in
its struggle to defend its lands, people and holy sites.

A/72/PV.60

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will continue to do
everything it can to ease the suffering of the Palestinian
people, overcome this historical injustice and maintain
our solidarity with the people of Palestine in their fight
to achieve their legitimate rights and aspirations.
Mr. Dibaei (Islamic Republic of Iran): As we
observe the International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, it is extremely unfortunate to have
to note that no progress has been made towards ending
the Israeli occupation of Palestinian lands over the
past year. We deplore the fact that the international
community’s efforts have so far proved inadequate,
owing to the Israeli regime’s intransigence and its
continued unlawful, criminal acts and policies directed
at the people of Palestine.
We note with grave concern the latest disturbing
developments in the occupied Palestinian territory, as
reflected in the documents under consideration today
(A/72/35 and A/72/368). The injustices have continued
for more than seven decades, as evidenced by the
systematic and unabated violations of the rights of
the Palestinian people that include the demolition of
homes, the forced displacement of Palestinian civilians,
the arrest and detention of Palestinians, including
children, as well as the persistent acts of violence,
terror and provocation committed by Israeli settlers
and extremists, including at sensitive religious sites,
particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque. At the same time,
the imposition of the illegal blockade on the Gaza Strip
continues to cause massive deprivation and hopelessness
and is fuelling a grave humanitarian crisis. In that
way the Israeli regime deliberately and systematically
violates each and every basic norm of international law,
including international humanitarian law.
That regime arrogantly and flagrantly continues to
violate a large number of United Nations resolutions,
including at least 86 resolutions adopted by the Security
Council, from resolution 54 (1948) to resolution 2334
(2016), on illegal settlement activities, as well as many
other resolutions adopted by the General Assembly, the
Human Rights Council and United Nations specialized
agencies in response to Israel’s illegal occupation,
repeated acts of aggression, well-documented
atrocities, apartheid policies and war crimes against
the Palestinian people. It is unfortunate that a host of
criminal practices and policies are being perpetrated
by that regime with impunity, and that the international
community has yet to take any significant measures to
address them.

17-405083/25

A/72/PV.60

30/11/2017

The rapid growth of illegal settlements in the
Palestinian territory constitutes not only a grave
breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention, but also a
war crime. It is yet again another clear indication that
the Israeli regime has never had any interest in peace
with the Palestinians, and its participation in the talks
has just been a tactic to buy time and continue its
policy of aggression and expansion. Emboldened by a
number of changes in the political landscape, it now
seems to have decided to totally negate any right of
Palestinian statehood.

that we will do everything in our power to help them
realize the cause of a free and prosperous Palestine.

Israel also continues to flout all international
regimes that govern weapons of mass destruction by
refusing to adhere to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons
Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention.
Nuclear weapons in the hands of that regime pose the
most serious threat to the security of all States in the
Middle East.

We commend and thank the Chair of the Committee
for the introduction of draft resolutions A/72/L.13,
A/72/L.14, A/72/L.15 and A/72/L.16, which we will
soon adopt, and the Vice-Chair for presenting the
annual report of the Committee (see A/72/PV.59), as
contained in document A/72/35.

As in the past, the situation in Palestine requires
urgent international attention and action. The
continued illegal and brutal Israeli occupation not only
causes misery to the Palestinian people; it also lies at
the origin of various tensions in the Middle East, and
is dangerously inflaming the volatile situation in the
region, with far-reaching and serious consequences for
international peace and security. While Israeli criminal
acts and policies are worsening and could at any
moment trigger further crises, the extremely fragile
situation on the ground must be seriously addressed to
avert further destabilization.
Regrettably, and despite the clear global consensus
on the illegality of Israeli policies and practices on
Palestinian territory, the Security Council continues
to be paralysed, failing to uphold its obligations. That
must change. The Security Council should shoulder its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
and international law to compel the Israeli regime
to respect the norms of international law, including
international humanitarian law, and to end its war crimes
and human rights violations against the Palestinian
people and its illegal occupation of Palestinian land, as
well as to end the plight of the Palestinian refugees.
I would like to conclude by reiterating the
unwavering support of the people and the Government
of the Islamic Republic of Iran for the oppressed people
of the Palestinian nation. Once again, we assure them
4/25

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): The delegation of the
Republic of Indonesia is pleased to participate in
today’s and yesterday’s sequence of events marking
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, which commenced yesterday morning with the
special meeting of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People in the
Trusteeship Council Chamber and continues with this
meeting on the question of Palestine.

We share the concern expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report, in document A/72/368, about
the absence of political progress on the Palestinian
question and the high risk of further violence and
radicalization. Indonesia also takes this opportunity to
once again reaffirm its support of the two-State vision
and to affirm, as the Secretary-General has done, that
nobody who claims to object to it has come up with a
viable alternative that meets the legitimate aspirations
of the Israelis and Palestinians.
With a sustainable and just peace in mind, we share
the position set out in the report of the Quartet and
various Security Council resolutions that Israel must
take the necessary steps to stop settlement expansion and
construction. We, the international community, cannot
wait for another 50 years of occupation — 50 years of
tragic history, full of the grievances and suffering of
the Palestinian people. That is a crime, one that, as time
elapses, will increasingly be forgotten unless we keep
being reminded of the peril of our Palestinian brothers
and sisters, and unless we take action in this Hall. Their
pain and suffering result from the flagrant violation of
human rights and of the decency of humankind.
Indonesia reiterates its call for issues such as the
violation of fundamental human rights and freedom of
movement, poverty, discrimination and racism, fear
and intimidation and extrajudicial killings, as well
as other forms of human rights abuses that have been
conducted by the occupying Power, to be put to an end.
While the policy of expanding illegal settlements by the
occupying Power continues to exacerbate the situation,
17-40508

30/11/2017

the war created by Israel is not only physical in nature,
but is also a social and cultural barrier that limits the
livelihoods of Palestinians.
With regard to the Palestinian economy, it cannot be
put on a development path that is sustainable in the long
term because of the systematic nature of the occupying
Power’s planning policies, laws and practices. It is clear
that the illegal blockades and barrier zones imposed by
Israel undermine the current Palestinian economy and
its potential and exacerbate Palestinian dependence on
imports and foreign aid.
The deliberate destruction of infrastructure and
services, confiscation of land, restrictions on access
to water and the expansion of illegal settlements
have caused much harm to the Palestinian people.
The Palestinian living standards and productive
capacities and activities are destroyed because of
prolonged restrictions on the movement and trade of the
Palestinian people. We must allow Palestinian children
to go to school in peace; we cannot let them grow up in
a harmful and polluted environment.
In the search for progress and peace, Indonesia
remains committed to the two-State solution within
the framework of a comprehensive regional settlement
consistent with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003), 1860 (2009) and
2334 (2016) and in accordance with the Quartet road
map, the Arab Peace Initiative, the report of the Middle
East Quartet and the principle of land for peace. Much
needs to be done to ensure that all those resolutions
are implemented.

A/72/PV.60

As things stand now, the Palestinian-Israeli talks
remain deadlocked, and there are incessant, violent
conflicts that result in grave humanitarian disasters.
Israel’s persistent settlement expansion has severely
undermined the mutual trust between the two parties.
The international community must have a greater sense
of urgency and work for a political solution to the
Palestinian question by addressing the root causes, as
well as the symptoms, in order to safeguard international
justice and promote regional peace and stability.
Chinese President Xi Jinping sent a congratulatory
message to yesterday’s meeting marking the International
Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, in which
he expressed the Chinese people’s sympathy with and
support for the Palestinian people. In July, President
Xi put forward a four-point proposal on facilitating
the settlement of the Palestinian question, which is the
overarching guidance for China’s engagement in the
next phase of the political settlement process. China is
ready to join the international community in pushing
for a solution to the Palestinian question based on the
following efforts.
The first is to steadfastly push ahead with the
political process based on the two-State solution.
On the basis of relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace and the Arab Peace
Initiative, parties should continue working towards a
negotiated, comprehensive, just and lasting solution of
the Palestinian question.

Now is the right time for the international
community to finally put an end to the occupation of
Palestinian territory. Let us see no more blood and tears
falling on the ground on Palestinian lands, and let our
call for peace not fall on deaf ears. Having said that,
Indonesia is pleased to lend our full support to all the
draft resolutions to be adopted and is determined to see
them implemented.

Secondly, we must uphold the concept of common,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable security.
Palestine and Israel need to embark on a path to
security that is built and shared by both countries.
China appeals for the good-faith implementation
of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016) so as to
immediately put an end to all settlement activities in
the occupied territories and to take immediate steps to
prevent all acts of violence against civilians. We call
for resumption of talks as early as possible to expedite
the political settlement of the Palestinian question and
achieve common, sustained security.

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
question of Palestine is at the centre of the Middle East
issue and is fundamental to peace in the Middle East.
A comprehensive and just solution to the Palestinian
question without further delay is in the interest of all
peoples in the region, including the Palestinian people,
and is conducive to peace and stability around the world.

Thirdly, we must further coordinate international
efforts and scale up the synergy for peace. Recently,
the international community has intensified diplomatic
efforts to bring the two parties back to the negotiating
table. China supports all efforts conducive to the
political settlement of the Palestinian question. We
applaud Egypt’s contributions to intra-Palestine

17-405085/25

A/72/PV.60

reconciliation. We hope to see greater coordination
within the international community to advance the
peace initiatives with wide participation.
Fourthly, we must take an integrated approach
and promote peace through development. China sees
both Palestine and Israel as important partners along
the route of the Belt and Road Initiative. Guided by
the concept of promoting peace through development,
China is committed to facilitating mutually beneficial
cooperation between the two countries by providing
greater access to the avenues for such cooperation and by
supporting, as always, Palestine’s faster development.
That will reinforce the basis for peace and harmony and
minimize impediments to peace talks.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and a responsible major player, China has never been
absent from the international endeavour to peacefully
resolve the question of Palestine. We have always
maintained an objective and impartial stance and
have worked actively to encourage peace and push
for negotiations. We consistently and firmly support
and contribute to the Middle East peace process. We
support the just cause of the Palestinian people to
restore their legitimate national rights. We support the
establishment of an independent State of Palestine with
full sovereignty, based on the 1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
Earlier this year, China received visits from
Palestinian President Abbas and Israeli Prime Minister
Netanyahu on separate occasions, during which we
engaged both parties on the Palestinian question. We
will continue to play an active and constructive role to
help bring about a solution to the Palestinian question.
We are also keen for Palestine and Israel to seize the
opportunity to meet each other halfway, rebuild trust
and resume peace talks without delay.
The way the Middle East situation as a whole is
evolving is a cause for concern. Some countries in the
region are trapped in protracted turmoil. There are
complex and intertwined hotspot issues, and terrorism
is spreading, and all of that poses a severe challenge to
international peace and security.
China pays close attention to the Middle East
situation, and we hope that the international community
can work in concert for peace, stability and development
in the region.
6/25

30/11/2017

First, our focus should be on the political settlement
of hotspot issues in the region, and parties concerned
should be encouraged to abandon their zero-sum-game
logic and resolve their differences through inclusive
political dialogue.
Secondly, Middle Eastern countries and the
international community at large should work in unity
to combat terrorism relentlessly by upholding uniform
standards and applying a combination of measures
in an integrated manner. They should enhance
cooperation in border control and law enforcement, cut
off terrorist financing and weapons supply, roll back
the dissemination of terrorist ideology and prevent any
spillover or return of terrorist fighters.
Thirdly, the way in which Middle East affairs
are handled must be consistent with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. That
entails respect for the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of countries in the region,
respecting the right of all countries to independently
choose their political system and development model
and adhering to the universally recognized and basic
norms of international relations.
Fourthly, our focus should be on the root causes
of each conflict, promoting inclusive and balanced
development; respecting the diversity of civilizations
and fostering the awareness that humankind is a
community with a shared future.
China is ready to work hand in hand with the rest of
the international community in the quest for a solution
to end the turmoil in the Middle East for the early
attainment of peace and development in the region.
Mr. Paolino Laborde (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): On the occasion of another anniversary of
the International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, we echo the words of other Members of this
Organization, hoping that we may very soon witness
the long-awaited peace that would allow the Palestinian
people to exercise their legitimate right to be part of a
sovereign and independent Palestinian State.
Yesterday marked 70 years since the General
Assembly adopted resolution 181 (II), by which it was
decided to partition Palestine and create two States,
one Arab and one Jewish. Uruguay strongly supported
that solution, convinced that it would allow Israel and
Palestine to live together in peace and security.
17-40508

30/11/2017

Today, seven decades later, Uruguay wishes to once
again reaffirm its support for the right of Israel and
Palestine to live in peace within secure and recognized
borders, in an environment of renewed cooperation and
free from any threat or action that could undermine
peace. Uruguay also reiterates its support for a solution
with two independent States, as we are convinced that
that is the only way that will allow for the peaceful
coexistence of Israel and Palestine.
Uruguay maintains strong ties of friendship with
the State of Israel and also with the State of Palestine.
Palestine’s full membership in the Organization,
exercising its people’s right to self-determination, is
the logical consequence of the process that has been
under way since it was recognized as a full-fledged
State and a responsible State, one capable of completely
eliminating terrorism from its territory, and incitement
and endorsement of terrorism, while living in peace
with the State of Israel and the other States in the region.
Early on, Uruguay recognized the State of Israel,
and later, when we determined that the inconclusive
process could not continue to drag on, the State of
Palestine. It is crucial for the international community
to step up its efforts to assist in the process and
encourage the parties to return to the negotiating table
with a view to achieving a peaceful, fair, negotiated
and lasting solution that is in line with international
law and takes the interests of both nations into account.
To achieve that, the parties must comply with their
obligations under international law and refrain from
adopting unilateral decisions that hinder dialogue.
Clear political signals are needed to break the vicious
circle of disputes and violence.
Uruguay remains concerned about the expansion
of settlements in territories occupied by the Israeli
authorities, despite the provisions of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 2334 (2016), as well as the
confiscation of land and the continued destruction of
Palestinian homes. We urge Israel to stop such practices.
Under international law, those settlements are illegal,
and they are contrary to the recommendations of the
Middle East Quartet and Security Council resolutions.
If the current trend continues, the two-State solution
will be rendered practically impossible.
To conclude, Uruguay reaffirms its willingness
to continue working to reactivate the peace process
through all existing initiatives, to break the status quo

A/72/PV.60

and, in that way, to make progress in the peace talks
and the two-State solution.
Mr. Al-Shanfari (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): On
behalf of the delegation of the Sultanate of Oman, I
wish to commend and thank the President for convening
this meeting to examine the question of Palestine. We
are also grateful to Ambassador Fodé Seck, Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Senegal and Chair
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People. We thank the
Committee for its report in document A/72/35, which
was introduced earlier (see A/72/PV.59). We also thank
the Secretary-General for his report on the question of
Palestine (A/72/368).
Since the question of Palestine was first raised
in the United Nations 70 years ago, the situation has
remained unchanged. No settlement has been reached
that allows the Palestinian people to enjoy their rights,
and over the past seven decades Israel has continued
to carry out illegal and inhumane practices. Israel
continues to expand its settlements in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem, thus violating all the rights of the
Palestinian people and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016).
My country calls on the international community,
represented in the United Nations and the Security
Council, to fulfil its responsibility and call upon Israel to
work in conformity with international resolutions, so as
to guarantee international protection for the Palestinian
people. We also call on the international community to
compel Israel to end those practices and its attempts to
alter the demography of Palestinian territories. We must
move towards negotiations, so as to end that occupation
and ensure an independent sovereign State of Palestine
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with
the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative. Israel must also withdraw from the
occupied Syrian Golan and the rest of the territory still
under occupation in southern Lebanon.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
welcome the recent Palestinian national reconciliation
agreement between Fatah and Hamas, in Cairo. That
will allow the Palestinian Government to expand its
authority and power throughout Palestinian territories
and end divisions, therefore serving the needs of the
Palestinian people. We reiterate the readiness of the
Sultanate of Oman to cooperate with all parties towards

17-405087/25

A/72/PV.60

Palestinian unity. We also commend the efforts of the
Arab Republic of Egypt to achieve that agreement.
In conclusion, the delegation of my country
reiterates the need for both parties to return to dialogue
and negotiation. We call on those interested in the peace
process, including the Middle East Quartet and the
Security Council, to take on a positive role by carrying
out vital and effective action in order to find a just and
lasting solution that would create an independent State
of Palestine, within the internationally recognized
pre-1967 borders, allowing that country to live side by
side with Israel in peace.
Mr. Rivero Rosario (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba wishes to align itself with the statement made
earlier by the representative of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela (see A/72/PV.59) on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
We thank His Excellency Ambassador Neville
Melvin Gertze, Permanent Representative of Namibia
and Vice-Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, for the
Committee’s report (A/72/35) and for his statement (see
A/72/PV.59).
Cuba expresses its deep concern about the situation
in the region of the Middle East, which is afflicted
by violence, interference in internal affairs, foreign
aggression and long-standing conflicts, such as that
between Palestine and Israel — the nucleus of the ArabIsraeli conflict. It is time to settle historical debts with
the State of Palestine and restore the inalienable rights
of its people, which have been violated for half a century
during Israeli occupation, repression and collective
punishment, destruction and confiscation of land and
Palestinian homes, forced displacement, and colonialist
settlements in occupied Palestinian territories.
The numerous violations of international law,
in particular of humanitarian law and human rights
principles, committed by Israel, the occupying Power, in
the context of its 50 years of foreign military occupation
of the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan since 1967, continue
today, and those violations have increased during the
period covered in the Committee’s report. The Security
Council must adopt tangible measures to do away
with this historical injustice, urgently ending Israel’s
occupation of the Palestinian territory and other Arab
territories since 1967.
8/25

30/11/2017

An immediate end must be brought to the embargo
in the Gaza Strip, which has lasted for almost a decade.
The critical situation caused by the air, land and sea
blockade has led to almost total isolation and great
privation for the 2 million Palestinian people in the
area. In Gaza, a grave humanitarian crisis persists, and
the socioeconomic conditions have sunk to the lowest
levels since the beginning of the occupation in 1967. That
has created an extremely difficult and unsustainable
situation that requires an immediate solution.
The two-State solution and a comprehensive, just,
peaceful and lasting settlement of the Palestinian
question will not be possible as long as Israel continues
to violate its obligations under international law and the
Charter of the United Nations in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, as well as to violate
the relevant resolutions of the United Nations, including
Security Council resolution 2334 (2016).
Cuba also demands an end of the occupation of
the Syrian Golan. We reiterate that any measure that
has been taken or that will be taken with the goal
of modifying the legal, physical and demographic
status and the institutional structure of the occupied
Syrian Golan, as well as Israel’s measures to exercise
its jurisdiction and administration in that territory,
constitute violations of international law, international
agreements, the Charter and the resolutions of the
United Nations, including Security Council resolution
497 (1981) and the Fourth Geneva Convention. They
also challenge the international community.
In such a complex scenario, we must not forget to
seek solutions to situations arising in the region that
also have an impact on the possibility of achieving
peace. We must find a comprehensive, just and lasting
solution to the question of the city of Jerusalem that
takes into account the legitimate concerns of the
Palestinian and Israeli parties. We must also not forget
that the imposition of legislation, jurisdiction and
administration by Israel, be it in Jerusalem or in the
occupied Syrian Golan, is not a neutral and worthless
action, but an obstacle to the peace process.
As stated in his message of solidarity yesterday
with the Palestinian people, our Minister for Foreign
Affairs said:
“Cuba has historically maintained its strong
support for and solidarity with the just cause
of the Palestinian people, based on a clear and
unequivocal position of principles in favour of self17-40508

30/11/2017

determination and the creation of an independent
Palestinian State. We will continue to uphold the
right of the Palestinian people to establish a free,
independent and sovereign State with its capital in
East Jerusalem and its pre-1967 borders, as well as
the right of return for the Palestinian refugees.
“The international community must not remain
unmoved in the face of abuses and violations against
the Palestinian people. We support all actions that
enable the implementation of a political negotiation
process to ensure the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people and achieve a just and lasting
peace for all peoples of the region.”
In November 2012, the General Assembly adopted
the historic decision to grant Palestine the status of an
Observer State at the United Nations. Just as we lent
our support at that time, Cuba will continue to support
the entry of Palestine as a full Member of the United
Nations, as is the manifest desire of the vast majority of
States. The historical debt to the Palestinian people is
enormous and must be paid.
Allow me to conclude my statement by reiterating
Cuba’s unwavering solidarity with the Palestinian
people and its determination to continue supporting
them in their legitimate struggle for justice, dignity,
peace and the defence of their inalienable right to selfdetermination and sovereignty.
Mr. Bessedik (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my deepest thanks for
the efforts of the members of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People to defend the legitimate and just rights of the
Palestinian people. The rights of the Palestinian people
continue to be violated under the Israeli occupation.
The International Day of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People reminds us of the responsibility
of the international community as a whole and of the
United Nations vis-à-vis the Palestinian people and their
just cause, as well as of the failure of the international
community to fulfil the obligations it undertook in
1947 under the United Nations Partition Plan for
Palestine, seventy years ago. In the period since then
the Palestinian people have not managed to enjoy their
legitimate rights and their freedom or to establish their
independent and viable State, in accordance with the
relevant United Nations resolutions.

A/72/PV.60

Today also coincides with the centenary of the
sinister and ominous Balfour Declaration, which marked
the beginning of the plight of the Palestinian people,
which is still continuing today. It is deeply deplorable
that some insist on celebrating the anniversary of the
Declaration, in which promises were made by those
who did not have right to make them to those who did
not deserve them.
The world is still witnessing the ongoing plight
of the Palestinian people under Israeli occupation and
illegal settlement policies, including the establishment
of the apartheid wall, the displacement of the
Palestinian civilians and the collective punishment and
the blockade on the Gaza Strip for more than 11 years.
There are most recent violations of international norms
and law, including international humanitarian law,
notwithstanding the recurrent international calls for an
end to the occupation.
The challenge posed by Israel’s occupation to
international legitimacy and its ongoing manoeuvring
to impose a de facto policy on the Palestinian people,
including the Judaization and separation of the city
of Jerusalem, not to mention the day-to-day barbaric
and atrocious practices of the Israeli occupation
army, which violate the dignity and freedom of the
Palestinian people, would not be ongoing were it
not for the indifference of international parties with
regard to upholding their responsibilities vis-à-vis the
Palestinian people.
Given their ongoing suffering and the absence
of any prospects for a settlement to this crisis, the
international community is still responsible for finding
a way out of the long-standing Palestinian issue and for
responding to the aspirations of Palestinians to live in
freedom, dignity and peace in a viable, independent
State. Therefore, the international community should
fully uphold its responsibilities and redouble its efforts
to provide the Palestinian people with international
protection, meanwhile putting pressure on the Israeli
regime to end its occupation of the Palestinian
territories and to help the Palestinian people to establish
their independent State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as
its capital. That would enable them to control their
natural resources, in accordance with United Nations
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
From this rostrum, I wish to reaffirm Algeria’s
unconditional and ongoing support for the Palestinian
cause and its complete support of the Palestinian

17-405089/25

A/72/PV.60

people in their just and legitimate struggle and ongoing
efforts to establish an independent Palestinian State,
with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. In that regard,
we applaud the efforts for national reconciliation. We
reiterate that the steadfastness and struggle of the
Palestinian people, their determination to defend their
inalienable national rights and access to their holy sites
and their overcoming the systematic Israeli violations
will culminate in freedom and salvation.
On the occasion of the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, Algeria reiterates
its principled position of supporting the Palestinian
people. We therefore call on the international
community and the United Nations to put an end to
the flagrant violations by the Israeli authorities and
to step up efforts to enable the Palestinian people to
establish an independent State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif
as its capital.
Mr. Mayong Onon (Malaysia): Allow me to
thank the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People for
his statement yesterday (see A/72/PV.59). Malaysia
applauds the Committee’s annual efforts and joins
the international community in commemorating the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. The successful organization of activities in
cooperation with Governments, United Nations bodies,
parliamentarians and intergovernmental and civilsociety organizations is testimony to the unwavering
support for the cause of the Palestinian people.
My delegation appreciates the indispensable work on
the question of Palestine carried out by the Committee,
the Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat
and the other entities within the United Nations system.
We also commend the commitment, the efforts and the
contribution of the Secretary-General and the United
Nations in faithfully carrying out their responsibilities
towards achieving a just and lasting peace in the region.
The question of Palestine has been before us for
seven decades now. However, we are still nowhere near
to resolving the conflict and to achieving a just and
durable peace between Palestine and Israel. Malaysia
reaffirms its long-standing commitment to supporting
Palestine’s continuous efforts for self-determination,
sovereignty and independence, underpinned by various
international principles and laws.
My delegation deeply regrets that Israel’s continued
building of illegal settlements on Palestinian lands,
10/25

30/11/2017

including in East Jerusalem, further weakens the
possibility of a two-State solution based on the pre-1967
borders. Those illegal policies and actions are in blatant
disregard of Security Council resolution 2334 (2016).
Despite the provocations of the occupying Power,
Malaysia appreciates the readiness and commitment
of the Palestinians to continue negotiations. That spirit
should be reciprocated by Israel. We therefore urge the
international community to further demand that Israel
immediately cease all its illegal settlement activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory before the viability of
a two-State solution is completely eroded.
Malaysia welcomes the recent signing of the
unity agreement, facilitated by Egypt. We hope that
all Member States will support the unity Government
under the leadership of President Mahmoud Abbas.
Malaysia remains concerned about the vulnerability
of security at sites in the holy city. Freedom of religious
expression must be allowed to prevail. The sanctity
of religious sites must be respected. We call on the
occupying Power, Israel, not to take any action that
would alter the status of the Islamic holy sites. Thus we
continue to urge unrestricted and unhindered access for
Muslim worshippers to the Al-Aqsa mosque.
On the situation in Gaza, my delegation notes with
grave concern, from the reports before us, the scale of
deterioration leading to an unprecedented humanitarian
crisis. Food, clean water, sanitation and electricity
remain scarce, with vast networks having been
destroyed by the Israeli authorities. Access to medical
treatment and higher education, family and social
life, employment and economic activities are almost
unheard of. We urge the international community to
continue to provide generous support to all United
Nations bodies, including the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and other organizations working on the ground
to alleviate the catastrophic conditions and to expedite
rebuilding efforts for vital necessities.
Malaysia also urges all Member States to continue
to demand an immediate lifting of the blockade on
Gaza in order to enable legitimate and sustained
movement of persons and goods, including construction
materials, humanitarian aid and commercial flows. The
economy of Gaza should be allowed to re-establish
itself and to recover. My delegation firmly believes
that the normalization of the situation in Gaza
would significantly reduce tension and facilitate the
17-40508

30/11/2017

resumption of the political process. The citizens of
Gaza should not be allowed to continue to live in a de
facto open-air prison.
As a member of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and of
the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices
Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian
People and Other Arabs of the Occupied Territories,
Malaysia fully endorses the Committee’s report and
its recommendations. My delegation is also pleased
to co-sponsor all resolutions under this important
agenda item.
To conclude, my delegation reiterates that there is
an urgent need to address the root cause of the conflict,
which is occupation by Israel. Israel, the occupying
Power, must end the occupation and must comply with
all relevant United Nations resolutions.
Malaysia reiterates its long-standing support
for the inalienable right of self-determination for the
Palestinian people and a just, comprehensive and
definitive solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
We firmly support the establishment of an independent,
democratic, contiguous and viable State of Palestine,
living side by side in peace and security with Israel,
based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
Mr. Yemberdiyev (Kazakhstan): I wsh to thank the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People for the work that it has done so
far for the sake of the Palestinian people.

A/72/PV.60

correctional systems, together with new legislation, will
ensure the rule of law and good governance. Such steps,
together with encouraging unity among the various
factions as well as promoting inclusive participatory
development processes, will over time yield dividends.
The Middle East is a remarkable part of the ancient
land of great, incredible Asia. All of the world’s major
religions — Buddhism, Judaism, Christianity and
Islam — were born on the sacred soil of that continent.
Likewise, the spiritual teachers and prophets of
humankind, ranging from Lao-tzu, Gautama Buddha,
Moses, Jesus Christ and Muhammad to the greatest of
contemporary thinkers of the eminence of Mahatma
Gandhi, were born in that part of the world. Is it
impossible for the continent, in particular the Middle
East portion, to absorb and be inspired by the rich
legacy that has accumulated over the ages and thus
synthesize it into a new concept of cooperation and
collective security?
Finally, in the interest of peace in this long-suffering
region, we shall collect and synthesize matters as best
we can. We therefore must collectively seek the best
way to meet the contemporary challenges of that part of
the globe and lay new foundations for the existence of
humankind in a world that is more integrated than ever
before. Let me assure the Assembly that Kazakhstan
will do its utmost to ensure peace and security
throughout the Middle East as a whole.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.

The position of Kazakhstan remains unchanged,
balanced and consistent. We see the two-State solution,
with peaceful coexistence, as the only viable and
durable option between Palestine and Israel. That
should be in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, the relevant Security Council resolutions and
other mechanisms and initiatives, such as the road
map for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid
principles and the land-for-peace principle.

I should like to inform members that the
consideration of draft resolutions A/72/L.13, A/72/L.14,
A/72/L.15 and A/72/L.16 will take place following the
conclusion of the debate on agenda item 37.

We support the right of Palestinian people to selfdetermination in the creation of a free, sovereign and
independent State within the international borders of
1967. At the same time, we support the right of Israel to
peace and security.

The situation in the Middle East

Investment in building strong Palestinian institutions,
inter alia, promoting reforms in the security sector,
the military, law enforcement and the judicial and

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I now
give the floor to the representative of Egypt to introduce
draft resolutions A/72/L.11 and A/72/L.17.

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 38.
Agenda item 37
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/72/333 and
A/72/368)
Draft resolutions (A/72/L.11 and A/72/L.17)

17-4050811/25

A/72/PV.60

Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Further to
the statement delivered yesterday by the representative
of Egypt with regard to the question of Palestine and
the role of the United Nations in the preservation of
the rights of peoples within their territories (see
A/72/PV.59), I am introducing, on behalf of the Group of
Arab States, draft resolutions A/72/L.11 and A/72/L.17,
on the situation in the Middle East.
Draft resolution A/72/L.11 reaffirms the Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions on occupied
Jerusalem that determined that all legislative and
administrative measures taken by Israel to alter the
legal status of the city are null and void. Regarding the
situation in Jerusalem, there must be internationally
guaranteed provisions to ensure freedom of conscience,
and there must be an end to colonization and to other
such illegitimate acts, including the excavations in the
Old City and in the holy sites. The draft resolution has
not been changed except to note, in the preambular
part, Security Council resolution 2334 (2016), which
underlines that the Council will not recognize any
changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard
to Jerusalem, other than those agreed by the parties
through negotiations.
Draft resolution A/72/L.17, on the Syrian Golan,
recalls Security Council resolution 497 (1981) and
declares that Israel has so far failed to comply with it.
It reaffirms the applicability of the relevant provisions
of the Regulations annexed to the Hague Convention
of 1907 and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 to
the Syrian territory occupied by Israel since 1967. It
stresses the illegality of Israeli settlement construction
and other activities in the occupied Syrian Golan and
demands that Israel withdraw from all of the occupied
Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967 and comply with
its obligations in that regard. The draft resolution has not
been modified from the resolution on the same question
adopted at the previous session (resolution 71/24).
The sponsors of these two draft resolutions are of
the view that the international community must deal
with the issue of the Middle East as a whole, because
the people in that area all aspire to peace, prosperity
and harmonious coexistence. It must show genuine
commitment and political will to free all Palestinian
and Arab occupied territories in accordance with
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions,
the principle of land for peace and international law.
12/25

30/11/2017

We call on all States to support these draft
resolutions and to reaffirm the international
community’s view that we must achieve the objectives
and principles of international law on which the United
Nations was founded.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank the
representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt for
introducing draft resolution A/72/L.11, on Jerusalem,
and draft resolution A/72/L.17, on the Syrian Golan.
I would also like to thank all the States that have
previously voted in favour of the resolution on the
Syrian Golan.
Since its twenty-fifth session, in 1970, the General
Assembly has considered the item on the situation in
the Middle East on a yearly basis. At every session,
the Assembly calls upon Israel, the occupying Power,
to put an end to its occupation of Arab territories and
reaffirms that any measures taken by Israel to impose its
own laws, jurisdiction and administration on Jerusalem
and the occupied Syrian Golan are illegal, baseless and
null and void.
In all its recurrent resolutions, the General Assembly
is fully aligned with the position unanimously expressed
by the Security Council in resolution 478 (1980), on
occupied Jerusalem, and resolution 497 (1981), on the
occupied Syrian Golan. Those two resolutions rejected
the provocative actions of the Israeli authority in
annexing Palestinian Jerusalem and the Syrian Golan,
and considered the Israeli actions null and void and
totally groundless.
Our meeting today coincides with the hundredth
anniversary of the sinister and ominous Balfour
Declaration, which is legally known at the international
level as a promise by one who does not own to those
who do not deserve. It is a colonial declaration whose
devastating repercussions are still being witnessed
not only by the Palestinian people, but also by the
whole region.
Our meeting today also coincides with the fiftieth
anniversary of the Israeli occupation of the Arab
territories, which is totally supported and protected by
certain countries, including permanent members of the
Security Council, and which has emboldened Israel, the
occupying Power, in the region. Consequently, Israel
has refused to implement hundreds of United Nations
resolutions for decades. Moreover, Israel is expanding
and annexing a lot of Arab and Palestinian territories, as
17-40508

30/11/2017

well as perpetrating documented systematic aggression
and crimes, which are tantamount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
The Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan is
equally bleak, as Israel still refuses to return the
occupied Golan to its motherland, Syria, and to comply
with United Nations resolutions, especially Security
Council resolution 497 (1981). Since the first day of
this deplorable occupation, Israel has been trying to
change the legal and political status of the occupied
Syrian Golan, including by imposing Israeli citizenship
on our steadfast people there and through systematic
human rights violations and terrorist policies, including
racial discrimination, arbitrary detention, and such
unlawful restrictions as the denial of the right to
resist occupation, which is completely protected under
international norms and laws. Indeed, when those who
resist occupation are detained, they are subject to mock
trials that end in long sentences for them.
We also remind the international community of the
situation of Syria’s Mandela — the freedom fighter and
prisoner, Sedqi Al-Maqet — who was rearrested by the
Israeli occupation forces after having spent 27 years in
Israeli prisons. Al-Maqet was sentenced to another 14
years in prison because he exposed, via video and audio,
Israel’s cooperation with the terrorists of the Al-Nusra
Front. We call upon the international community to
pressure Israel to release Sedqi Al-Maqet, Amal Abu
Saleh and all others detained in the Israeli prisons.
One of the most deplorable and unprecedented
violations committed by Israel against our people in the
Golan is the fact that the occupying Power has, for more
than 50 years, denied them their most fundamental right
to communicate with and meet their families in their
motherland, Syria. This right has been converted into
the offence of communicating with a hostile foreign
State. The Israelis have also denied patients who cannot
afford medical treatment the right to go to Damascus to
get free medical treatment in the hospitals of that city.
In addition to the foregoing and quite ironically,
the occupying Power denies the people of the Golan
the right to build houses on their own land. Worse, it
is also demolishing the houses that the people of the
Golan have built on their ancestors’ land under the
pretext that they did not have a licence. Furthermore,
Israel has also committed violations in the cultural and
educational spheres, as it has stolen many relics from
archeological sites in the Golan and imposed the Israeli

A/72/PV.60

curriculum on students who are entitled to be learning
the Arab-Syrian curriculum. It has also expelled a host
of teachers for allegedly resisting the occupation and
replaced them with Israeli teachers. In addition, there
are only a handful of schools in the region.
The Israeli violations against our people in the Syrian
Golan do not end there. There are also socioeconomic
violations. The Israeli occupation has confiscated more
than three fourths of the Golan land and has converted
most of the agricultural land to military sites and to
more than 40 settlements, which are populated by
more than 23,000 Israeli settlers, and to landfills for
toxic waste. Israel has also constructed wind-powergeneration plants and is engaging in oil-exploration
projects. It has taken control of underground-water
resources and diverted them to Israeli settlements,
thereby denying the people of the Syrian Golan their
water rights or their right to sell their agricultural
products in their motherland, Syria.
The ongoing undue and sinister silence on the part
of the international community and the United Nations
in the face of the Israeli policies has emboldened Israel
to further violate the separation of forces agreement and
Security Council resolutions, including by providing
all kinds of support to terrorist groups in the area of
separation, including Jabhat Al-Nusra and Da’esh. We
would like to reiterate that, on 3 November 2017, Israel
provided transportation to hundreds of Jabhat Al-Nusra
terrorists to the town of Hadar, which is in the area of
separation north of the Golan, in order to carry out an
attack, providing them with support and coverage. The
attack resulted in 17 deaths, as well as casualties among
Syrian civilians, most of whom are women and children.
Israel’s unlimited support for terrorists in Syria
goes further. Israel, the occupying Power, has been
carrying out air strikes against many sites within Syria.
The unlimited Israeli support to armed terrorist groups
does not come as a surprise because they have common
interests and a shared goal. The first target of the armed
terrorist groups in Syria was the Syrian air-defence
sites, which defend Syria against Israeli hostilities.
My country reaffirms its sovereign right to the
occupied Syrian Golan within the borders of 4 June
1967. This right is not negotiable and is irrevocable.
Our occupied land and usurped rights will be fully
reclaimed by their owners, and Israeli settlers should
leave our land in the Golan. We will never surrender
our right to reclaim our occupied land and to free our

17-4050813/25

A/72/PV.60

30/11/2017

people who suffer under the yoke of Israeli occupation,
in accordance with the resolutions and the Charter of
the United Nations.

respect the legal obligations it undertook in the Oslo
Accords and implement the Arab Peace Initiative and
the Quartet road map.

Finally, it is no longer acceptable for the States
Members of the United Nations and the Organization to
adopt a position of solidarity in dealing with the Israeli
occupation because it does not lead to fruitful results.
We continue to believe that the United Nations should
uphold its historical responsibility to adjust its approach
and take immediate measures to put an end to the
Israeli occupation and bring about Israel’s withdrawal
from Arab territories, including the occupied Syrian
Golan, to the borders of 4 June 1967 and to ensure the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 497 (1981) and 2334 (2016).

In recent months, violence and illegal activities
by the occupying Power, Israel, have been increasing
dramatically. According to briefings held in the
Security Council in the past few months, the Israeli
Government’s provocative law to retroactively legalize
settlements has resulted in the approval of more than
2,000 housing units in Area C of the occupied West
Bank at the cost of Palestinian-owned structures.
These acts of structural alterations to the occupied
Palestinian territories and inflammatory rhetoric by
the Israeli Government continue to dim the hopes of an
end to the decades-long conflict through a two-State
solution. Achieving a negotiated solution is the only
way to achieve lasting peace, and now is the time for
the United Nations and the international community
to create the conditions for both parties to return to
negotiations. Now is the time for meaningful action.

In conclusion, I call upon all States to vote in favour
of the draft resolution on the Syrian Golan and other
draft resolutions pertaining to Palestine.
Ms. Shareef (Maldives): The Middle East is the
cradle of human civilization and the place of origin of
several early advancements in science and technology,
and yet the region is plagued by conflicts that have
inflicted enormous human suffering, poverty and terror
on hundreds of millions of people. My delegation wishes
to express its appreciation to the Secretary-General and
his good offices for the ongoing efforts to find lasting
solutions to conflicts that appear to be intractable.
Indeed, this year marks 47 years since the General
Assembly first considered the agenda item on the
situation in the Middle East. After more than four
decades of discussion in the Assembly, the question
of Palestine remains unresolved, which epitomizes the
failure of the international system to bring an end to the
suffering of the people of the Middle East.
The continued illegal occupation of Palestinian
lands by Israel is the cause of the most protracted
conflict in the Middle East, and its resolution — a fair
and just solution based on relevant Security Council
resolutions — will be vital to bringing peace and
tranquillity to the region. The establishment of an
independent and sovereign State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, on Palestinian lands within pre1967 borders, living side by side with Israel, is the only
solution and answer to the question of Palestine. That
is the solution that the Security Council demands, in
particular in resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 2334
(2016). The Maldives therefore calls on Israel to fully
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions,
14/25

The Maldives is deeply concerned by the ongoing
conflict in Syria, which has entered its seventh year.
The conflict has resulted in the deaths of hundreds and
thousands of people, and entire cities have been reduced
to rubble. The deteriorating humanitarian situation has
displaced millions of Syrians inside and outside the
country, resulting in Syrian refugees figuring among
the largest refugee communities in the world.
The violence and terror unleashed by the terrorist
group Da’esh is among the most serious threats that the
Middle East has faced in years. The barbaric acts of
violence that the group perpetrates and promotes in the
Middle East and in various parts of the world represent
a serious assault on the religion of Islam and must
be stopped. The Maldives condemns any attempt to
attribute terrorism to any religion, culture or tradition.
The Maldives has always believed that if we
are to achieve a lasting and peaceful solution to the
conflicts in the Middle East, we must be ready for
political compromise and constructive engagement.
The Maldives stands ready to work with all concerned
parties to find a lasting solution to the conflicts. The
Maldives will always be a partner in crafting shared
solutions for our shared destiny.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Middle East continues to experience
systematic and multilevel instability. The conflicts and
crises in Syria, Yemen, Libya and Iraq are ongoing.
17-40508

30/11/2017

Major agreements, such as the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action on Iran’s nuclear programme, which we
consider to be an example of constructive multilateral
cooperation, are under threat. We are concerned by the
growing tensions in the Persian Gulf, not only involving
Iran, but also among Arab States.
Russia is an active proponent of unity within
Arab States. The upcoming victory in Syria and Iraq
over the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in no
way guarantees that the threat of terrorism will be
eliminated in the near future. We cannot forget that
extremists, using ethnicity and religion to sow discord,
have created a fertile breeding ground for swelling
their ranks for a long time to come. Concerted efforts
on the part of the international community are needed
to properly respond to terrorist threats. Unfortunately,
the formation of a global anti-terrorist coalition under
the auspices of the United Nations — a proposal put
forward by the President of the Russian Federation in
2015 — has yet to be established.
The stagnating situation in the Middle East and
North Africa reflects the importance of developing
coordinated approaches to settle acute crises in the
region. In that regard, the initiative of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation, Mr. Sergey
Lavrov, to convene a comprehensive review of the crisis
situation in the Middle East remains relevant.
With respect to solving the crises in Syria, Iraq,
Libya and Yemen, Russia has continuously asserted
that the solution can be reached only through a political
and diplomatic process based on inclusive national
dialogue. We will continue to work with the opposing
sides in acute conflict situations, but will not impose
foreign, ready-made solutions on them. We must bridge
the chasm of misunderstanding and restore the prospect
of a peaceful settlement.
We are convinced that success in combating
terrorism will pave the way towards achieving a longterm political settlement in Syria. Such a settlement
must be implemented within the framework of the
Geneva process under the auspices of the United
Nations on the basis of fulfilling all of the provisions
set forth by Security Council resolution 2254 (2015).
We believe that recent events, including the statements
made by the Presidents of Russia and the United States
in Da Nang, the trilateral meeting of the Presidents of
Russia, Turkey and Iran in Sochi on 22 November, the
conference to unify the Syrian opposition in Riyadh and

A/72/PV.60

the preparation for a Syrian national dialogue congress
are aimed at renewing intra-Syrian talks in Geneva.
We call for the early resumption of the political
process in Yemen, as well as the establishment of an
effective format of external support for the settlement
of the crisis. It is necessary to provide and increase
humanitarian assistance to the people of the country,
which is on the verge of a humanitarian catastrophe.
We would like to emphasize that new challenges
and threats in the Middle East and North Africa should
not overshadow the priority of solving the Palestine
question, which remains fundamental to the longterm normalization of the situation in the region. The
persistent impasse in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is
a cause of deep concern for us. The lack of a peace
process is raising tensions that could lead to an
explosion at any moment.
We stress our commitment to achieving a
comprehensive and just settlement in the Middle East
based on a solid international legal framework providing
for a two-State solution, including relevant Security
Council resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Russia calls for the need to increase international
efforts aimed at seeking a way out of the deadlock in the
Middle East. As a permanent member of the Security
Council and a participant in the Middle East Quartet of
international mediators, we take a principled position
in support of the legitimate right of Palestinians to selfdetermination. We support the active involvement of
regional players, in particular Egypt and Jordan, and
confirm our willingness to host a summit in Russia
between the leaders of Palestine and Israel.
We note the emerging positive developments
in inter-Palestinian affairs. The agreement reached
between Fatah and Hamas through the active
engagement of Egypt on expanding the scope of the
Palestinian Authority’s power to cinlude Gaza will help
to fulfil the aspirations of the Palestinian people to
establish a sovereign State. We will continue to support
the strengthening of a unified Palestinian people.
We have no hidden agenda in the Middle East. We
have historically friendly relations with all countries in
the region. Russia will continue to pursue a consistent
and transparent policy so as to find a solution to the
crisis. This is our principled position.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.

17-4050815/25

A/72/PV.60

I should like to inform members that action on
draft resolutions A/72/L.11 and A/72/L.17 will be
taken after we have taken action on draft resolutions
A/72/L.13, A/72/L.14, A/72/L.15 and A/72/L.16, which
were submitted under agenda item 38.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 37.
Agenda item 38 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/72/L.13, A/72/L.14,
A/72/L.15 and A/72/L.16)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
the Assembly takes action on the draft resolutions
one by one, members are reminded that they will have
an opportunity to explain their vote on all four draft
resolutions either before or after action is taken on all
draft resolutions.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/72/L.13, A/72/L.14, A/72/L.15 and A/72/L.16.
Before giving the floor to delegations in
explanations of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Meitzad (Israel): This explanation of vote
refers to all the draft resolutions under agenda items
37 and 38.
On 29 November 1947, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 181 (II), which called for the
creation of independent Arab and Jewish States living
side by side. The State of Israel accepted the resolution,
and the Arab world rejected it. The Arabs wasted no
time; their relentless violence broke out immediately.
A few months later, just one day after Israel declared
its independence, on 15 May 1948, a coalition of Arab
armies invaded Israel from all sides. Their goal was
simple: to destroy the newly established Jewish State.
Yesterday, 29 November 2017, marked the
seventieth anniversary of that crucial United Nations
resolution. It should have been a day of celebration, but
once again it was the exact opposite. Year after year,
this historic date becomes an annual Israel-bashing
session. Some countries still refuse, 70 years later, to
accept the existence of the State of Israel in the Middle
East. The Assembly heard representatives of many of
16/25

30/11/2017

them speak yesterday and today, and while they may
try to hide, twist or alter their true position, we cannot
be fooled.
We are living at a time where many crises are
raging across the Middle East and around the world.
We, the States Members of the United Nations, have
so many responsibilities and so many important
decisions to make. Yet the United Nations still adopts
biased resolutions and devotes precious resources to
politicized bodies whose sole purpose is to attack and
denounce Israel. It is absurd. In fact, it is truly a shame.
One of those bodies is the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. It does nothing but spread a one-sided
political narrative — one that does nothing for
peace — and it uses the Member States’ money to
do so. This is the Committee that organized, in June
2017, the so-called United Nations Forum to Mark
Fifty Years of Occupation. The Division for Palestinian
Rights supports the Committee and invited several
organizations and speakers with clear and publicly
recognized ties to terrorism to participate in the event.
Let me repeat that: a body of the Secretariat provided
a platform for public supporters and glorifiers of and
participants in terrorism. This is not only a bad use of
our time; it is completely against our values. It is truly
disturbing and shameful.
That is not all. The Division for Palestinian Rights
is the only office of the Secretariat promoting an
agenda that directly targets one Member State. It fills
15 paid positions to do so. Not only that, but large
portions of the funding for the Division cover businessclass airline tickets so that participants in its anti-Israel
events can travel anywhere in the world to attend. This
type of division and funding at the United Nations is
truly unparalleled — especially as the Department
of Political Affairs struggles to tackle its endless
responsibilities with limited manpower and funding.
I turn now to another piece of this problematic
puzzle. The special information programme on the
question of Palestine, led by the United Nations
Department of Public Information (DPI), organizes an
annual seminar on peace in the Middle East. We must
not be misled by its name; the seminar has nothing to
do with peace, but everything to do with anti-Israel
sentiment and does little to promote dialogue and
understanding between Israelis and Palestinians. One
of the programme’s main responsibilities is to provide
17-40508

30/11/2017

training for Palestinian journalists. As some of members
of the General Assembly may know, 2017 has not been
a good year for Palestinian journalists.
In the Gaza strip, as revealed in the report of the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, entitled “Gaza Ten Years
Later”, Hamas engages in the widespread detention and
abuse of journalists. In the West Bank, the Palestinian
Authority instituted the so-called electronic crimes law
earlier this year. It enables the Palestinian Authority to
arrest and arbitrarily detain journalists and activists.
Some people might expect that the DPI would raise
its voice against such a troubling situation, but it does
not. It focuses on targeting Israel. It is another example
of a United Nations body that does not do its part to
remain impartial.
The evidence is clear. It is truly baffling that
the United Nations spends almost $6.5 million of its
budget on entities and bodies that do nothing but try
to isolate Israel. Not only are they one-sided, but they
are dangerous, as they give the floor to those who work
against a peaceful solution. With its budget facing
a severe deficit, it is not only unwise of the United
Nations to fund these entities, but it is also wrong.
The problem does not end with the allocation of
United Nations funding. The problem continues with
the draft resolutions on which we will vote today.
Two of these draft resolutions make reference to the
Temple Mount, a sacred place for all three Abrahamic
religions — Islam, Christianity and Judaism. Yet these
draft resolutions have deliberately omitted any mention
of the Jewish or Christian connections to the Temple
Mount or, as we call it in Hebrew, Har Habayit. This
omission was deliberate. It shows yet another instance
of the Palestinians’ refusal to recognize the proven
historical connection between Judaism, Christianity,
the Temple Mount and Jerusalem as a whole.
The international community must stop participating
in such a blatant denial of history. It must not permit
these blunt attempts to delegitimize Israel. As I
mentioned, we are commemorating 70 years since the
historic adoption of resolution 181 (II), the resolution
through which the United Nations called for the creation
of independent Arab and Jewish States and paved the
way for the establishment of the State of Israel.
Today, we will vote on draft resolution A/72/L.15,
entitled “Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable

A/72/PV.60

Rights of the Palestinian People.” This draft resolution
refers to the establishment of the State of Israel as a
Nakba or “catastrophe”. It calls Israel’s establishment a
catastrophe. Let me be clear to all who wish to support
the two-State-for-two-peoples solution that calling the
establishment of Israel a catastrophe is not a statement
of solidarity with the Palestinians. It is in fact a denial
of Israel’s right to exist.
As for draft resolution A/72/L.17, entitled “The
Syrian Golan”, the situation in Syria is in fact dire.
The Syrian regime is systematically killing its own
people,and has even used chemical weapons against
them. At the same time, Israel is taking care of
thousands of injured Syrians in our own hospitals, free
of charge. And yet, despite the realities on the ground,
at the General Assembly, absurdity prevails. As for
the comments of the representative of the regime who
spoke earlier, that is yet another example of the level of
absurdity that this Hall can sometime reach.
The reality is as follows: the six draft resolutions
put forward today pose a serious problem. They offer
a one-sided account of the situation in our region and
perpetuate a zero-sum approach to the conflict. They
send a message that says that a Member State can
support the Palestinians only by shaming and targeting
Israel. They do nothing but support the outrageous
bodies that abuse the United Nations budget and pull
us further away from peace. Supporting these draft
resolutions will neither advance nor inspire peace. For
all who truly seek to help the Israeli-Palestinian cause,
I call on them to take a stand, make the right choice and
vote against these biased draft resolutions.
Mr. Erdman (United States of America): I thank
the Assembly for the opportunity to present our
principled concerns about the draft resolutions before
us today.
As we have continued to make clear, the
United States opposes the annual submission of a
disproportionate number of unfair draft resolutions of
the General Assembly that are biased against Israel.
This one-sided approach damages the prospects for
peace by undermining trust between parties and by
failing to create the kind of international environment
critical to achieving peace. We are disappointed that
despite supposed support for reform, Member States
continue to single out Israel with these draft resolutions.
This year, the United States voted against 18 draft
resolutions that were biased against Israel. As we have

17-4050817/25

A/72/PV.60

30/11/2017

repeatedly made clear, this dynamic is unacceptable. It
is inappropriate that the United Nations, an institution
founded upon the idea that all nations should be treated
equally, should be so often used by Member States to
treat another State so unequally.

inform the Assembly that the draft resolution is closed
for sponsorship on the e-sponsorship platform.

The United States will therefore vote against these
one-sided draft resolutions. We encourage other nations
to do so as well. We are especially concerned today with
those texts that renew mandates of counterproductive
special committees that waste valuable United Nations
resources. Of these annual draft resolutions, three United
Nations bodies in particular reflect the bias, redundancy
and unnecessary cost of such draft resolutions: the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, the Division for Palestinian
Rights and the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian
People and other Arabs of the Occupied Territories.
These bodies waste limited United Nations resources,
costing approximately $6.1 million in 2015. But they
do nothing to contribute to peace in the region. Rather,
they perpetuate the perception of an inherent United
Nations bias against Israel.

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/72/L.13, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, the Comoros, Djibouti, The
Gambia, Lebanon, Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia,
Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, Tunisia, the United Arab
Emirates and Viet Nam.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that the
United States has consistently opposed every effort
to delegitimize Israel or to undermine its security at
the United Nations. We will continue to do so with
vigour. That said, the United States remains firmly
committed to achieving a comprehensive and lasting
peace agreement between Israelis and Palestinians.
Our Government is actively engaged with Israelis and
Palestinians to help them negotiate a conflict-ending
peace agreement that can help introduce a positive new
dynamic in the region. Biased draft resolutions do not
help to advance peace. Draft resolutions such as those
that will be passed here today only distract from the
process. The cause of peace will be served only when
the bias against Israel in the General Assembly of the
United Nations comes to an end.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in explanation of vote before
the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/72/L.13, A/72/L.14, A/72/L.15 and
A/72/L.16.
We turn first to draft resolution A/72/L.13, entitled
“Division for Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat”. I
18/25

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon,
Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan,
Kazakhstan,
Kenya,
Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
17-40508

30/11/2017

Against:
Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Honduras, Israel,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Nauru, Solomon Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Central African Republic, Colombia,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia,
South Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/72/L.13 was adopted by 100
votes to 10, with 59 abstentions (resolution 72/11).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Qatar informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We turn
next to draft resolution A/72/L.14, entitled “Special
information programme on the question of Palestine of
the Department of Public Information of the Secretariat”.
I inform the Assembly that the draft resolution is closed
for sponsorship on the e-sponsorship platform.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those listed in document
A/72/L.14, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, the Central African Republic, Djibouti,
The Gambia, Lebanon, Mauritania, Mozambique,
Namibia, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, the Sudan,
Tunisia and the United Arab Emirates.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

A/72/PV.60

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho,
Libya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Nauru, Solomon
Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Honduras, Mexico, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, South Sudan, Togo, Tonga

17-4050819/25

A/72/PV.60

Draft resolution A/72/L.14 was adopted by 155
votes to 8, with 8 abstentions (resolution 72/12).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Qatar informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
now turn to draft resolution A/72/L.15, entitled
“Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People”. I inform the Assembly that
the draft resolution is closed for sponsorship on the
e-sponsorship platform.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those listed in document
A/72/L.15, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Djibouti, The Gambia, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Mauritania,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Namibia,
Nicaragua, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone,
the Sudan, the United Arab Emirates, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam and Yemen.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Cyprus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Gabon, Gambia, Guinea, Guyana, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra
20/25

30/11/2017

Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Guatemala, Honduras, Israel,
Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of),
Nauru, Solomon Islands, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Colombia, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Mexico,
Monaco,
Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, San
Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland
Draft resolution A/72/L.15 was adopted by 103
votes to 10, with 57 abstentions (resolution 72/13).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We turn
next to draft resolution A/72/L.16, entitled “Peaceful
settlement of the question of Palestine”. I inform
the Assembly that the draft resolution is closed for
sponsorship on the e-sponsorship platform.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those listed in document
A/72/L.16, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Angola,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, the Central African
Republic, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, The Gambia,
Lebanon, Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia, Saudi
17-40508

30/11/2017

Arabia, Sierra Leone, the Sudan, the United Arab
Emirates and Viet Nam.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium,
Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Central African Republic,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho,
Libya,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

A/72/PV.60

Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Solomon Islands,
United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Fiji, Honduras, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, South Sudan, Tonga
Draft resolution A/72/L.16 was adopted by 157
votes to 7, with 8 abstentions (resolution 72/14).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to delegations in explanations of vote,
may I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Ms. Lind (Estonia): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU).
The EU wishes to thank the Palestinian delegation
for the successful outcome of our negotiations on a
number of draft resolutions on which action has been
taken by the General Assembly. As an outcome of those
negotiations, the EU confirms its consolidated voting
pattern on the draft resolutions.
At this time, we would like to put on record that
with regard to all draft resolutions adopted during the
seventy-second session of the General Assembly, the
EU and its member States consider that whenever the
Palestinian Government is mentioned, the reference is
to the Palestinian Authority. Furthermore, the use of the
term “Palestine” in any of these draft resolutions cannot
be construed as recognition of a State of Palestine and
is without prejudice to the individual positions of the
member States on this issue and hence on the question
of the validity of an accession to the conventions and
treaties mentioned therein. We also point out that the
EU as a whole has not expressed a legal qualification
with regard to the term “forced displacement” — used
in a number of draft resolutions submitted under agenda
items 38 and 54.
Some of the resolutions adopted today refer to the
holy sites in Jerusalem. The EU is concerned at the
worrying developments and recurrent violent clashes
at the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The EU
recalls the special significance of the holy sites and
calls for upholding the status quo put in place in 1967
for the Temple Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif in line
with previous understandings and respecting Jordan’s
special role.

17-4050821/25

A/72/PV.60

The EU recalls that its position with respect to those
resolutions does not imply a change of its stance on the
terminology concerning the Temple Mount/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. The EU stresses the need for language on
the holy sites of Jerusalem to reflect the importance
and historical significance of the holy sites for the three
monotheistic religions and to respect religious and
cultural sensitivities. The future choice of language
may affect the EU’s collective support for the draft
resolutions according to the established voting pattern.
Mr. Mazzeo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to give an explanation of vote on resolution
72/11, concerning the Division for Palestinian Rights of
the Secretariat, on which Argentina abstained.
Argentina recognizes the contribution of the United
Nations system to raising awareness about the rights
of the Palestinian people and with regard to the need
to reach a peaceful solution to the Palestine question,
in accordance with the relevant General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions. However, Argentina
believes it is time for an evaluation to decide what the
appropriate allocation of resources for the Division for
Palestinian Rights of the Secretariat should be.
This vote should not be interpreted as a change in
the traditional position of Argentina’s principles on the
matter. Argentina wishes to reaffirm its commitment
to the inalienable rights of the Palestine people to selfdetermination and an independent and viable State.
In this regard, on 6 December 2010, the Argentinian
Government recognized Palestine as a free and
independent State within the existing 1967 borders and
in line with the decisions made by the parties during
the negotiation process.
Argentina’s decision to recognize the Palestinian
State is part of our authority’s desire to facilitate the
negotiation process between Israel and Palestine so as
to lead to the end of the conflict. This is driven by a deep
desire to see all people living in peaceful coexistence,
which is the strong belief of all Argentinians. Argentina
ratifies its irrevocable position in favour of Israel’s right
to be recognized by all and live in peace and security
within its borders.
Mr. Teo (Singapore): I have the honour to speak
in explanation of vote after the adoption of resolutions
72/11, 72/12, 72/13 and 72/14.
Singapore voted in favour of resolution 72/13,
entitled “Committee on the Inalienable Rights of the
22/25

30/11/2017

Palestinian People”, on the understanding that the
reference in paragraph 2 to the “achievement ... of the
two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders”
should be interpreted to mean what is set out in
paragraph 1 of resolution 72/14 on “Peaceful settlement
of the question of Palestine”, namely, “the two-State
solution of Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace and security within recognized borders, based on
the pre-1967 borders ...”.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We
have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote. The
General Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 38.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Draft resolutions (A/72/L.11 and A/72/L.17)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We shall
now proceed to consider draft resolutions A/72/L.11
and A/72/L.17.
Members are reminded that they will have an
opportunity to explain their vote on the two draft
resolutions either before or after action is taken on both
draft resolutions.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolutions A/72/L.11 and A/72/L.17.
We turn first to draft resolution A/72/L.11, entitled
“Jerusalem”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/72/L.11, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria,
Angola, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia, the Comoros,
Djibouti, Mauritania, Mozambique, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, the Sudan, Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
17-40508

30/11/2017

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland,
Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, TimorLeste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon, Central African Republic,
Honduras, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
South Sudan, Togo
Draft resolution A/72/L.11 was adopted by 151
votes to 6, with 9 abstentions (resolution 72/15).

A/72/PV.60

[Subsequently, the delegation of Djibouti informed
the Secretariat that it had intended to vote in
favour; the delegation of Guatemala informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to abstain.]
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We now
turn to draft resolution A/72/L.17, entitled “The Syrian
Golan”. I inform the Assembly that the draft resolution
is closed for sponsorship on the e-sponsorship platform.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those listed in document A/71/L.17, the
following countries have become sponsors: Algeria,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Djibouti, Mauritania, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, Tunisia and the United
Arab Emirates.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Argentina,
Armenia,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo,
Costa Rica, Cote d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Ethiopia, Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan,
Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,

17-4050823/25

A/72/PV.60

Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia,
Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South
Sudan, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Ukraine
Draft resolution A/72/L.17 was adopted by 105
votes to 6, with 58 abstentions (resolution 72/16).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): Before
giving the floor to speakers in explanation of vote
after the voting, I would like to remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mazzeo (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): As
in previous years, I have the honour of speaking on
behalf of the delegations of Argentina and Brazil to
explain our votes on the draft resolution on the Syrian
Golan, which the General Assembly has just adopted
(resolution 72/16). Brazil and Argentina voted in
favour of the resolution, as we believe that its essential
character is linked to the illegality of the acquisition of
territory by force. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter
of the United Nations prohibits the use or the threat of
use of force against the territory or territorial integrity
of a State.
I would also like to make clear our delegations’
position with respect to paragraph 6 of the resolution.
Our vote does not does not prejudge the content of
the paragraph, in particular the reference to the line
of 4 June 1967. Argentina and Brazil believe that it is
important to make progress towards a solution to the
Syria and Israeli aspect of the conflict in the Middle
24/25

30/11/2017

East in order to bring to an end the occupation of the
Golan Heights. Therefore, on behalf of the Governments
of Argentina and Brazil, I would once again stress the
importance of resuming negotiations in order to find a
definitive solution to the situation in the Syrian Golan,
in accordance with resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) and the principle of land for peace.
Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation wishes to express its deepest
gratitude to the General Assembly for having once
again adopted, as it has done without any interruption
since 1981, the resolution entitled “The Syrian Golan”
(resolution 72/16) and the other resolutions on the
question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East (resolutions 72/14 and 72/15).
On behalf of my country, Syria, I reiterate our
thanks to all those countries that sponsored the
resolution on the Syrian Golan and those that voted
in favour of it. The majority of States Members of the
United Nations support the resolution, which shows
their commitment to the purposes and principles of
the Charter of the United Nations and their rejection of
foreign occupation. It also shows their support for our
right to recover every inch of our territories occupied
by Israel since 1967.
The overwhelming majority of States supporting the
resolutions sends a clear and international message to
Israel that its policies of occupation, killing, expansion,
aggression, racial discrimination and settlements and
the imposition of the status quo and annexation of
territories by force represent violations of international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations and the
1949 Geneva Convention, and are practices rejected by
international community. All such practices have been
condemned by all those who are committed to promoting
international law, ending foreign occupation, rejecting
the annexation of territory by force, and punishing
those who violate these core principles.
The representative of the Israeli occupation made,
as usual, false accusations against my country. She
claimed that Israel, the occupying Power, has provided
medical care to people whom she called Syrian citizens.
However, they are in fact Da’esh and Jabhat Al-Nusra
terrorists. According to top Israeli leaders, Israel has
treated and is treating thousands of them in its hospitals.
I shall be brief and say only that the adoptions today
by an absolute majority of the resolution on the Syrian
Golan and the other resolutions are the best response to
17-40508

30/11/2017

the lies that we have heard here from the representative
of Israel.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for the opportunity to explain the United Kingdom’s
vote on the resolution entitled ”The Syrian Golan”
(resolution 72/16).
The United Kingdom continues to believe that a
just and lasting resolution that ends the occupation and
delivers peace for both Israelis and Palestinians is long
overdue, and the United Kingdom has been pleased,
along with our European Union partners, to support
resolutions introduced by the Palestinian delegation
at the General Assembly. The United Kingdom is
committed to continuing to work with the international
community to achieve a two-State solution and selfdetermination for the Palestinian people.
It is in all our interests to strengthen the rulesbased international system. We have voted in favour
of four resolutions that we believe will bring us closer
to our aim of a just, comprehensive and lasting peace
between Israel and the Palestinians. Those balanced
resolutions call out the growth in illegal settlement
activity, as well as terrorism, incitement and violence.
They also call on both sides to take responsibility for
human rights violations.
We will continue to push back against actions that
make peace harder to achieve, but resolutions that
undermine the credibility of United Nations bodies
risk hardening positions on both sides and do little to
advance peace or mutual understanding. That is why
we have voted against resolution 72/16, which was
proposed by the Syrian regime, on the occupation of
Syria’s Golan.
We consider the Golan Heights, along with East
Jerusalem, the West Bank and Gaza, as occupied
territory, and we do not recognize Israel’s annexation
of the Golan. We continue to call on Israel, as the
occupying Power, and all actors, to uphold their
obligations under international law to promote peace,
stability and security. That is why we voted in favour
of the Palestinian-sponsored draft resolution on the
occupied Syrian Golan.
But resolution 72/16, on the Golan Heights,
proposed by the Syrian regime, repeats much of the
same language and adds nothing new. It is unnecessary
and disproportionate. The Syrian regime’s intent is to
use this additional resolution to deflect attention from

A/72/PV.60

its own criminal actions and indiscriminate slaughter

of its own citizens. The duty of the General Assembly

is to draw attention to international humanitarian law

violations wherever they occur. This resolution risks

discrediting that vital responsibility.

The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We

have heard the last speaker in explanation of vote after

the voting.

The General Assembly has thus concluded this

stage of its consideration of agenda item 37.

The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

17-4050825/25
