A/68/947–S/2014/449

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
11 July 2014
Original: English

General Assembly
Sixty-eighth session
Items 14 and 118

Security Council
Sixty-ninth year

Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United Nations
conferences and summits in the economic, social and
related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit

Fulfilling our collective responsibility: international
assistance and the responsibility to protect
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report outlines the ways in which national, regional and
international actors can assist States in fulfilling their responsibility to protect
populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. It responds to the decision by the General Assembly in its resolution
63/308 to continue consideration of the responsibility to protect, in the light of its
endorsement by States in paragraphs 138 to 140 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome.
It also draws on the first report of the Secretary-General, in 2009, on implementing
the responsibility to protect (A/63/677), which established the three pillar framework
for the responsibilities enshrined in the principle.
The present report, which focuses on pillar II, begins by recalling the nature
and dynamics of the atrocity crimes outlined in the World Summit Outcome. It goes
on to identify the approach and principles that should guide efforts to assist States in
the fulfilment of their protection responsibilities, and the various actors that could
contribute to the responsibility to assist. The core section elaborates on three main
forms of pillar II support, namely, encouragement, capacity-building and protection
assistance, and provides examples of good national, regional and international
practice. The report concludes by identifying challenges to the implementation of
pillar II of the responsibility to protect and provides concrete recommendations on
how this important agenda may be advanced. It also sets out possible next steps for
Member States to continue considering the responsibility to protect, given the
upcoming 10-year anniversary of the 2005 World Summit.

14-57339 (E)

210714

*1457339*

A/68/947
S/2014/449

I. Introduction
1.
In paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome (see General
Assembly resolution 60/1) all Heads of State and Government affirmed that each
individual State has the responsibility to protect its populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. This includes a responsibility
to prevent the commission of such acts (pillar I). They also declared that the
international community should encourage and help States to exercise this
responsibility, support the United Nations in establishing an early warning
capability, and assist those which are under stress before crises and conflicts break
out (pillar II). Lastly, Member States confirmed the responsibility of the
international community to help to protect populations using diplomatic,
humanitarian and other means, as well as their readiness to take collective action, in
a timely and decisive manner and in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, should peaceful means be inadequate and national author ities are
manifestly failing to protect their populations (pillar III).
2.
The responsibility to protect encapsulates a powerful imperative: the
international community has a collective responsibility to help to protect
populations from acts that have been defined as international crimes. 1 It emerged
following the failure of the international community to prevent genocide in Rwanda
and Srebrenica and is one distinct element of broader, long-standing efforts to
protect populations from acts that have shocked the global conscience. The
responsibility to protect is a political principle that shares some common elements
with the concept of the protection of civilians in armed conflict, but has a more
narrow focus on protecting populations from genocid e, war crimes, ethnic cleansing
and crimes against humanity, 2 and draws on a broader range of tools and approaches
for prevention and response.
3.
The responsibility to protect has been reaffirmed by the Security Council in its
resolutions 1674 (2006), 1894 (2009), 2117 (2013) and 2150 (2014). Resolution
2150 (2014), adopted on the twentieth anniversary of the genocide in Rwanda, also
recalled the important role of my Special Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide
and on the Responsibility to Protect. The Council has continued to refer to the
responsibility of States to protect their populations in country-specific resolutions
and, in relation to some of these situations, has authori zed action to assist the State
to protect its populations from atrocity crimes. 3
4.
In its resolution 63/308, the General Assembly agreed to continue its
consideration of the responsibility to protect. At its most recent informal debate on
the principle in September 2013, Assembly Members expressed interest in the
Secretary-General’s views on pillar II. The present report responds by assessing how
__________________
1 The present report uses the term “atrocity crimes” to refer to the four acts specified in

paragraph 138 of the World Summit Outcome Document. Genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity are established as crimes under international criminal law; ethnic cleansing,
while not defined as a distinct crime, includes acts that will regularly amount to one of the
crimes, in particular genocide and crimes against humanity.
2 See paragraph 21 of the 2012 report of the Secretary-General on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict (S/2012/376) and paragraph 16 of the 2012 report of the Secretary-General on the
responsibility to protect: timely and decisive response (A/66/874).
3 See Security Council resolutions 2085 (2012) on the situation in Mali, 1996 (2011) on the
situation in South Sudan and 1975 (2011) on the situation in Côte d’Ivoire.

2/20

14-57339

A/68/947
S/2014/449

a variety of actors, working in partnership, can encourage States to fulfil their
primary responsibility to protect; assist them in building capacities that will make
them more resilient to the risk factors for atrocity crimes; and add to their protection
capacities in situations of emerging or ongoing crisis. It builds on previous reports
addressing the implementation of the responsibility to prote ct (A/63/677), early
warning and assessment (A/64/864), the role of regional and subregional
arrangements (A/65/877-S/2011/393), timely and decisive response (A/66/874S/2012/578) and State responsibility and prevention (A/67/929-S/2013/399). The
report also incorporates the views of Member States, regional and international
organizations and civil society actors, which were consulted during its preparation
and provided examples of international assistance that have helped States to fulfil
their protection responsibilities.
5.
My annual reports on the responsibility to protect reflect a deep commitment
to move the principle from the realm of rhetoric into concrete action. An elaboration
of pillar II is long overdue, given its central place in this critical task of
implementation. The everyday reality of populations in current crises, including
those in the Central African Republic, Iraq and South Sudan, also illustrates vividly
why such international assistance is more important than ever. The range of acute
protection challenges confronting the international community today, including
those related to the rise of extremist groups, highlights the urgent need to provide
earlier and more effective forms of support to States to prevent the slide into
systematic violence and atrocity crimes.
6.
If properly conceived and consistently executed, international assistance as
part of pillar II can reinforce the efforts that States are already making to protect
their populations from atrocity crimes, and reduce the likelihood of collective
response by the international community under pillar III. That is why I have
steadfastly maintained that the three pillars of the responsibility to protect are of
equal weight, mutually reinforcing and non-sequential. In implementing these
pillars, it should also be remembered that the crucial question is not whether or not
the responsibility to protect “applies” in a given situation, since States have a
responsibility to protect their populations everywhere and at all times, but rather
how best to use the specific measures available under each pillar to prevent and
respond to atrocity crimes.

II. The nature and dynamics of atrocity crimes
7.
Designing appropriate forms of international assistance under pillar II requires
a clear understanding of the specific nature of genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity and the particular form of violence that they
represent. The need to identify opportunities for prevention early on has also
contributed to a better understanding of how atrocity crimes dev elop. While events
may unfold differently in each context, three main stages can be identified.
8.
The first stage is characterized by the presence of one or more factors that
raise the general risk of atrocity crimes. As noted in my 2013 report on State
responsibility and prevention (A/67/929-S/2013/399), these can include the presence
of armed conflict or other forms of instability; a record of serious violations of
international human rights and humanitarian la w, including persistent patterns of
discrimination; economic deprivation and related disparities; weaknesses in State
structures; motives or incentives to commit atrocity crimes, including the presence

14-57339

3/20

A/68/947
S/2014/449

of an exclusionary ideology; the absence of mitigating factors; and the presence of
actors with the capacity to engage in such crimes. Preventive action at this stage
requires more structurally focused strategies designed to help to build national
resilience. The principal objective is the creation of State structures and institutions
that are functioning and legitimate, respect human rights and the rule of law, deliver
services equitably, and can address or defuse sources of tension before they escalate.
9.
The likelihood of atrocity crimes increases during the second stage,
transforming a situation of general risk into one presenting more specific threats.
This stage is often initiated by a crisis or political transition that triggers upheaval
and exacerbates existing grievances. However, atrocity crimes may not be
committed unless there is an explicit drive to target or exclude a particular group,
marginalize moderate elements, and mobilize armed groups, often through the
spread of propaganda. This phase may also involve more frequent and serious
human rights violations.
10. The third stage, imminent risk of atrocity crimes, is marked by increased
violations of the right to life and physical integrity, a rise in other human rights
abuses, systematic targeting of specific groups, including political opposition, and
efforts at self-protection by those being targeted. Addressing the shocks and crises
typical of the second and third stages requires more targeted measures that reflect
the shorter time available to prevent crimes from being committed. These measures
may target either a particular group at risk or address specific challenges, such as
restricting the availability of arms that could be used to commit atrocity crimes.
11. These three stages imply that assistance measures under pillar II are not
necessarily restricted to early-stage prevention, but can also encompass support to
States facing imminent or ongoing atrocity crimes.

III. Spirit of pillar II
Sovereign equality
12. At the 2005 World Summit, States committed to assist one another to succeed
in fulfilling their responsibility to protect, not just to react if they fail. Pillar II is
therefore a reminder that the responsibility to protect is intended to reinforce, not
undermine, sovereignty. The principle was not designed to create a hierarchic al
structure in which the international community imposes demands or solutions on
States. Rather, it reaffirms the fundamental principle of sovereign equality,
expressed in Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations. As sovereign equals,
States have both reciprocal rights and responsibilities and participate, as peers, in
the creation and maintenance of international rules, norms and institutions. The
responsibility to protect is meant to inspire cooperation among a variety of actors
that are equally committed to protecting populations from atrocity crimes.
Collective responsibility
13. Paragraphs 138 and 139 of the World Summit Outcome also articulate a
collective responsibility to help to protect populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. The key conceptual move made by
the principle of the responsibility to protect was to shift the discussion from the
discretion or right of third parties to intervene to the responsibility that a variety of
actors have, at different levels, to assist in protecting potential victims of atrocity

4/20

14-57339

A/68/947
S/2014/449

crimes. Collective responsibility is a demanding but more inclusive idea. Rather
than simply providing support to States when they are in need, international
assistance under pillar II contributes to fulfilling a collective responsibility.
Common principles of assistance
14. To exercise this collective responsibility effectively, a common set of
principles should guide the efforts of national, regional and international actors to
assist States under pillar II:
(a)

Ensure national ownership
15. National actors are usually best placed to identify risk factors for atrocity
crimes and to develop effective mitigation strategies. Experience has shown that
international assistance has more impact when aligned with national priorities. In
turn, national strategies must be reflective of society as a whole. Efforts to prevent
or respond to atrocity crimes can succeed only if they are the product of inclusive
processes that engage national and local authorities, as well as civil society,
including human rights organizations, traditional leaders and women’s groups.

(b)

Build mutual commitment
16. The success of a State’s efforts to protect its population from atrocity crimes
depends on the commitment of national actors to fulfil their responsibility. Where a
genuine will to build resilience is lacking at the national level, or where there is no
agreement among national actors on the objectives and the approach to take, the
potential contribution of outside actors will be limited. At the same time,
international partners should seek to provide coherent and coordinated assistance
that reinforces national efforts, respects inclusive national decision-making
processes and commits to sustained support that recognizes the long-term nature of
building resilience to atrocity crimes.

(c)

Do no harm
17. Experience has shown that poorly designed international assistance can
inadvertently create or exacerbate social cleavages, thereby contributing to the
development of atrocity crimes. International support or technical advice that
contributes to discrimination and disparities or causes groups to compete over
sources of revenue is particularly damaging. International partners should therefore
make all possible effort to “do no harm” by incorporating atrocity crime prevention
into the assessment, planning and monitoring processes that guide their assistance.

(d)

Prioritize prevention
18. Paragraph 139 of the World Summit Outcome expresses the commitment of
the international community to assist States under stress before crises and conflict
break out. Acting early not only increases the likelihood of being able to address
latent risks before they escalate, but is also more cost-effective. Although this is
widely recognized, the international community continues to systematically
underinvest in prevention and to react only at the brink of crises.

14-57339

5/20

A/68/947
S/2014/449

(e)

Retain flexibility
19. The risk of atrocity crimes varies according to the context and changes over
time. International assistance must therefore be designed both to respond to a
specific situation and to adapt to evolving needs, in particular with respect to States
under stress. Flexibility entails a willingness to adjust programming regularly to
achieve desired outcomes and to review the effectiveness of assistance while it is
being provided.
Partnerships
20. Many actors have a role to play in implementing pillar II. Those with the
proximity, trust, knowledge, capacity or legitimacy to best provide assistance may
take the lead in certain situations. This does not absolve other actors, however, of
their continuing responsibility to support policies that are directed at atrocity crime
prevention and response. The most effective forms of international assista nce are
likely to involve partnerships among a range of actors, as discussed in paragraphs 21
to 27 below.
21. Given its legitimacy and global character, the United Nations is a central part
of the architecture for assisting States under pillar II. The General Assembly has a
unique ability to convene States, elaborate international norms and principles that
facilitate the protection of populations, and galvanize resources to support States to
fulfil their commitments. The Human Rights Council, human rights treaty bodies
and special procedures mandate-holders encourage and make recommendations to
States to meet their pillar I responsibility to protect, and help to identify potential
risks of atrocity crimes through their ongoing monitoring role. The Security Council
authorizes assistance to States through peacekeeping operations and special political
missions, but also addresses related thematic agendas, such as sexual and gender related violence in armed conflict. The Peacebuilding Commission has a mandate to
provide sustained support for peace efforts in countries emerging from conflict,
including, in some cases, those that have suffered from atrocity crimes. Particular
United Nations programmes, funds, specialized agencies, country teams and
independent human rights mechanisms also have essential roles to play under
pillar II, by facilitating access to expertise and ensuring that capacity-building
efforts enhance national resilience to atrocity crimes.
22. Several other international organizations provide assistance that directly and
indirectly helps States to fulfil their responsibility to protect. The World Bank, for
example, has expanded its support to States that have suffered from conflict and
other forms of violence, including through its Statebuilding a nd Peacebuilding
Fund. The International Criminal Court and the principle of positive
complementarity established by the Rome Statute and other international criminal
accountability mechanisms also aim to assist States in protecting their populations
by sharing information, training national prosecutors and investigators and
combating the impunity that facilitates atrocity crimes.
23. States that are closer to events often have access to more detailed information,
may have a more nuanced understanding of the history and culture of a State, are
likely to be more directly affected by the consequences of atrocity crimes, and may
be critical to the effective delivery of international assistance. Neighbouring States
can lead in identifying capacity gaps and serving as conduits for the flow of
information, ideas and strategies between national and international actors.

6/20

14-57339

A/68/947
S/2014/449

However, a legacy of tension or the presence of political or economic interests may,
in some cases, limit the positive role of neighbouring States or contribute to greater
instability. In some instances, more distant actors may have a broader or more
balanced perspective and be better placed to assist.
24. As noted in my 2011 report on the role of regional and subregional
arrangements (A/65/877-S/2011/393), fostering more extensive and effective
collaboration between regional and global bodies is central to implementing the
responsibility to protect. Cooperation among the United Nations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) to support peace
processes and political dialogue in the Sudan and South Sudan and the joint efforts
of the United Nations, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
and the African Union to foster peace in the Sahel region provide powerful
examples of how regional organizations can contribute under pillar II. These joint
approaches are more likely to build trust across borders, promote both security and
development, address transnational threats to populations and facilitate the exchange
of civilian expertise. Other regional organizations, such as the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the European Union and the Organization of
American States (OAS), also have key economic and political instruments that can
be used to assist local and national authorities, as well as civil society, in responding
to the risk of conflict or instability.
25. The increasing number of global and regional networks of States dedicated to
preventing atrocity crimes opens new avenues for partnership and mutual assistance.
The work of the Global Network of Responsibility to Protect Focal Points, Global
Action Against Mass Atrocity Crimes and the Latin American Network for Genocide
and Mass Atrocity Prevention demonstrates how shared objectives and lessons
learned from past experience may help States to identify effective protection
strategies.
26. Private sector actors can contribute to building resilience by strengthening
local economies and employing a workforce inclusive of all social groups. In some
cases, private sector expertise can be mobilized through public -private partnerships
to enhance the impact of national measures aimed at atrocity prevention. On the
other hand, experience shows that businesses can both indirectly contribute to the
commission of atrocity crimes through their operations and business practices,
particularly in extractive industries, and directly enable those engaged in such acts
through their products and services. Private sector actors can reduce this risk by
complying with the 2011 United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and
Human Rights and ensuring that their commercial activities do not exacerbate social
cleavages. They could also consider developing risk management too ls that
explicitly incorporate atrocity crime risks.
27. Civil society plays a vital role in providing and advocating for international
assistance under pillar II. Local civil society actors have knowledge of and access to
early warning information that many other actors do not and can hold national
authorities accountable. International civil society organizations can encourage the
development of a vibrant national civil society, that includes a prominent role for
women and young people, and support the development of national and communitybased approaches to prevention. These efforts complement more formal types of
international assistance aimed at strengthening national resilience.

14-57339

7/20

A/68/947
S/2014/449

IV. Forms of assistance
28. Development assistance that enhances equality and social justice can have a
positive impact in helping States to meet their protection responsibilities. However,
while traditional development cooperation has a central role to play, assistance to
States in the context of the responsibility to protect will also involve a wider range
of economic, political, humanitarian and, in certain cases, military tools. My 2009
report on implementing the responsibility to protect ( A/63/677) identified three
broad categories of assistance under pillar II:
• Encouraging States to meet their responsibility to protect by disseminating
relevant legal standards and normative commitments, reminding States of the
importance of adherence and engaging in dialogue on ways to ful fil their
responsibility
• Building national capacities to prevent atrocity crimes through training,
institution-building and active sharing of best practices
• Assisting States to protect in situations of emerging or ongoing crisis through
the provision of additional capacity or expertise.

A.

Encouragement
29. Encouragement can take two forms. First, international actor s can encourage
States to fulfil their pillar I responsibilities through awareness-raising and norm
dissemination. Second, international actors can use confidential or public dialogue
to remind States under stress of the importance of meeting their responsibility to
protect and addressing signs of impending crisis.
Encouragement to meet pillar I responsibilities
30. The first type of encouragement is part of broader efforts to undertake
structural atrocity prevention and involves the dissemination of human rights and
humanitarian standards and norms, as well as education of national authorities and
the wider public on the nature and dynamics of atrocity crimes. The discourse and
practices developed around the Geneva Conventions and their additional protocols,
the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide and
core international human rights instruments serve to reinforce State adherence to
legal norms prohibiting atrocity crimes. All State parties to such legal instruments
have an obligation to ensure their implementation.
31. Peer review and assessment mechanisms provide a particularly powerful form
of encouragement and serve as a reminder that no society is immune to the risks of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. Human Rights
Council sessions and the universal periodic review process provide opportunities to
raise concerns about human rights violations that could constitute risk factors for
atrocity crimes and for conveying recommendations for corrective action. The
public nature of these processes establish particular incentives for States to address
their pillar I responsibilities. In addition, the engagement of both special procedures
mandate-holders of the Human Rights Council and independent experts of the
human rights treaty bodies provide a vital mechanism for engaging in dialogue with
States on human rights concerns and atrocity crime risks.

8/20

14-57339

A/68/947
S/2014/449

32. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) also encourages States to meet their protection responsibilities, including
by supporting the implementation of human rights standards, the development of
national human rights institutions and support for commissions of inquiry into
allegations of serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law
that could constitute atrocity crimes. In Côte d’Ivoire, for example, OHCHR
provided the commission of inquiry established by the Human Rights Council with
information to assist its investigation into allegations of serious violations of human
rights following the presidential election of November 2010. It also provided
technical support to national judicial institutions, which helped to facilitate the first
two national trials for crimes committed during the country’s post-electoral crisis.
33. The Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator has a specific mandate to advocate, both publicly and privately, for
populations at risk and in need of protection and assistance, including with the
General Assembly and the Security Council. The Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs also seeks to strengthen the commitments of Member States to
the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
34. Regional actors and initiatives are particularly well-placed to provide focused
encouragement. Examples include the OAS Inter-American Commission on Human
Rights, the Council of Europe and in particular its European Court of Human
Rights, the African Peer Review Mechanism, the Regional Committee on the
Prevention and Punishment of Genocide, War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity and
All Forms of Discrimination of the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the ASEAN Regional Forum and the League of Arab States. I encourage
States to invest in strengthening existing regional mechanisms so that they
incorporate a focus on preventing atrocity crimes and to consid er creating them in
regions or subregions where peer-to-peer discussion on the prevention of atrocity
crimes is lacking.
35. All forms of encouragement should focus particular attention on the protection
of the most vulnerable populations. Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security, along with subsequent resolutions 1820 (2008), 1888
(2009), 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013) and the efforts of my Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, highlight the importance of en couragement aimed at
upholding prohibitions related to conflict-related sexual violence. Similarly, the
work of my Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and of the
United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) encourages States to implement
guidelines for child protection and assist in the development of national action
plans. In both domains, civil society organizations have been active in disseminating
global standards and encouraging the creation of national strategies to address
sexual and gender-based violence and promote child protection.
Dialogue and preventive diplomacy
36. The second type of encouragement applies in particular situations of concern
and involves the use of preventive diplomacy to reduce the vulnerability of
populations to atrocity crimes. Whereas preventive diplomacy has traditionally
sought to resolve disputes before they escalate, it can be used by actors in more
targeted ways under pillar II. Confidential dialogue or various forms of public
exchange can both remind national actors in States under stress of their

14-57339

9/20

A/68/947
S/2014/449

responsibility to protect their population and offer advice on courses of action that
can mitigate the risks of atrocity crimes.
37. Some regions have institutionalized these forms of preventive diplomacy. For
example, the High Commissioner on National Minorities of the Organization for
Security Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) conducts field missions and undertakes
early warning, operating on the basis of quiet diplomacy. Similarly, the Panel of the
Wise of the African Union has a mandate to use its good offices to encourage parties
to a dispute to resolve their differences non-violently. In Latin America, leaders
have united to collectively support neighbours under stress through the Union of
South American Nations. In 2008, the Union created a commission to support
dialogue in the Plurinational State of Bolivia following a period of violent political
unrest. These and similar bodies can be used to reiterate the importance of
respecting international human rights and humanitarian law and signal the potential
costs of non-compliance.
38. The United Nations, led by the Department of Political Affairs, also uses
preventive diplomacy to defuse tensions and work towards non-violent solutions,
and can stress the importance of States fulfilling their responsibilities to protect
populations from atrocity crimes. Indeed, I have repeatedly encouraged States to do
so, both publicly and privately, through the use of my good offices or, in some
cases, through the appointment of special envoys. I intend to continue to build
political will to act by drawing international attention to ongoing or impending
situations of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and my Special Advisers
on the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect also respond to
situations of concern by offering States both public and private encouragement.

B.

Capacity-building
39. Atrocity crime prevention begins at the national and local levels, but can be
effective only if States have the structures, means and knowledge necessary to foster
resilience. International assistance can have a substantial impact by helping to build
two sets of capacities. The first set is generally aimed at creating effective,
legitimate and inclusive governance, while the second set is specifically directed at
creating “inhibitors” to the commission of atrocity crimes. The term “inhibitor”
refers to particular capacities, institutions and actors that help to prevent escalation
from risk to imminent crisis.
40. In undertaking this form of international assistance, actors need to consider not
only what capacities they seek to build, but also how they can best be built.
Experience suggests that capacity-building should begin with a thorough needs
assessment, so that international actors take account of existing structures, and
involve extensive consultation with national and local actors. Such efforts must also
entail more than the establishment of formal institutions. The culture and spirit that
pervade those institutions are equally important, since they establish shared norms
and principles among those who occupy positions of authority. In addition,
international capacity-building assistance should couple the provision of technical
advice on different aspects of governance with concrete support and skills
development for those who can serve as “watchdogs” and hold authorities to
account. Finally, capacity-building efforts under pillar II should include mechanisms

10/20

14-57339

A/68/947
S/2014/449

to measure their impact, so that local support for international assistance is
continually maintained.
Effective, legitimate and inclusive governance
41. A number of regional and international actors are engaged in building nati onal
capacities for effective, legitimate and inclusive governance. While the priorities
depend on the context, the central components most often entail assistance to
develop or strengthen participatory and accountable political institutions, respect for
the rule of law and equal access to justice, and mechanisms for the fair and
transparent management of economic resources and assets. These bedrocks of good
governance can remove core sources of grievance and minimize the risks of
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. To further the
aims of atrocity prevention, international assistance to build these capacities should
focus particular attention on addressing horizontal inequality in society, which
frequently results from the systematic exclusion of particular groups from civil,
political, economic, social and cultural rights.
42. Assisting national authorities to promote and protect the rights of cultural,
ethnic, national, linguistic and religious minorities is one important ele ment of this
approach. However, recent crises, which demonstrate an alarming rise in religious
intolerance, discrimination based on ethnicity, religion, or political affiliation, and
restrictions in public freedoms, suggest that international assistance ne eds to go a
step further, in order to promote the creation of truly integrated institutions.
Integrated institutions are representative of society as a whole, foster regular
inter-communal dialogue and problem-solving and create a shared stake in a
country’s future. The principles and advice contained in the Ljubljana Guidelines on
the Integration of Diverse Societies, developed by the OSCE High Commissioner
for National Minorities, offer a useful resource for this kind of capacity -building.
Specific inhibitors of atrocity crimes
43. In addition to these broader preventive efforts, experience with societies that
have witnessed genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing
suggests that international assistance should focus on buildi ng specific inhibitors
that enable States to address the early signs of crisis that could lead to the
commission of atrocity crimes. These inhibitors contribute to the development of
effective, legitimate and inclusive national institutions, but also have a more direct
and targeted impact on mitigating atrocity crime risks. The following seven
capacities are particularly important:
(a)

Professional and accountable security sector
44. International actors, through the provision of materials, training and advice,
can assist in building a security sector capable of responding to threats posed by
armed non-State actors that may have the motive and means to commit atrocity
crimes. However, capacity-building must be more broadly conceived, for two
reasons. First, a State’s security forces may themselves collude or actively engage in
the commission of such crimes. Those providing assistance should therefore insist
on safeguards against potential abuse, including robust civilian oversight, and retain
the right to cease security sector cooperation if the objective of atrocity crime
prevention is compromised.

14-57339

11/20

A/68/947
S/2014/449

45. Second, material capacity should be complemented by assistance to promote
professionalism, respect for international human rights and humanitarian law and
accountability, so that the armed forces, law enforcement and intelligence services
engender the trust of the population. These objectives guide the Organization’s
overall approach to security sector reform, both through the human rights due
diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces
and through programmes to build specific capacities. In Colombia, for example, the
capacity-building efforts of OHCHR led to a new legal framework on the
functioning of the intelligence services and the establishment of a parliamentary
intelligence oversight committee. The International Security Sector Advisory Team,
established to support regional and international actors engaged in security sector
reform, also provides specific advice on ways to ensure that security sector
personnel reflect the diversity of the population, act impartially and operate within
clearly established mechanisms for detecting and sanctioning wrongful behaviour.
Going forward, those engaged in security sector assistance, including within the
inter-agency Security Sector Reform Task Force, could build specific modules on
the nature and dynamics of atrocity crimes into their training programmes.
(b)

Impartial institutions for overseeing political transitions
46. Political transitions, particularly elections, can sometimes trigger violence that
could lead to atrocity crimes. If sectors of the population perceive an election to
lack fairness, inclusiveness or transparency, there is a greater likelihood that they
will resort to violence or that conflict entrepreneurs with an incentive to encourage
violence may be able to mobilize groups for their own ends. An important inhibitor
to these negative dynamics is an impartial and competent electoral commission that
can stand apart from narrow economic and political interests, ensure the integrity of
an election and announce the results in a timely and impartial fashion.
47. The assessment of the causes of alleged crimes committed in Kenya following
the December 2007 election, including crimes against humanity, found that in
addition to underlying grievances, mistrust in the electoral institutions contributed
to the inter-ethnic violence that gripped the country and delays in announcing results
fuelled suspicion of electoral fraud. A number of reforms were undertaken to
improve public confidence and reduce the risk of atrocity crimes during the 2013
elections, including the technical and financial support provided by the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and donor States to Kenya’s Independent
Electoral and Boundaries Commission.

(c)

Independent judicial and human rights institutions
48. An impartial and independent judiciary offers two particular ways of
mitigating the risk of atrocity crimes. First, it is a mechanism for redressing
grievances that constitutes an alternative to the violent or extralegal strategies that
might otherwise trigger atrocity crimes. Second, it provides the means of bringing
those who plan, incite or commit atrocity crimes to justice, thereby assisting
implementation of the International Criminal Court’s core principle of
complementarity.
49. Institutions empowered to protect human rights, including national human
rights institutions and ombudsman’s offices, can also act as inhibitors to atroci ty
crimes. These independent institutions, which should respect the 1993 Paris
Principles adopted by the General Assembly, not only respond to individual

12/20

14-57339

A/68/947
S/2014/449

complaints but can also identify and make public which kinds of statements
constitute incitement to violence, based on ethnic or religious hatred.
50. Efforts to strengthen these rule-of-law-related institutions are often most
effective when they avoid a “one size fits all” approach and seek to empower local
and national actors. A bottom-up strategy that builds on the formal and informal
justice systems that already exist is more likely to enjoy widespread legitimacy and
serve as a foundation for subsequent reforms. This approach has been employed in
Sierra Leone, for example, where the historical role of P aramount Chiefs in dispute
resolution has been recognized through their participation in Parliament and local
governance institutions.
(d)

Capacity to assess risk and mobilize early response
51. National capacity to prevent and respond to atrocity crime s can be enhanced
by regular assessments of risk factors, evidence of mobilization and the
vulnerability of different population groups. Such assessments can also be used to
shape other kinds of international assistance, such as development cooperation, so
that policies pursued in one domain will not have an adverse effect on another.
52. While each State will develop a risk assessment framework appropriate to its
own context, the guidance provided by civil society organizations dedicated to
preventing atrocity crimes or the framework of analysis developed by my Special
Advisers on the Prevention of Genocide and on the Responsibility to Protect, 4 can
help to identify atrocity risks and vulnerabilities in a State’s capacity to address
them. Regional organizations that have advanced early warning mechanisms, such
as the European Union, the African Union, IGAD and ECOWAS, can also advise
States on risk factors relevant to their situation. In some cases, risk assessments can
be implemented jointly or in cooperation with development partners. As part of the
framework of the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States, for example, the
European Union and other international partners have supported Somalia in the
development of a fragility self-assessment. Information alone is not enough,
however. Relevant facts and analysis must be provided in a timely and accessible
way to policymakers in a position to act.

(e)

Local capacity to resolve conflicts
53. Capacity-building assistance should also concentrate on informal mechanisms,
both local and national, that can foster dialogue and reconciliation and mediate on
specific matters. With the assistance of UNDP, for example, Guyana has created an
Ethnic Relations Committee, which has helped to build governmental and civil
society capacity to respond effectively to events that could trigger atrocity crimes.
The sources of tension will vary, ranging from disputes over land and other
resources, religion and ethnicity to political succession, but by promoting
indigenous solutions, these mechanisms can build a culture of peaceful dispute
resolution and reduce the need for international mediation.
54. The role of traditional and religious leaders in defusing social tensions may be
especially relevant at a local level, and some prom ising initiatives have been
designed to reinforce their efforts. The Mediation Support Unit of the Department of

__________________
4 The analysis framework is available in the official languages of the United Nations from

http://www.un.org/en/preventgenocide/adviser/.

14-57339

13/20

A/68/947
S/2014/449

Political Affairs, the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, Finn Church Aid, the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the non-governmental organization
Religions for Peace have established the Network of Traditional and Religious
Peacemakers as a means of enhancing the positive contribution such processes can
make to resolving inter-communal tensions.
(f)

Media capacity to counteract prejudice and hate speech
55. Hate speech that constitutes incitement to violence has often encouraged
perpetrators to commit atrocity crimes. Countering these destructive messages,
which can make atrocity crimes appear desirable or permissible, is an impor tant
inhibitor to their commission. As tools for receiving and transmitting information,
the media can either provide a powerful pathway for propaganda, negative
stereotypes and incitement or serve as a key tool for contesting their arguments or
preventing their dissemination.
56. International actors can support the positive role of media by assisting the
development of research and investigative capacity of journalists, legislation
regarding incitement, and codes of conduct and ethical standards for journ alists that
promote truth telling and impartial reporting. The best way to defeat incitement is
for respected local figures and organizations to contest it in the print media, on radio
and television, on the Internet and social media, and in face -to-face communication.
In Côte d’Ivoire, where hate speech has contributed to communal violence, the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) has used its broadcasting
capacity to promote a peaceful environment and has been tasked by the Security
Council to monitor and report on incitement to hatred, violence or intolerance.

(g)

Capacity for effective and legitimate transitional justice
57. Given that a major risk factor for atrocity crimes is the past commission of
such acts and a record of impunity, effective and legitimate transitional justice
mechanisms, which look forward as well as backward, should be a key focus for
capacity-building under pillar II. International partners, often working in close
collaboration with the United Nations, have provided critical support to hybrid
transitional justice efforts, including the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of
Cambodia, the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the War Crimes Chamber of the
Court of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Beyond effective judicial remedies for the crimes
committed, international actors can help to finance outstanding property claims,
establish durable solutions for the displaced, and facilitate the restoration of
citizenship for victims. The assistance given by the International Criminal Cour t to
victims of the Lord’s Resistance Army in northern Uganda is a good example of this
broader approach. In addition, given the central role of education in fostering social
cohesion and a sense of individual responsibility, international assistance in
post-conflict contexts could pay particular attention to educational reforms that
promote the value of diversity and instruction on the causes and consequences of
atrocity crimes.
58. Transnational justice efforts directed at addressing sexual and gender-based
crimes is a particular priority. As indicated in my 2014 report on conflict -related
sexual violence (S/2014/181), the lack of sufficient national capacity and expertise
to investigate and prosecute such crimes remains a serious obstacle to
accountability. International and regional actors have sought to address these gaps in
a variety of countries. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example,

14/20

14-57339

A/68/947
S/2014/449

representatives from the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict, working with UNDP, have provided support to investigation and
prosecutions by military magistrates and military mobile courts, including through
the prosecution support cells designed and supported by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). Beyond these legal accountability mechanisms, Security Council
resolution 1888 (2009) called upon States, with support from the international
community, to provide victims of sexual violence with better access to legal
assistance, health care and social and economic reintegration services and to address
structural factors that contribute to violence against women and girl s.

C.

Assisting States to protect their populations
59. In addition to capacity-building assistance, States under stress or facing an
impending crisis may request temporary international help, either to deny those with
the motivation to commit atrocity crimes the means of doing so or to boost their
existing protection capacities.
Denying the means to commit atrocities
60. International and regional actors should cooperate to stem the flow of small
arms and light weapons, illicit financing and other forms of illegal trafficking,
especially by strengthening cross-border customs cooperation and informationsharing networks. Efforts to deny perpetrators the means to commit atrocity crimes
are particularly important when launched at an early stage. The A rms Trade Treaty
is a significant step forward in this respect and reinforces the obligation of States
not to knowingly provide arms that could be used for atrocity crimes. In addition,
Security Council resolution 2117 (2013), which explicitly recognized that the
misuse of small arms and light weapons has resulted in grave crimes, emphasized
the need to actively assist States in addressing the destructive accumulation and
spread of such weapons, including in countries subject to Security Councilmandated arms embargoes, through the help of United Nations peacekeeping forces.
In some cases, international companies operating in a State under stress can also
assist in protecting the population by ensuring that their products, services or
technologies are not directly or indirectly contributing to systematic violence or
serious human rights violations.
Civilian assistance
61. Neighbours, regional and international organizations and civil society can also
respond to State requests for civilian resources to strengthen their ability to protect
vulnerable populations. Enhancing the international community’s ability to draw on
and deploy specialized civilian capacity in a timely manner would particularly help
States under stress. Assistance in the following five areas is likely to have the
greatest impact:

(a)

Dispute resolution expertise
62. International actors can provide advice and expertise to support local
mediation and dispute resolution efforts. The Mediation Support Unit in the
Department of Political Affairs makes technical expertise available through the
deployment of its standby team and roster of mediation experts and has developed

14-57339

15/20

A/68/947
S/2014/449

United Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation. Member States have a lso engaged
in both national and regional initiatives to support local mediation efforts, such as
the Group of Friends of Mediation led by Finland and Turkey and the Mediation and
Facilitation Unit recently established by ECOWAS.
(b)

Human rights monitoring
63. Assistance to expand national and local capacity to monitor and report human
rights abuses is especially important in situations where there is a risk of atrocity
crimes. OHCHR field offices, human rights components of peacekeeping operations
and some special political missions of the United Nations often have a mandate to
fulfil this role. In cases such as Afghanistan, Colombia, Guinea, Iraq, Mali and
South Sudan, United Nations human rights monitors can identify vulnerable
populations, provide early warning, engage with national authorities to address
violations and risks, or even protect through their presence, by deterring human
rights violations that may amount to atrocity crimes. Regional organizations,
including the African Union, ECOWAS, the European Union and OSCE, also deploy
human rights experts, either through their own missions or through contributions to
United Nations authorized peacekeeping missions. Given the important role they
play, States and intergovernmental organizations could invest more in recruitment,
training and deployment of human rights experts, including under the United
Nations framework.

(c)

Law enforcement and criminal investigation
64. The temporary deployment of senior police officers can often help national
actors to meet the multifaceted challenges of law enforcement during periods of
stress. The police components of United Nations peacekeeping operations have
made significant contributions, including in Burundi, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Kosovo, Liberia and Sierra Leone. This need for
assistance also extends throughout the justice sector. Where the capacity to
investigate and prosecute atrocity crimes is limited, international assistance may be
the only means of determining facts, preserving due process and holding
perpetrators to account.

(d)

Protection of refugees and the internally displaced
65. In situations of crisis, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), sometimes working in collaboration with non-governmental
organizations such as the Norwegian Refugee Council, can offer concrete forms of
protection by supporting requests for asylum or protecting refugees in safe facilities.
UNHCR staff can serve not only to prevent the commission of atrocity crimes or
their escalation, but can also provide crucial information about refugees and
internally displaced persons that can be used to enhance the protection capacity of
the State and other regional or international actors.

(e)

Protection of civilians in humanitarian emergencies
66. Both at the field and global levels, humanitarian actors undertake coordination
and protection efforts under the framework of the humanitarian protection clusters.
In humanitarian emergencies, these clusters identify, analyse and actively respond to
the protection needs of affected populations. This assistance not only enhances

16/20

14-57339

A/68/947
S/2014/449

national efforts to protect populations at risk, but also contributes to mitigating
conditions conducive to the commission of atrocity crimes.
Peacekeeping and stabilization assistance
67. States may in some cases seek assistance from regional or international
military forces to protect civilians subject to or at risk of atrocity crimes. For
example, the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands, established in
2003 at the request of the Government of the Solomon Islands and with the full
participation of the Pacific Islands Forum, provided comprehensive military, civilian
and police support to national authorities to help to protect the population by
disarming military and criminal groups, establishing the rule of law, and holding
perpetrators accountable through criminal justice mechanisms. In addition, the
protection of civilians is now regularly included in Security Council mandat es for
peacekeeping missions and remains at the heart of efforts in the Central African
Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, the
Sudan and elsewhere, where atrocity crimes have either been committed or where
there is a risk that such crimes continue to be committed. In some cases, such as
Security Council resolution 1996 (2011) establishing the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS), peacekeepers were explicitly mandated to support national
authorities in implementing their responsibility to protect. In other cases, such as
MONUSCO, missions have created innovative and flexible measures to provide
security in areas where civilians are under imminent threat, suc h as through the use
of quick reaction forces, temporary deployments of military contingents, and
standing and mobile patrols.
68. Much has been learned about civilian protection in volatile situations. The
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has created training modules to enhance
peacekeepers’ understanding of their role in protecting civilians and is working,
through the use of mobile training teams, to ensure that peacekeepers internalize this
guidance before deployment. However, this alone is not eno ugh; training requires a
stronger commitment on both sides. It is essential for troop - and police-contributing
countries to proactively ensure that their personnel are trained in the specifics of
such mandates and understand the implications involved in their implementation.
69. Beyond training, stronger coordination between human rights monitors and
peacekeeping forces is essential to ensure that assessments of risk to different
population groups are built systematically into peacekeeping operation strateg ies
and tactics. As suggested in my 2013 report on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict (S/2013/689), improved tracking of civilian casualties in the field and the
establishment of a common United Nations system to record civilian casualties
would facilitate these efforts. In addition, greater donor support for women
protection advisers could increase the protection capacity of national, regional and
international military personnel in situations where conflict parties are suspected of
committing rape and other forms of sexual violence.

V. Challenges and recommendations
70. The three main forms of international action under pillar II, namely,
encouragement, capacity-building and protection assistance, can support States to
succeed in meeting their pillar I responsibility to protect their populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity and avoid more

14-57339

17/20

A/68/947
S/2014/449

controversial measures under pillar III. Yet, fulfilling our colle ctive responsibility to
assist States will require a number of actors to do things differently and to embed
knowledge of atrocity crimes and their dynamics more consciously into core
operations.
71. The United Nations has already taken a concrete step in this direction. The
Rights Up Front Action Plan, which I initiated in response to the Organization’s
failures during the final stages of the conflict in Sri Lanka, calls for a system -wide
effort to prevent and respond to the risk of or ongoing serious viola tions of
international human rights and humanitarian law, including those that could lead to
atrocity crimes. Rights Up Front, using the breadth of United Nations mandates,
ensures that United Nations entities recognize a collective responsibility to
strengthen the link between early warning and early action, and brings human rights
protection to the centre of the work of the Organization. Other actors, including at
the regional and national levels, are also making significant progress by developing
explicit strategies for atrocity prevention and response. For example, the European
Union, in cooperation with other regional organizations and civil society, has
significantly strengthened its early warning and conflict analysis capacity in order to
better target the assistance it provides. However, while these positive initiatives are
welcome, implementing pillar II will require overcoming a set of challenges.
Challenges
72. First, the multifaceted agenda under pillar II can appear daunting. There is no
easy way to simplify the tasks or the sustained commitment involved in helping
States to meet their responsibility to protect. Nevertheless, lessons have been
learned about the most effective forms of international assistance. The objectives of
pillar II can be met both by using existing resources in smarter ways and by
designing strategies that prioritize the specific inhibitors for atrocity crimes.
73. Second, there is still too little will to operationalize prevention. This is
manifest most clearly in the reluctance of States to place country situations on the
agenda of regional or international organizations before they reach a crisis point. It
is also reflected in the resource allocations of many Member States, which still
prioritize crisis response, and in the concern of some States about subjecting
themselves to peer review.
74. Part of the solution to the challenge of prevention lies within the World
Summit Outcome itself, in which States committed themselves to assisting those
which are under stress before crises and conflicts break out. The implementation of
the responsibility to protect should focus on giving greater meaning and specificity
to this pledge. Preventive efforts would be enhanced by investing in methodologies
to analyse prevention outcomes, which are notoriously hard to prove, and by
securing agreement among States on what constitutes a State “under stress”.
75. Third, the implementation of the responsibility to protect coincides with a
climate of fiscal restraint in many countries. However, the current resource
constraints also offer an opportunity to fundamentally re -examine the allocation of
resources and revise existing frameworks. Pillar II assistance is also a wise and
long-term investment, given the much greater cost of acting once a c risis occurs and
the social and economic devastation facing countries that experience atrocity
crimes. The forms of international assistance outlined in the present report can help
to focus efforts and encourage a division of labour.

18/20

14-57339

A/68/947
S/2014/449

76. Lastly, pillar II emphasizes assistance to States. This is particularly relevant in
cases where a non-State actor is preying upon the civilian population. However,
when a Government actively exploits State structures to commit atrocity crimes,
strengthening national institutions becomes untenable. Even in such situations,
however, international actors can continue to encourage the State to fulfil its
protection responsibilities and offer assistance. The 2014 report of the commission
of inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
(A/HRC/25/63) calls upon States and the Special Rapporteur to continue their
engagement efforts with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in what
remains one of the most challenging environments for implementing the
responsibility to protect. International actors can also address State -driven
mobilization for atrocities by helping civil society groups to develop the political
and organizational skills to oppose the proponents of atrocity crimes, keeping
international attention focused on the threat to populations, and offering to assist
with efforts to punish or isolate perpetrators. As Secretary-General, I have a
particular responsibility in such situations to act as a spokesp erson for those who are
vulnerable and threatened.
Recommendations
77. Successful implementation of the pillar II agenda necessitates coordinated
action from those identified in the present report, in order to avoid overburdening
national actors or fragmenting international assistance. A key precondition for
coordination is a shared understanding of the core priorities: intensifying efforts to
encourage States to meet their responsibility to protect; investing in capacity building programmes that address horizontal inequalities and buttress specific
inhibitors of atrocity crimes; and deploying additional capacity to States under stress
to boost their ability to protect populations. More specifically, I call upon Member
States to:
• Leverage existing mechanisms and institutions to encourage States to fulfil
their responsibility to protect, including the peer-review processes of the
Human Rights Council and relevant regional organizations
• Invest in tools to encourage States to fulfil their responsibilit y to protect in
situations of emerging or ongoing crisis, such as good offices and preventive
diplomacy
• Improve existing forms of national, regional and international assistance by
incorporating atrocity crime risks and dynamics into conflict analysis a nd
expanding existing guidance to include policy options for atrocity crime
situations
• Focus existing capacity-building efforts on eliminating horizontal inequalities
and design or strengthen capacity-building programmes aimed at the seven
inhibitors of atrocity crimes
• Enhance the availability and expertise of specialized civilian resources and
expand training programmes for peacekeeping, security and law enforcement
personnel in atrocity crime risk factors and dynamics
• Ensure that international assistance under pillar II is coordinated and coherent,
including by improving the exchange of information on priorities and
programmes aimed at mitigating atrocity crime risks

14-57339

19/20

A/68/947
S/2014/449

• Support the early warning and capacity-building efforts of the Office on
Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect and invest in the ability
of the United Nations to recruit, train and deploy human rights experts
• Support efforts to better monitor and evaluate the impact of preventive actions
• Strengthen regional and international networks for atrocity crime prevention.

VI. Renewed commitment to protection
78. In addition to taking these practical steps to enhance international assistance
under pillar II, the upcoming year offers an opportunity for States to rene w and
further the commitment made at the World Summit to protect populations from
genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. This task could
not be more urgent, given the continued subjection of populations to atrocity crimes
despite the pledge of “never again”. The time has come for a stronger global
partnership to implement our collective responsibility to protect, inspired by the
common principles outlined in the present report.
79. The consensus that has developed since 2005 on many elements of the
responsibility to protect can serve as a basis for moving forward. First and foremost,
States have agreed that the scope of the responsibility to protect is “narrow but
deep”: narrow because it is restricted to the protection of popula tions from atrocity
crimes, but deep given the array of measures required for its implementation.
Second, States have reiterated that the primary responsibility to protect lies with
national authorities and that no society is immune to the risk of atrocity crimes. At
the same time, States have acknowledged that the three pillars of the responsibility
to protect support one another and that none would be effective standing alone.
Third, States consistently declare that prevention is the most important aspect of the
responsibility to protect, given the inherent limitations of attempting to address a
crisis that is already under way. They also recognize, however, that it is not always
possible to draw a clear line between prevention and response. Lastly, States insist
that the international community’s implementation of its responsibility to protect
must be in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and other established
principles of international law. They also stress that timely and decisive respons e,
under pillar III, should emphasize diplomatic, political and humanitarian measures,
leaving military force a matter of last resort.
80. As the tenth anniversary of the World Summit, 2015 is an opportune moment
for the General Assembly to build on this consensus and take stock of efforts to
implement the responsibility to protect. As part of this process, Member States may
wish to consider the inclusion of the responsibility to protect on the formal agenda
of the General Assembly. Such an assessment could offer the chance for deeper
consideration of the impact of the responsibility to protect to date, challenges
related to each of the three pillars, and gaps in the protection capacities of national,
regional and international actors. I encourage Member Sta tes to seize this
opportunity to craft an ambitious vision for the next decade of the responsibility to
protect: a principle that has become a core part of the world’s armour for protecting
vulnerable populations from the most serious international crimes and violations.

20/20

14-57339
