-UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COU
OFFICIAL

RECORDS
)I‘.

THIRTY-FIFTH

YEAR

2259’”

MEETING:

19 DECEMBER

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2259)

.. ... ... ... .. ... .. ... .. .. ... ... .. ... .

1

Adoption of the agenda .................................................

1

The situation in the occupied Arab territories.

1

............................

NOTE

.t
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference’to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplenwuts
of the Ojjicitrl Rcc~tls ($ the Security Courwil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolrrtiom
mtl
,Dccision.s cd’ the Srcwrity
Corrncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2259th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 19 December 1980, at 11 a.m.
Mr. Donald F. McHENRY
(United States of America).

President:

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia,
Provisional

agenda.(S/Agenda/2259)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the occupied Arab territories
The meeting

was called to order at 11.50 a.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation iii the occupied
Arab territories

1. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Egypt, Israel and Kuwait in which
they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda. In accordance with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

3. The proposal by the representative of Tunisia is
not made pursuant to rule 37 or rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, but, if approved by the
Council, the invitation to participate in the debate
would confer on the Palestine Liberation Orgamzation (PLO) the same rights of participation as those
conferred on Member States pursuant to rule 37.
4. Does any member of the Security Council wish to
speak on this proposal?
5. Since no other member of the Council wishes to
speak, I shall make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of the UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.
6. I wish to reiterate the position the United States
has so often stated in the Council. We have no objection to hearing representatives of the PLO under the
established procedures of rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure. However, we do not consider it
appropriate to extend an invitation to participate in
terms that might give the appearance of according
rights of participation to the PLO as if it were a Member State of the United Nations. It is for this procedural reason that we are opposing the invitation that is
being proposed.
7. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT of
the Council.
8. If no other member wishes to speak, I shall take it
that the Council is ready to vote on the proposal by
Tunisia.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Blum (Israel) and Mr. Bishara (Kuwait)
took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 18 December from the representative of Tunisia [S/14303], which
reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation to the representative
of the Palestine. Liberation Organization to participate in the Security Council’s consideration of the
item ‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’,
in accordance with the Council’s past practice.**

In favour: Bangladesh, China, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Philippines,
Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia
Against:

United States of America

Abstaining:
France, Norway, Portugal, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The proposal
4 abstentions.

was adopted

by 10 votes to 1, with

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation
Organization)
took a place at the
Council table.

9. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received a letter dated
18 December from the representative of Tunisia
[S/14305], which reads as follows: .

24 May [S/13960]. In that report, I mentioned the
anpeal I had addressed to Prime Minister Begin asking
him to take the necessary action to respond ,to the
call of the Council. In his reply, Mr. Begin stated that
a petition to allow the return of the two Mayors and
the Sharia Judge had been submitted to the%raeli
High Court of Justice for consideration. He added
that an order nisi had been issued by the Court and
that hearings would be held on the merits of the case,
after which the Supreme Court, sitting as the High
Court of Justice, would render its judgement, which
would be carried out by the Government. Since then,
my advisers and I have brought up this matter on
several occasions with the Permanent Representative
of Israel and other Israeli representatives.

“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council extend an invitation to Mr. Clovis Maksoud,
Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States
to the United Nations, to participate in consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied
Arab territories’, in accordance with,rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure.*’
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to this request.

16. In that connection, I should like to recall briefly
some developments relating to this case, on the basis
of information confirmed by the Israeli Mission.

It was so decided.

10. The PRESIDENT: I have also received a letter
dated 18 December from the representative of Tunisia
[S/14304], which reads as follows:
:
“I have the honour to request that the Security
Council invite Mr. Fahd Qawasma, Mayor of AlKhalil, and Mr. Mohamed Milhem, Mayor of
Halhoul, to participate in the Council’s consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in the occupied Arab territories’, in accordance with rule 39
of its provisional rules of procedure.”

17. In August, the Supreme Court of Israel upheld
the expulsion of the two Mayors and the Sharia Judge.
It also ruled that the two Mayors had the right to
appeal to an Israeli military review board.
18. In October, in response to an appeal submitted
by the families of the two Mayors on their behalf, the
Israeli Government decided to allow the Mayors to
return to the West Bank to appeal their deportation
order before a military review board. The board began
its proceedings on 9 October and the two Mayors
were invited to appear before it by mid-October. The
two Mayors, who returned to the West Bank for the
hearings, were held in confinement at the Customs
Terminal, where the board sat. Subsequently they
were transferred to Ramleh Prison in Israel. The military review board recommended that the expulsion
order be upheld, and this recommendation was endorsed by the Military Governor.

Unless I hear an objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees to this request.
It was so decided.

11. The PRESIDENT: As was agreed in the course
of consultations on 17 December, the Council is
meeting today in connection with the expulsion of the
Mayors of Al-Khalil and Halhoul and the Sharia Judge
of Al-Khalil.

19. Following that, the lawyer of the two Mayors
submitted an anneal to the Sunreme Court. On 4 December, the Supreme Court upheld the expulsion
order; at the same time, the judges recommended that
the Government review this matter and that in the
meantime the Mayors be allowed to stay.

12. Members of the Council have before them the
following documents: S/13960, containing the report
submitted on 24 May by the Secretary-General in
pursuance of Council resolution 469 (1980); S/14302,
containing the text of a note by the Secretary-General
calling attention to paragraph 5 of General Assembly
resolution 35/122 F; S/14306, containing the text of a
draft resolution which was prepared in the course of
the Council’s consultations.

20. On 5 December, upon hearing that the Israeli
Government intended to deport the Mayors forthwith,
I immediately contacted the Israeli representative.
Recalling the Security Council resolutions on this
matter, I asked Ambassador Blum to convey urgently
my concern over this development to his Government
and my hope that his Government would reconsider
its decision. Unfortunately, the Israeli Government _
maintained its decision, and the Mayors were deported to Lebanon on the same day.

13. The Secretary-General has asked to be allowed
to make a statement and I now call upon him.
14. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: As the Security
Council is about to consider the expulsion of the
Mayors of Hebron and Halhoul and of the Sharia
Judge of Hebron, I feel I should report to the Security
Council on the efforts I have undertaken on this matter.

21. Since that time, the General Assembly has
adopted resolutions 351122 D and F on this matter.
On 17 December, I addressed a new appeal to Prime
Minister Begin in which I urged him to reconsider the

15. The Council will recall that, in pursuance of its
resolution 469 (1980), I submitted a report to it on
2

/ ,;

.

is indisputable proof of the brutality now being practised in the West Bank. Indeed, the Israelis are having
a Roman holiday, unopposed, uncontested. The two
Mayors will reveal to us what they went through, what
they saw and what they suffered.

decision of his Government and to permit the Palesfinian leaders to return to the West Bank so that theycould
resume the functions for which they were elected and
appointed. I indicated in the same letter to Prime
Minister Begin that this and my previous appeals were
motivated by my concern for the cause of peace and
the welfare of the population in the area and also by
my conviction that the expulsion of the Palestinian
leaders would inevitably exacerbate tensions and
hamper efforts for a just and lasting peace.

28. Very soon; everyone will be celebrating the
holidays with families, children, relatives. The two
Mayors will never have the chance to celebrate the
holidays with their children, their relatives, their
families. It is a tragedy-a tragedy that emanates from
occupationBut I do not intend to talk about occupation now.

22. That is all I have to say for the time being.
23. The PRESIDENT: The first speaker is the representative of Kuwait, who wishes to make a statement
in his capacity as Chairman of the Arab Group at the
United Nations for the month of December. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

29. The Council adopted two resolutions-468 (1980)
and 469 (1980). Israel flouted, disregarded, rejected,
opposed those two resolutions. Recently the General
Assembly adopted by an overwhelming majority
a resolution on the return of the two Mayors. Israel
rejected and disregarded that resolution and treated it
with contempt. The Council has time and again reaffirmed that the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949’
applies to the occupied territories. Israel defies, rejects
and spurns the Council decisions, just as it has always
defied the Council, the General Assembly and the
international community on any issue relating to the
tragedy of Palestine and the problem of the Middle
East. It pursues that policy with exceptionalimmunity
from any countermeasures, any punitive measures.
I do not intend to go into the reasons for that.

24. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): I should like to say on
behalf of the Arab Group that we are very grateful
to you, Mr. President, for acceding to our request to
convene this meeting. I also express to you best
wishes for a very successful future. I have known you
and worked with you for many years. I have discovered how objective, constructive, healthy and positive
your approach always is. We shall miss you in the
United Nations, but I am sure that you will take with
you outside the United Nations constructive achievements that will be reflected in your future career. We
wish you good luck wherever you go, and I am sure
that, whatever your destination, success will be your
companion.

30. In the past few months, Israel has intensified its
repressive measures against defenceless Palestinians.
In doing that it has used all the measures inherited
from the British colonial rule. Universities have been
closed. Students have had their legs shot at. Houses
have been demolished. Property has been looted. As
we read in yesterday’s New York Times, indiscriminate shooting is becoming a daily affair. Even the
foreign press suffered from the brutality of the Israeli
measures. Films of foreign reporters were confiscated,
television teams were harassed and reporters were
prevented from sending dispatches to their headquarters. The aim is to impose a blackout on what
goes on. The aim is to prevent the truth from getting
out. The aim is to shut out the world and to prevent
the world’s gaining any knowledge of what is going
on there. But truth can never be hidden, and we have
two distinguished Palestinians who will speak about
that truth.

25. I should like to express our thanks to the Secretary-General for his unflagging efforts. The statement
he has just made demonstrates how deeply involved
he is. We are grateful to you;Mr. Secretary-General.
26. I do not intend to repeat what was said in the
debates during the past two weeks in the General
Assembly. I do not intend to go into the origins of
the tragedy of Palestine. I shall not speak about territories or occupation. I shall contine myself to the
present issue.
27. In this chamber we have two distinguished Palestinians: the Mayor of Al-Khalil (Hebron) and the
Mayor of Halhoul. They themselves will, later in this
meeting, explain their odyssey, which started with
expulsion and continued with imprisonment, and
again expulsion. We here in the United Nations read
about terror in the West Bank and repression: they
lived it. We read about Israeli repressive measures,
the Israeli brutal approach: they suffered from it. We
read about emergency measures and decrees: they
are the victims of such measures and decrees. They
will present their case, and truth-only truth-is their
companion. Knowledge is their ammunition, right,
justice, fairness are their weapons. Their presence
here is a clear indictment of Israeli policy. Their plight

31. The presence of these two Palestinians will
articulate the power of the truth. The two distinguished
Palestinians who are present here, sons of Palestinian
forebears who tilled the Palestinian soil, who grazed
their herds in Palestinian valleys, are now in New
York, the victims of expulsion. Jewish foreigners are
welcome to take their place, to live in the West Bank.
The two native Palestinians here can travel anywhere
in the world but to their own country, to the place
of their birth, while Jews from all over can settle in
their place and claim it as their own place of birth.
3

Jewish settlements are being intensified in the midst
of Palestinians and on Palestinian territory, settlements that claim the water resources of the indigenous
Palestinians. To cap all the privileges enjoyed by these
imported Jews, they invoke the Bible to justify their
colonialism. The plight of the Palestinians is the result
of occupation. Their plight will end with the end and
eradication of that occupation.
. ,+

United Nations in breach of human values and+-more
than that, that ii is warmongering. It is very important
to shame Israel by revealing how sinister and how
3:
destructive its policy is.
36. The two mayors‘are symbols of Palestinian resistance and opposition to the brutal measures imposed
on the West Bank. Our support for the cause of the
mayors isa signal to the people under occupation that
they are not alone in their opposition to brutality, that
their cause is just and that the world, acting through
the Security Council, has not turned a blind eye to
their plight. It is a signal.of moral support. It is a signal
of political support and a signal of the isolation of
Israel by the international community. It is a signal
that should shame Israel into desisting from its policy.
The draft resolution that is before the Council [S/14306]
is in line with what we demand. Moral and political
support on the part of the Council to the people under
occupation is justified and timely. We hope that the
Council will respond positively.

32. We say that the tragedy of the Palestinian people
knows no parallel and we have an example, an illustration’ of this tragedy in the presence of two distinguished mayors who are unable to go home. And when
they: ‘seethat these imported Jews enjoy land that the
Palestinians own, it becomes sad and tragic. They see
that their own country, the West Bank, has become
almost a Jewish ranch, while they have no place to go,
travelling from one city to another, from one country
to another, like wanderers. It is sad.
33,““This policy, as we have been saying for years,
is an invitation to war and is by no means conducive
to peace. It is, as we have been saying, warmongering.
It is, as ‘we have been saying, illegal. It is, as we have
been saying, immoral, and therefore should be opposed
and condemned.

37. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Israel. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
38. Mr. BLUM (Israel): Before turning to the substance of the matter before us, let me briefly recall
the background.

341,’ The expulsion of the two mayors by Israel is in
line with Israeli policy, which is to de-Arabize, dePalestinize, denationalize the Palestinian territories.
Israel expels as many Palestinians as it can so as to
create room for ;its imported Jewish settlers. DeArabization by definition means physical expulsion.
It also means eradication, an attempt to eradicate
Palestinian national feelings by expelling Palestinian
thinkers, leaders, scholars, artists-men of ideas.
The purpose is to de-Arabize the area sentimentally
and nationally, but this. policy of de-Arabization by
expulsion and the removal of leading Arab personalities will never succeed. Every Palestinian-as we
know-will remain faithful to his land, no matter how
effective Israel’s measures are.

39. On Friday, 2 May 1980, a group of Jewish worshippers, mostly students of religious seminaries,
were returning from their Sabbath evening devotions
at the Tomb of the Patriarchs-the Cave of Machpelah-in Hebron. While they were walking down a
narrow alley, PLO terrorists launched a cowardly
attack on them from the roofs of two adjacent buildings.
Six of the worshippers were murdered; 16 others,
among them women and children, were wounded,
two of them critically. Within hours, Yasser A&at’s
Fatah, the largest constituent group within the PLO,
took responsibility for that outrage.

35. Tyranny is not the way to bring about peace.
Tyranny is counter-productive. Therefore, the Council should declare-and. this is the mildest of our
demands--its opposition to Israel’s measures against
the mayors and against the Mufti, a distinguished
religious leader whose only fault was to express his
own national feeling. The territory can never be without this expression of national feeling by the Palestinians, this sense of their right to existence and their
feeling for the land of their forebears, for the land that
they developed, a land from which great religions
emanated, a land which will see peace when reason
prevails. It is imperative that Israel remain isolated
and that the international community insist on the
return of the two mayors and the Mufti to their homes.
Such action reveals and confirms the immorality of
Israel’s policy. It is very important to bring it home to
Israel that its policy is immoral, that it is contrary to
international law, in violation of the Charter of the

40. The Government of Israel, like any Government,
has a primary duty and responsibility to preserve law
and r Lder and to safeguard human life. Accordingly,
it imulediately took a number of steps to prevent the
recurrence of this kind ofoutrage. These steps included
the expulsion of: the then Mayors of Hebron and
Halhoul and the Qadi of Hebron.
41. As I explained in detail in my statement before
the Council on 8:May [222Ist meeting], those three
individuals, on instructions from the PLO and the
Arab rejectionist States, had been actively .and systematically engaged over the preceding months in
inciting the local Arab population to acts of violenceand subversion against Israel and Israelis alike. Their
record and activities were well known then, and there
is no need for me to go over them again. Their conduct
since last May has further vindicated the decision to
expel them.
4

Israel’s courts darken the horizon. What hypocrisy!
What utter hypocrisy!

42. Over the last few months, the three individualsconcerned have had full recourse to the Israel judicial
system. Early in May, petitions were submitted on
their behalf by their relatives contesting the expulsion
orders, and on 20 May the Israel Supreme Court, sitting
as the.High Court of Justice, agreed to hear the petitions. After hearing the arguments submitte.l on behalf
of the petitioners, the Supreme Court saw no reason
to rescind the expulsion orders. At the same time, the
Court ruled that Mr. Fahd Qawasma and Mr. Mohamed
Milhem had a right to a hearing before a military
review board, and recommended that the two individuals be allowed to appear in person before that board;
The Government of Israel complied with the ruling
regarding the military review board. Also, even though
it was under no obligation to do so, it accepted the
recommendation that Mr. Qawasma and Mr. Milhem
be permitted to return to appear personally before the
review board. That board convened on 15and 16October and heard lengthy testimony from the two men.
After considering all the evidence, it recommended
that the expulsion orders be upheld. The Area Commander of Judea and Samaria accepted that recommendation and confirmed the orders ‘on 20 October:
Thereupon, Mr. Qawasma and Mr. Milhem took their
case to the Supreme Court once again, this time
directly appealing the expulsion orders. On 4 December, the Supreme Court upheld the validity of the
orders issued against the individuals in question.
Accordingly, and after further consideration of the
matter by the appropriate Cabinet committee, Mr. Qawasma and Mr. Milhem were expelled one day later
on Friday, 5 December.

46. Where in heaven’s name has this Council been
over the last year? This is the third time in the last
eight months that the Council has met to consider the
case of three men expelled for incitement to subversion, violence and terror.
47. But what has happened to the Council’s primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and ,security? The Soviet invasion and occupation of Afghanistan was last discussed in this Council
almost a year ago. That occupation still goes on.
Thousands of defenceless Afghanis have been killed
by Soviet tanks and bombers. Hundreds of thousands
more have been turned into refugees, including,
undoubtedly, scores of mayors and Qadis. Where has
this Council been? Since 9 January it has not held one
formal meeting on the Soviet aggression against
Afghanistan, despite the call, made in the resolution
adopted on 14 January by the General Assembly at
its sixth emergency special session, that the Security
Council should take action [resolution E&6/2].
48. The American hostages in Iran are now in their
412th day of bondage. We all hope that their ordeal
will be over soon. But where has the Council been on
this grievous issue? It has not met ,on this subject since
January.
49. Has the exodus of poor wretched people from
Viet Nam and Kampuchea stopped? Is their fate not
worthy of consideration? Do the forces that impel
their exodus constitute a threat to international peace?
No. Only the decision of the Israel Supreme Court
with regard to men who have abused their public
offrces is worthy of consideration by the Council
three times in the space of eight months.

43. As this brief chronology makes clear, Mr. Qawasma and Mr. Milhem have been able to pursue
every legal recourse and remedy in the Israel judicial
system, including personal appearances before the
Supreme Court.

50. Over 100,000 people were made to leave Cuba,
one way or another, in the course of the last year.
This is another issue which the Council has either
not heard about or does not wish to know about.

44. Israel is a State dedicated to the rule of law, which
is guaranteed by an independent judiciary. Our courts
and our judicial system as a whole have established
for themselves an enviable reputation. They certainly can match, and in many cases can better, the
courts in any of the countries represented in this
Council. We cannot, therefore, accept any attempt to
interfere with the judicial process of our country.

51. In the last month, the same super-Power which
used naked force and aggression against Afghanistan
began marshalling ,its military might and that of its
satellites with a view to making its weight felt .elsewhere. But the Council sees no evil, hears no evil,
and, of course, speaks no evil.

45. Beyond that, the entire proceedings here today
prompt me to make some remarks of a more general
nature. As I have observed on previous occasions,
anyone reviewing the agenda of this Council since the
beginning of this year would be obliged to conclude
that there are almost no international crises in the
world other than the Arab-Israel conflict. The human
lot is a happy one: gone we the whole range of threats
to international peace and security in all comers of
the globe. Acts of terror have been stamped out, and
the “terrorist international” has been brought under
control. Human misery, persecution and degradation
have ceased to plague this earth. Only the rulings of

52. But why need I go so far afield? In the Middle
East, a bloody war has been waged for the last three
months between Iraq and Iran. The Council held one
or two desultory meetings a couple .of months ago and
since then has not felt the need to hold another formal
meeting. The carnage, the wanton destruction and the
toil of human life on both sides is immense, but, since
this conflict is unrelated to Israel, the matter can wait.
No one need be condemned. The killing can go on and
the threats to international peace and security are of
no consequence.
5

.

53. Even closer to home, indeed almost within sight
of Israel’s northern border, Syria moved large numbers of tanks and troops in the last three ieeks against
Jordan. Jordan responded in kind. There were moments in the course of that crisis when,the two sides
were ,within a hair’s breadth of a shooting war which
could easily have had drastic repercussions throughout the region. At one point, the Council made a nervous attempt to put this question on the agenda of one
of its informal meetings. In the nick of time a news
agency report was received to the effect that the
armed stand-off on the Syrian-Jordanian border was
being resolved, and thus the Council was mercifully
spared the embarrassment of having to discuss the
situation.
54. :And what about the situation in Lebanon? That
battle-tom country has been under Syrian occupation for four years and more. Yet the Council has not
found a moment to discuss Syrian aggression. To be
sure, it did hold one meeting, scarcely worthy of the
name, on 6 October 1978[2089rh meeting] in the wake
of the Syrian bombardment of Beirut and the resulting
death of hundreds of men, women and children and
the creation of thousands of refugees. On that extraordinary occasion, the Council met for all of five
minues to adopt without discussion a milk and
water resolution that was so preciously drafted that
it did not mention Syria by name or even go so far
as to suggest that a State-I repeat, a State-might
perhaps be involved in the wanton killing of civilians.
The Council raised its moral authority to a pinnacle
by entreating “all those involved in hostilities in
Lebanon” to desist if they would please be so kind

58. None of the threats to international peace and
security to which I have referred appear, in theeyes
of the Council, to be of sufficient gravity to warrant
its active attention. What is so urgent? An expulsion
order issued pursuant to law and confirmed by the
Supreme Court of a sovereign State. The subjects of
that order were three men who had been actively and
systematically engaged in inciting the local popuiation
to acts of violence and subversion, men who abused
their public office to make inflammatory statements
at public gatherings, men who since their expulsion
have made no pretence of hiding their active involvement with the activities of a terrorist organization.

[resolurion

62. Mr. MILHEM: Thank you, Mr. President, for
giving me the privilege of addressing the Security
Council for the second time.

59. As I stated earlier, these men have enjoyed every
benefit of the Israel legal system. They have presented
their case to the competent authorities. They were
allowed to appeal not once, but twice, to the Israel
Supreme Court. In light of this, the involvement of the
Council in this matter from the- beginning has constituted a gross interference with Israel’s independent
judiciary.
60. Informed world opinion will judge any resolution
which may- be adopted in this debate not only on the
doubtful merits of the debate itself but much more so
in the light of the Council’s over-all record.
61. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. Mohamed Milhem, to whom the Council has extended
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. I now invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

436 (1978)].

55. And what about Libya’s occupation of parts of
Chad, and what of its massive involvement in the civil
war there today? Since 1973, Colonel Qaddafi occupied
and later annexed 114,000 square kilometres of Chad’s
territory. Given this Council’s well-known preoccupation with occupied, territories,. one would have
expected that in the last few years it would have found
a moment to rebuke Libya-ever so mildly-for threatening international peace. One would not expect the
Council to go so far as to express concern, or God
forbid, to deplore, let alone condemn, Arab acts of
belligerency, aggression, occupation, subversion and
intervention in the internal affairs of other countries.
56. But of course, Libya was a member of the Security Council in 1976 and 1977. Perhaps at the time of
Libya’s election to the Council its occupation of
parts of Chad constituted its special contribution to the
maintenance of international peace and security, as
expected of non-permanent members of the Council
by Article 23 of the Charter. By the’same token, permanent membership of the Council apparently accords
the right to occupy whole countries permanently, with
only a minimum of inconvenience.
57. This, then, is the Council’s record. Does it give
the Council the moral authority to sit in judgement on
the Supreme Court of Israel?

63. I have heard Mr. Blum say that the Council has
wasted so much time on a problem of three individuals. Actually, ours is not a problem of three individ.uals but is a problem of about one and a quarter million
Palestinians, hostages in the occupied territories-and
I stress the word “hostages”. Our problem is also one
of more than 3 million Palestinians in exile abroad.
It is not a problem of just three people. If it had been
a problem of three people, and of where and how to
live, we have enough space in the Arab world, and in
the world at large, in which to live and be better provided for, and in better living conditions, than in the
occupied territories, where inflation is the highest in
‘the whole world.
64. 1 have just remembered-and Mr. Blum’s words
about dedication to law and democracy and so on
brought it to mind-that my wife, while I was in the
Ramleh gaol, told me that in a demonstration of women
and schoolgirls in my town, asking for our return, the
Israeli soldiers started beating them on the legs with
their sticks, and told them the following-and I quote
what my wife told me: “Now there is no TV to take
pictures when we break your legs; there are no press
6
i

people to report to the world; and the Security Council and United Nations resolutions can ,in no way be
implemented as long as we are here.‘* I leave it to your
discretion.

ber-and before any decision had been rendered or
any session of the Supreme Court had taken place, told
us that our return was impossible. How could an
influential personality there judge that our return was
impossible before we had completed the proceedings
in the Tribunal and gone to the Supreme Court? ..

65. ‘There is an Arabic saying which goes like this:
“If the judge were your opponent, to whom should
you complain?” The judgein this case was the General
in Command of the West Bank--not the Supreme
Court, because the Supreme Court had bowed to the
military establishment in Israel. There is no primacy
of law and democracy in that part of the world.

71. In spite of the army establishment policy in the
occupied territories, of which all members of .the
Council are aware, and the maiming of the mayors,
I would remind Mr. Blum of this: the investigations
concerning the Mayors of Nablus and Ramallah came
up against a closed door, a deadlock; they got nowhere.
I suppose that that is dedication to law. Now, in spite
of the insistence of that army establishment on refusing to allow us back, we had hopes that the Supreme
Court, which is civilian, would decide in favour of our
return. The Supreme Court in Jerusalem held,‘two
sessions and adjourned to take a decision. It took five
weeks before the last session, that is the session of
the decision, was held. Five long weeks. I just want
members to imagine being in our place. During that
entire time, those five weeks, we were in Ramleh gaol
following the news from sunrise to midnight +very
day. To us, as it would be to anybody else, that could
only be psychological torture, the most difficult kind
that one can imagine.

66. Now, because the judge is our opponent, we have
come back to this Council as,,symbols of our Palestinian people being daily harassed in the occupied
territories.
67. On 14 October, we voluntarily gave ourselves up
and went very willingly to gaol-from United Nations
Plaza to gaol; from the Sheraton to gaol; from the
Hilton to gaol-in the hope that it would be the first
step towards our return to our families and towns.
Our hope was based on the following reasons: first,
the Security Council had adopted two resolutions in
favour of our return; secondly, the investigations of
those responsible for the Hebron military operation
on 2 May last had proved that we were not directly
or indirectly connected with that operation-as the
Council knows, we were expelled only five hours after
that operation, which means that our expulsion was
the result of that particular operation; thirdly, world
public opinion, heads of State, heads of political
parties, jurists, parliamentarians and others also had
called for our return; fourthly, the ‘Supreme Court,
which, as 1 said at the outset, had bowed to the military establishment, had issued two rulings stating that
our expulsion was illegally carried out, and kept the
door open for us to appeal.

72. The decision finally came on 3 December, not
4 December. The Supreme Court, which according to
Israeli law has no authority to reverse a decision of
the Advisory Military Tribunal, decided that the steps
that had been taken were legal. They had nothing to
say against the decision to expel us. Most important
of all was that the Supreme Court unanimously referred the final decision to the Prime Minister of Israel,
asking him to reconsider our case, which according to
the court ruling had become a political issue, not a
legal one. On 4 December all the main editorials in the
Israeli press analysed the court ruling. I want to give
the Council an example. The Dean of the Faculty of
Law in Tel Aviv University commented that the
Supreme Court ruling meant that our expulsion was
illegal and that we must be allowed to return home at
least for a probationary period. He pointed out that
the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 applied only
to people under occupation, not to people whose
countries had bilateral relations, and that consequently
our expulsion was illegal.

68. For the foregoing reasons, it seemed that our
return to continue our mission for a just peace would
be realized at last, after our five-month world tour to
explain our position,
69. On 15 and 16 October, the Israeli Advisory Military Tribunal held two lengthy sessions in the Jordan
River Bridge building, which served as our gaol.
70. Now, there is one thing 1 want to remind the
Council of, and I want Mr. Waldheim to know about
it, because in his report he was well informed: the
three members of the Tribunal were appointed by
Ben Eleazar, who is the Commander of the West
Bank. They were selected and appointed by him.
General Ben Eleazar had previously threatened to
leave the Israeli army if we were allowed back. Who
in his right senses believes that General Ben Eleazar
would assign judges who would take a just decision
and bring about his resignation? Another indication
is that one of the General’s aides, on the first day of
the first session of the Tribunal-that was 15 Octo-

73. In June, the Prime Minister of Israel informed
Mr. Waldheim that our case was not in his hands but
in the hands of the Supreme Court. He added that
he would abide by the Court’s ruling. When the case
was at last referred to him by the Court and left for
him to decide, he broke his word to Mr. Waldheim.
He tuned a deaf ear to the two Security Council resolutions, to world public opinion, to a great majority
of peace-loving Israelis and even to the law experts
inside Israel itself, including the three judges of the
Court. In front of visiting parliamentarians, the Prime
Minister of Israel declared that he-and I stress he,
7

78. I should like to add a final word: that, forus, it
would be a great honour, on behalf of the Palestinian
people, to be the first Palestinian expellees to return
home because of one of the many United Nations
resolutions.

not the Court-had decided to exuel us -because we
constituted ‘*a danger to the Arabs and the Jewish
public”. In other words, he wanted to deceive the distinguished visitors into believing that we were dangerous not only to our families and the people who
elected us but to that considerable number of peaceloving people in Israel who supported our cause
throughout the 52 days of our imprisonment. The
Prime Minister’s statements were literally incredible.
,His Minister of Justice denied that: we had been
expelled as a result of the Hebron operation. Why,
then, did our expulsion take place a few hours after
that operation?

.

79. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr.‘Fahd
Qawasma, to whom theCouncil,has extended an invitation under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make’his statement.
80. Mr. QAWASMA: Once again we are here
before this august body to plead our case. In May
[2223rd meeting], as may be recalled, my colleague
and I addressed the Security Council immediately
after our expulsion from our homeland and separation from our families, our children and the people
who had elected us mayors. On that occasion, the
Council adopted two resolutions, 468 (1980).and 469
(1980). In both resolutions the Council requested
Israel to allow our return and to facilitate our resumption of our responsibilities as mayors. Israel responded
to these resolutions by total rejection.

74. Equipped with the Council’s resolutions and the
support of the world, we chose to go to gaol and to
undertake a lo-day hunger strike. Our actions show
that we are lovers of our land and of our people. Our
right of return is unquestionable. We preferred to be in
the occupied territories sharing the sufferings of our
people than to be outside with less tension in our minds
and lives. And here I just want to relate something
that Saad Haddad told us in south Lebanon, in the
village to which we were re-expelled. He said, “Could
you please tell Arafat to leave Lebanon together with
his Palestinians?** And we told him this-and the
Israeli officers were there, sitting in the room: “Please
ask your Israeli friends to allow us to go back to gaol,
not to our homes.” If we did not believe in ajust peace
and in working for it, we would have chosen the easier
way: to stay outside. If we did not believe that the
Organization and the Security Council would stand
on the side of justice, we would not have come here.

81. Our love for Palestine, our love for our families
and for our people prompted us to resort to every
possible method which would facilitate our return.
Hence, we-agreed to appear before the Israeli courts
despite our strong conviction that the Israeli courts
possess no authority or jurisdiction over us.
82. In that context, I should like to -point out that
the jurisdiction that the Israeli High Court of Justice
has is limited only to examining whether or not the
legal procedures of the lower courts were followed
during the course of their decision-making. In other
words, the Israeli High Court of Justice does not deal
with the substance of cases. Accordingly, the role of
the High Court of Justice in handling our case was
only to ensure that legal procedures were applied and
that is precisely why that High Court of Justice requested the military authorities to allow our return
and our appearance before the military review board.

75. Let us, and for the first time, give full credibility
to this vehicle of peace by having one of the Member
States, Israel, implement two Security Council resolutions and return three persons-two elected mayors
and one Sharia judge-to their homes and towns.
Nobody in the world believes that three individuals
endanger the security of the State of Israel and its
army. Could the two of us, even together with the
Sharia judge-he is very old, anyway, to endanger
anybody’s life-endanger the security of Israel and its
army? As the Council is aware, the chiefs of staff of
the Israeli army have all the time been saying that their
army has a long arm and that it can reach any part
of the Middle East or.-.-_.the world.-.

83. Our expulsion on 3 May was based, according
to the Israeli military authorities; on the defence regulations of 1945 of the British Mandate. Those regulations were imposed by a colonialist Power and are at
best arbitrary.

76. If in Begin’s mind there had been any intention
of making peace, he would have let us stay. In expelling
us the Prime Minister invited, as was evidenced at
once, the way of violence and confrontation. The
Council has heard what happened in the occupied
territories right after our expulsion.

84. On 14 October, we entered the occupied territories. The Israeli occupation authorities detained us
in a little room. near the Jordan River. There they conducted hearingsby the military review board. Uniquely, that military advisory board was appointed by
Mr. Benjamin Eleazar, the Israeli Commander of the
West Bank who had been responsible for our initial
expulsion.

77. We stand with the Council for implementation
of the resolutions and for establishing the credibility
of the United Nations at a time when all of mankind
would Iike to see the Organization grow and its resolutions respected.

85. The review board held two secret sessions with
us. Each session lasted.12 consecutive hours. At those
8

sessions the only witness who testified-and
he testified against us-was Mr. Egal Karmoon, the Assistant to the Israeli Military Commander,
Mr. Eleazar.
Again, to note yet another irony, Mr.+ Karmoon was
the very same person who on 3 May had come to my
home in Al-Khalil
and lied to me in saying that the
Israeli ‘Military Commander wanted to see me. He lied,
for the Military Commander did not want to see me,
nor was I taken to see the Military Commander.
In
fact, what happened was that he abducted me and my
colleagues, put us in a helicopter and then threw us
across the border into Lebanon. I called the attention
of the President of the Israeli military review board
to that fact, and I asked him how he could accept the
testimony of someone who had already proved that
he was a liar. The Committee official’s reply to me
was that Mr. Karmoon had lied to me upon instructions from the Military Commander. May I ask if we
can expect justice from a system that includes telling
lies upon instructions as part of its policy?

“No
except
law”.
Paragraph

person shall be’ detained or imprisoned
in accordance with the provisions of the

’
-

9 reads:

“(i) No Jordanian
tory of the Kingdom;

shall be exiled from the terri-

“(ii) No Jordanian shall be prevented from residing anywhere, or shall be obliged to reside
in any specified place except in the circumstances
prescribed by law”.
- Thirdly, expulsion violates article 49 ofthe fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949.
- Fourthly,
rity Council.

it violates the resolutions

of the Secu-

91. In the second place, our expulsion in May was
unjustifiable.
The Israeli authorities expelled us five
hours after a military operation had -occurred, thus
giving the impression that our expulsion was related
to that military operation. However, as is well known
to everyone now, we did not have any connection with
that military operation-either
directly or indirectly.
In fact, the confessions of those who conducted -the
military operation themselvesand who were later
apprehended-verify
the fact that there was no direct
relevance.

86. Moreover, the Israeli authorities used as another
reason for our second expulsion the statements we
made outside, after our expulsion, and here at the
Council in May.
87. Allow me to ask the Council if it ‘has ever heard
of anyone who has been expelled unjustly turning to
others and praising the system of justice that illegally
expelled him? Naturally our statements to the Council
did not contain words of praise for the system that
illegally expelled us. And to use OUF statements as
additional evidence against us is only additional evidence of the distorted system of justice there.

92.

I should like to make the following

remarks.

93. First, the High Court of Justice upheld, by a
majority of 2 to 1, the decision of the military review
board to expel us. Of the three court authorities, the
Deputy President of the High Court dissented, declaring that the provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention are applicable in the occupied territories.

88. On 20 October, the review board made its decision to expel us again. The Military Commander gave
his signature of approval to that decision. Left with
the only means of protesting that illegal decision, our
persons, we started a hunger strike, which lasted
10 days. Our lawyer, meanwhile, appealed the decision to the Israeli High Court of Justice. During our
hunger strike we were transferred to the infamous
Ramleh. prison, where we were detained for another
42 days, until early December.

94. Secondly, the High Court of Justice recommended to the executive authorities
of Israel that
they review the decision to expel us, because the High
Court was convinced that the decision to expel us was
a political decision and not a legal one. However, in
spite of the recommendation
of the High Court,
r Mr. Menachem Begin, the Prime Minister of Israel,
persisted in his defiance of the resolutions of the Security Council, of international
legality, of the norms of
civilized behaviour, of Palestinian and Arab public
opinion both inside and outside Palestine, of a large
segment of Israeli public opinion, and of world public
opinion at large. In defiance of everything, Mr. Begin
certified our fate by expelling us.

89. Our lawyer based our appeal to the Israeli High
Court on the following arguments.
90. In the first place, expulsion of civilian population
from the occupied territories is totally illegal because:
- First, it violates the Jordanian law which was
in effect at the time when Israeli occupation of the
territories began.
”
,

95. .On every occasion, Israeli representatives claim
that Israel is a democratic society and that it upholds
the law. Mr. Blum has just said that. But our own
experience-our
tragic experience that this Council
has followed with us from its very beginning-proves
the fallacy of those Israeli claims. If there were any

- Secondly, it violates the Jordanian Constitution,
which prohibits the expulsion of any civilian from his
country. Chapter II of-the Constitution of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan is entitled “Rights and Duties
of Jordanians”;
its paragraph 8 reads:
9

,

see them behind the closed doors of ‘military occupation? What little information
the information
media
have been able to smuggle out is but a small indication
of what goes on. And now the international
media are
also under siege by the Israeli authorities.

validity to the claims of the Israelis, I would not be
here before the .Council; I would be in Al-Khalil
attending to my duties there and serving the people
who elected me.
96. If the Israeli authorities can commit all these
atrocities against two elected mayors, and can do this
in full view of the world; can you imagine how Israel
deals with the hundreds and thousands of our people
who are not elected mayors?

98. One can rent a room in a hotel, buy an airplane
ticket, rent a car or a house; but one cannot rent a
homeland. I am a Palestinian. My homeland is Palestine. If I am made a refugee and I cannot go back to
Palestine, where shall I go?

97. We were expelled, then gaoled and then expelled
again. When we were in gaol and they came to expel
us again, we asked them to keep us in gaol and not to
expel us again; but they refused. And they did this
while the whole world looked on. Our people in occupied Palestine are shot at in the streets of their towns
and villages, are beaten in their schools and on their
farms. Can you imagine-can
you even venture a guess
about-the
way the Israelis behave when no one can

The meeting

rose at 1.20p.m.‘

NOTE
I United

Nations,

Treury

Series,

vol.

75, p. 287.

:

_
iitho

in United

;
Nations,

New York

00300

83-61462-October

1984-2,050

_
