S/PV.8567

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8567th meeting

Thursday, 27 June 2019, 10.45 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Matjila
Ms. Pierce/Mr. Power
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-19759 (E)
*1919759*

S/PV.8567

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.45 a.m.

is no easy solution for Idlib. But the only way to find
one is for hostilities to stop and for key stakeholders to
engage in a cooperative approach towards countering
terrorism, an approach that safeguards the protection
of civilians.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, to participate in this meeting.
Mr. Pedersen is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Pedersen.
Mr. Pedersen: Let me start with the very worrisome
situation in and around the Idlib de-escalation zone.
Regrettably, the fighting continues, with reports of air
strikes, shelling, rockets and mortar attacks that all too
often involve the indiscriminate use of force. Civilians
continue to be killed, and hundreds of thousands have
been displaced. Front lines have not shifted, at least
not significantly.
The Security Council-designated terrorist group
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham is a significant presence within
the de-escalation zone. Its attacks must cease. All
due protection must be afforded to the up to 3 million
civilians in Idlib, many of whom fled there from earlier
fighting, and to civilians in the surrounding areas as
well. As the Secretary-General said last week, even
in the fight against terrorism, there needs to be full
compliance with international human rights law and
humanitarian law. Strikes against civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including de-conflicted health facilities
and humanitarian workers, are absolutely unacceptable.
They must cease without delay.
Reports of close military exchanges between the
Syrian Government and Turkish observation posts
are also of grave concern. They remind us that Idlib
is not just a humanitarian issue — or is it an issue that
is exclusively about Syria — rather, it is a potential
powder keg of regional escalation. Undoubtedly, there
2/20

27/06/2019

Both Turkey, which I visited earlier in the month,
and the Russian Federation, which I will visit next
week, have reassured me that they remain committed
to the September 2018 memorandum of understanding
and have set up a working group. But we must see that
assurance reflected on the ground. I strongly reiterate
the Secretary-General’s appeal to Russia and Turkey
to stabilize the situation without delay. We must in
fact pursue a nationwide ceasefire, as envisaged in
resolution 2254 (2015).
We see the importance of that when we see unrest
across Syria. There are exchanges of fire and fatalities
in northern rural Aleppo and continued signs of
instability in the south-west. The fate of the north-east
remains unresolved, which demands a solution. There
are immense humanitarian and protection needs across
the country, and outside too. There is grinding poverty,
exacerbated by commodity shortages and rising
prices in many parts of Syria. We have seen a terrible
spate of fires ravaging wheat fields and jeopardizing
Syria’s food security. The internally displaced are
acutely vulnerable.
In addition to Idlib, two grave humanitarian
situations, in Rukban and Al-Hol, remain at the top of
our agenda. Emergency Relief Coordinator Lowcock
briefed the Council on this two days ago (see S/PV.8561).
Today, my Senior Humanitarian Adviser, Ms. Najat
Rochdi, urged the Syria Humanitarian Task Force, here
in Geneva, to support the Organization’s efforts for
humanitarian access, support the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure and find durable solutions.
The current escalation and unrest also send exactly the
wrong signal to Syrian refugees. It reinforces only their
doubts about the security conditions, conscription and
livelihoods in Syria.
We must stabilize the situation in Idlib. If that
is achieved, we must then avoid the risk of a no-war/
no-peace scenario — with front lines mostly frozen
but periodic conflict and unrest lingering and five
international armies in perpetual risk of confrontation;
with the continual violation of Syria’s sovereignty,
territorial integrity and independence; with internally
displaced persons and refugees still not returning, at
19-19759

27/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

least not in any critical mass; with the tragedy of the
detained, abducted and missing still unresolved; with a
strengthened insurgency of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, with terrorist groups and foreign fighters
still regrouping and posing a challenge; and still no
political solution.
We all agree that there is no military solution to
this conflict. I have sought to revive a Syrian-led and
-owned political process based on resolution 2254
(2015). An immediate priority has been to launch a
credible, balanced and inclusive Syrian-led and -owned
United Nations-facilitated constitutional committee
that fully respects Syria’s sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, if at all possible. That has
been a key item in my sustained dialogue with the two
parties — the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
and the opposition Syrian Negotiation Commission. I
have also ensured the continued support for a common
way forward among the Sochi conveners and others,
including the small group, which I saw in Paris earlier
this week. The Secretary-General himself discussed
the issue with the Russian leadership during his recent
trip to Saint Petersburg.
I believe the path to concluding the constitutional
committee’s composition and the rules of procedure
may now be open. In my upcoming engagements, I
look forward to testing directly whether a formula
that I have been careful to ensure has the buy-in of
all can advance the establishment of the committee.
I appreciate recent engagement by senior Russian
officials to support the efforts of the United Nations.
I look forward to consultations with the Government
in Damascus in the near future and with the leadership
of the Syrian Negotiation Commission. It is time to
finalize outstanding issues to enable the United Nations
to facilitate the work of the constitutional committee
in Geneva. The constitutional committee can indeed
open doors, but it will not alone solve the conflict or the
challenges facing Syria. That can come about only if we
begin to see real trust and confidence developing via
tangible and reciprocal steps, including on the ground.
I strongly believe that progress on detainees,
abductees and missing persons, if done in a meaningful
way and at a meaningful scale, could make a large
impact. I have prioritized action on the unilateral
release of women, children, the sick and elderly.
Improving access to information and communication
is another step. The Government and the opposition
should compile and consolidate lists of individuals

S/PV. 8567

they hold, have information on or seek. Deputy Special
Envoy Khawla Matar and I will continue to engage in
earnest on this very difficult but critical file. In parallel,
we will also continue to press Russia, Turkey and
Iran — countries participating with us in the working
group on this issue — to exert the efforts needed to
try to achieve more concrete results on this file. My
invitation for the working group to hold its next meeting
in Geneva stands.
In truth, a series of steps will be needed if a cycle
of trust and confidence is to develop. That has been
impressed upon me by Syrians from many walks of
life. I have met with many civil society actors and
networks recently, including through the Civil Society
Support Room. All of the Syrians, from both inside and
outside and irrespective of their political orientations
or backgrounds, are eager — even desperate — for a
political solution. But it strikes me that they do not
really believe that a real process that could lead to a
solution is likely.
This week, I also engaged with the Syrian Women’s
Advisory Board, which met in Geneva to deepen its
understanding of how constitutional processes can
protect and advance women’s rights. They and many
others stress the critical importance of a constitutional
committee made up of at least 30 per cent women. But
they too emphasized their lack of faith that Syrians,
men and women, have in the political process.
This is why a political process must be about more
than just meeting in Geneva. It must include concrete
actions on the ground to inspire trust and confidence.
I will therefore continue to intensively consult a wider
spectrum of Syrians on what they see as practical and
constructive entry points for trust-building actions.
But ultimately, of course, it falls upon the parties
to take those actions. Unblocking the impasse will
be difficult. There is much mistrust. Positions are
entrenched. But I believe that international discussions
and cooperation can help Syrians overcome these
obstacles. That is not to undermine the Syrian-led and
-owned nature of the process. It is simply a recognition
of the extent of international involvement in Syria and
the centrality of international support for any viable
future for the country. Real steps on the ground could
and should see national actions too. That would build
trust and confidence among Syrians and between Syria
and the international community.

19-197593/20

S/PV.8567

The situation in the Middle East

At present, no currently active international
grouping brings together all key international players,
whose support can guarantee concrete and reciprocal
steps across all dimensions. I believe my efforts would
be helped by bringing together the will embodied in
the Astana format, the small group format and the
permanent membership of the Council. That is why I
continue to work on inviting a group of key players to
a common forum to support a Syrian-led and -owned
process in Geneva in a very practical way.
Tomorrow, at the Group of 20 Summit, world
leaders will have many items on their agenda. The
Secretary-General and I have urged that Syria should
be high among them. We hope that Russia and Turkey
can work at the highest level to stabilize the situation
in Idlib. We also hope that Russia and the United States
can build on recent talks and deepen their dialogue,
because cooperation between them will be a key element
for international cooperation on Syria. Finally, we hope
that cooperation can be built in a way that all other key
players are involved in supporting a Syrian-led and
-owned process facilitated by the United Nations in the
discharge of its Council mandate.
Since the beginning of my tenure, the Council has
offered its full support for my mission, and I have greatly
appreciated that. Six months into the job, I appreciate
just how complex and difficult it is, but I also see the
possibilities to chart a path out of this conflict.
It is now time for the Idlib situation to be stabilized
and a nationwide ceasefire pursued. It is in fact past
time to launch a constitutional committee. It is also
time to try to develop a climate of confidence-building
measures, and we clearly need renewed international
support. These are the kinds of actions that would signal
that we are at least moving along a political path that
is in keeping with resolution 2254 (2015) — through a
constitutional committee unfolding in a safe, calm and
neutral environment, paving the way for free and fair
United Nations-supervised elections, as envisaged in
the resolution, and a lasting political settlement.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Pedersen for his briefing.
4/20

27/06/2019

The United Nations-led political process in Geneva
is the only legitimate and internationally recognized
forum to create a lasting, inclusive and peaceful
political solution to the conflict in Syria. Three
and a half years ago, in resolution 2254 (2015), the
Security Council established a blueprint for a peaceful
political transition: a new constitution, elections and a
nationwide ceasefire. The United States will not accept
any attempt by the Al-Assad regime and its allies to
use military means in Idlib, or elsewhere, to undercut,
circumvent or further delay Special Envoy Pedersen’s
efforts aimed at maintaining the political process.
Nor can we, the members of the Security Council,
afford any further delays by the regime to implement
resolution 2254 (2015). The regime’s escalation of
attacks on civilian areas, facilities and humanitarian
actors, including yesterday’s attack on an ambulance
carrying White Helmet volunteers, shows that the
Al-Assad regime still believes force will make a
solution to the conflict attainable, as Damascus actively
seeks to avoid negotiating a political solution with
representatives of the Syrian opposition.
Time and again Syria and Russia have given
assurances to uphold ceasefires, adhere to reconciliation
agreements and advance the political process. However,
those assurances have repeatedly been broken and
disregarded. The lack of a political solution continues
to put civilian lives at risk.
The Council must acknowledge that the Astana
group’s efforts to advance the political process have
failed. Seventeen months after the launch of negotiations
at Sochi on forming a constitutional committee, it is
time to admit that not only has progress stalled, it is
likely to remain out of reach for some time, because
that is where the regime wants it to be — out of reach.
The time has come for the Council to encourage Special
Envoy Pedersen to try other routes to achieving the
political solution laid out in resolution 2254 (2015),
by focusing on preparing for nationwide elections,
with the participation of an estimated 5 million Syrian
refugees and observed by the United Nations, by
securing the release of detainees and by establishing a
nationwide ceasefire.
The fate of the United Nations political process,
resolution 2254 (2015) and the lives of millions of
Syrian civilians depend on whether or not the regime
and Russia will work with Turkey to stop further
attacks in north-west Syria and immediately return to
19-19759

27/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the ceasefire lines agreed in the 2018 Sochi agreement.
Idlib must not become another Aleppo, and the United
States believes that progress on the political front and a
genuine de-escalation is still possible, but it requires the
Al-Assad regime to recognize that a healthy political
system must accommodate more than one view.
At this stage we see two paths for Idlib. The first
path is bloody and sadly familiar. The continued vain
quest for a military solution is undermining both
security and humanitarian conditions, with the United
Nations once again struggling to respond to the needs
of innocent civilians. Thousands — perhaps hundreds
of thousands — of people will flee Idlib and turn
north to Turkey, or west into the Mediterranean, jumpstarting a second migration crisis that destabilizes the
wider region.
The second path is that Idlib and its 3 million
civilian residents are protected by a permanent ceasefire
agreed between the parties on the ground and endorsed
by the unanimous support of the Security Council.
Such a cessation of violence would create momentum
and a positive political environment in which to launch
a political process.
The United States believes that the reinvigoration
of the political process in Syria can and should start
with a verifiable ceasefire in Idlib and northern
Hama. Groups on the ground, including Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham, Russia and the Al-Assad regime must
immediately cease military operations and return to the
original lines of the 2018 Sochi ceasefire agreement.
Not one more shot should be fired, no more barrel
bombs should be dropped and no more air strikes
should be launched. Turkey should be entrusted to
remove terrorist forces from the region, consistent with
the 2018 Sochi agreement, and the final status of Idlib
should be negotiated between the parties, mediated by
the United Nations, as part of the political process in
line with resolution 2254 (2015) once a ceasefire is in
place. In the meantime, as the United Nations lets Syria
political-track negotiations continue, the people of Idlib
would administer themselves and be granted access
to humanitarian aid deliveries, as enumerated under
resolution 2449 (2018).
The United States recognizes that there is no path
forward without the cooperation of Russia and the
Al-Assad regime. Therefore, the United States calls
upon Russia to de-escalate its military operations, press
the regime to do the same and engage with the United

S/PV. 8567

States in a step-by-step process to implement resolution
2254 (2015) that will result in the final stabilization of
Idlib and Syria writ large. Until the Al-Assad regime
and Russia take concrete steps towards a full, immediate
and verifiable de-escalation in Idlib, the United States
will continue to apply diplomatic and economic pressure
through all available means to isolate the regime and its
allies. Our preference is to work together on a step-bystep approach. But make no mistake: the United States
will seek any and every opportunity to ratchet up our
pressure on the regime and its supporters if political
progress on the humanitarian and political tracks
continues to stall. Our resolve is clear and unwavering.
I planned to end my remarks at this point, but I
would like to take just a moment to react to the statement
of the speaker who addressed the Council under rule
37 on 25 June (see S/PV.8561). It is a privilege to
address the Security Council — for each of us — and
it always should be treated as such. The disrespect
bordering on contempt that he showed the Council is
unacceptable and begs a response. First, procedurally,
the representative in question consistently shows a
lack of respect by abusing our time, exceeding the five
minutes recommended by presidential note S/2017/507
every time he speaks, by 10 or 20 or more minutes.
Two days ago, he tried to assert a procedural position,
demonstrating a lack of knowledge about Council
rules, when our colleague from the United Kingdom
made a point of order regarding his outrageous and
dangerous claims.
Beyond the procedural points, he tried to assert
that humanitarian workers were somehow complicit
in terrorism, that civilians in areas where terrorists
are present are not entitled to humanitarian assistance
or medical care, and that the schools and hospitals in
those areas are by extension legitimate military targets,
which they clearly are not. It is outrageous that this
representative, whose Government has repeatedly
used chemical weapons on its own civilians, prevents
humanitarian assistance from reaching its needy
and violates international norms and international
law by intentionally targeting hospitals, schools and
ambulances, would seek to lecture the Security Council
on the Geneva Conventions, applications of Security
Council resolutions or the rule of law.
Moreover, his vilification of David Lillie and the
cannot go unanswered by the United States or the
Security Council. A humanitarian who has risked his
life over and over again to help the needy on the basis

19-197595/20

S/PV.8567

The situation in the Middle East

of humanitarian principle does not deserve to have a
diplomat from a region like this one, who has sat out the
trauma of his own country’s civil war in the comfort of
New York, or for that matter anyone, question his bona
fides. The allegation that the Syrian American Medical
Society is a branch of the United States Government
simply because the United States is one of many
countries contributing funds to the organization is both
offensive and ludicrous. The United States funds over
20 per cent of the cost of this Organization. That does
not make the Secretary-General an employee of the
United States Government, or the Security Council a
United States Government body, any more than funding
from the United States Government makes the Syrian
American Medical Society an entity of the United
States Government, or Mr. Lillie an employee of the
United States Government. That was a shameful attack
on a humanitarian, particularly in a meeting where
the Syrian representative had no problem accepting
a humanitarian briefing from a Russian general in
military fatigues who has been helping prosecute
the war.
Finally, his contention that a non-Syrian has no
right to brief on Syria would disqualify most briefers
whom the Security Council has heard since its founding.
The United States cannot let this twisted logic going
unanswered. We reject the Syrian representative’s
25 June statement during the Syria humanitarian
briefing and urge other Council members to do so as
well. It is an affront to this organ and the rules-based
international order.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy and his team. What they do remains absolutely
vital, however hard pounding it is on the ground.
I will start, if I may, with Idlib, where the Special
Envoy started. We had a big debate about this earlier
in the week (see S/PV.8561), so I will not rehearse all
those points. But I think the fact that the indiscriminate
use of force continues ought to worry everybody on the
Security Council.
There are violations of the Geneva Conventions
and international humanitarian law going on. I asked
a number of questions. Those questions remain
unanswered. I looked at the Russian general’s statement.
The questions are still unanswered, so I will return to
them at the next humanitarian briefing.
However, at this particular moment, I want echo
what the Special Envoy said in his appeal for all parties
6/20

27/06/2019

to stabilize the situation and implement resolution 2254
(2015), including the nationwide ceasefire. We need
to keep that goal right at the forefront of our minds.
I also take this opportunity to echo the United States
representative with regard to what we heard from the
Syrian representative in the meeting on Idlib (see
S/PV.8553). We have discussed the length of statements
and the working methods here in the Council. This is
therefore not the time to rehearse that. I think, however,
that it does mean that we need another discussion
about it.
I want to pick up on the point about attacking
humanitarian workers. Their jobs are dangerous
enough, and they do those jobs because recognized
institutional services or a country’s own services are
unable or unwilling to help. Therefore, as I said in the
previous meeting, they deserve our protection, as well
as our thanks.
Turning to the political process, I hope that the
Special Envoy knows that he has the United Kingdom’s
full support. We are very interested in the contact group
being able to meet. I think that it is a necessary first step
towards trying to make faster progress on resolution
2254 (2015). I therefore hope that all the people whom
the Special Envoy is trying to bring together would
approach that in the spirit of constructiveness and good
faith. We support his efforts in the United Nations-led
Geneva process. It is the only the legitimate forum. We
welcome the holding of the meeting in Geneva. It is
necessary but not sufficient. As he said, we also need
progress on the ground. I hope that the Group of 20 will
be able to discuss it and find a way forward.
None of that is to detract from the fact that we
support the political process being Syrian-owned
and Syrian-led, with United Nations facilitation. The
Special Envoy is absolutely right to say that progress
cannot be made without that sort of facilitation. I believe
that there is still is a very big question about the Syrian
Government’s commitment to the political process,
as, month after month, we see the prevarications with
regard to the constitutional committee continue. If
progress cannot be made, then I really do agree with
the United States representative and would encourage
the Special Envoy — who alluded to this himself — to
try other routes leading towards achieving the political
solution set out in resolution 2254 (2015). For good
reason, we have all become very focused on the
constitutional committee, but the bigger prize is
resolution 2254 (2015), which includes preparing for
19-19759

27/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

nationwide elections observed by the United Nations,
securing the release of detainees and establishing the
nationwide ceasefire.
I note that, unless there is progress on the ground
that is meaningful to ordinary citizens, a political
process will not prosper. That means the Syrian
Government stopping the repression throughout the
country — in former opposition areas that it now
controls. It means stopping arbitrary detention,
conscription and discrimination.
We understand that, only last week, the Syrian
authorities issued death certificates for more than 700
Syrians who died in detention in Hamah, and, according
to reports from Syrians for Truth and Justice, families
have not received the bodies of their loved ones, nor
have they received information about the circumstances
of their deaths or the location of their burials. That is
therefore a serious hindrance for the people of Syria to
being able to have confidence in their own future.
In addition, there is a real sense that the Syrian
authorities are holding their own people to ransom. It
also affects and impacts on conditions for the return of
refugees and fails to create the conditions required for
a stable economy so that Syria eventually can become
a normal country once again. It fails to give people
the chance to engage in the decisions that govern their
lives, and it fails to give them the right to live those
lives free of violence and fear.
Once again, let me conclude by appealing to the
Syrian authorities to come to the table and engage more
speedily and positively with the Special Envoy.

S/PV. 8567

of 3 million people, including 1 million children, are
at stake.
The particularly poignant testimony of the
representative of the Syrian American Medical
Society on Tuesday (see S/PV.8561), reminded us that
humanitarian and medical staff and infrastructure
continue to be targeted. We condemn in the strongest
terms the most recent deliberate attack on an ambulance
yesterday in Al-Bara, which killed two humanitarian
personnel from the White Helmets, in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law. In such
tragic circumstances, it is particularly odious that the
regime claims that humanitarian workers are working
in collusion with terrorist organizations, while they
carry out their work at such a high risk when far too
often it is at the cost of their own lives.
I also underscore the particular responsibility of
Russia, whose air support is necessary to the regime’s
pursuit of its offensive. Combating terrorism is not the
only justification for that offensive, which primarily
affects the civilian population and infrastructure.
The fight against those terrorist groups listed by the
Security Council remains a priority for France, but
it cannot be carried out in violation of international
humanitarian law.
We therefore reiterate our call on Russia to reaffirm
its commitment to the ceasefire and put pressure on the
regime without further delay to stop the fighting, in
particular with a view to enabling the establishment of
a nationwide ceasefire. That is imperative in order for
the political process to move forward smoothly.

I will stress today the need to silence the weapons
in Syria permanently and without delay so as to enable
us to move towards a credible political process.

In the north-east, we must pursue our efforts to
completely and permanently eradicate the threat of
Da’esh and stabilize the region. That was the message
conveyed unanimously by the political directors of the
international coalition against Da’esh who met in Paris
on 25 June. To that end, France has also decided to
allocate an additional €50 million for Syria, which will
be mainly dedicated to the north-east.

Our number-one priority must be to address Idlib,
where the pursuit of the regime and its allies’ offensive
is dangerously undermining the Special Envoy’s efforts
to revive the political process. That is the position
that was reiterated by the 28 States members of the
European Union in their statement on Idlib issued
today. In the face of recent tragedies taking place in the
north-western part of Syria, we must spare no effort to
prevent Idlib from becoming a new Aleppo. The lives

In that regard, I recall the urgent need to make
progress on the political front in order to forge
a meaningful prospect for achieving peace and
reconciliation. Our shared responsibility is to support
the Special Envoy in advancing all aspects of resolution
2254 (2015). The Special Envoy enjoys our full
support in bringing together the various international
stakeholders around the same table, which, in our view,
is a necessary condition for moving forward. He also

Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his clear and precise
briefing on the issues and challenges of his mediation
efforts. I reiterate France’s full support to him.

19-197597/20

S/PV.8567

The situation in the Middle East

has our full support for quickly finalizing a credible
and balanced constitutional package that addresses the
composition and procedural rules of the constitutional
committee. However, we regret that no progress has been
made in that regard. It is clear who remains responsible
for that. The Syrian regime refuses every compromise
and is stepping up delaying tactics to prevent that
first opportunity for dialogue from succeeding. It is
incumbent on the Special Envoy to tell us frankly when
he believes that he has exhausted all possible ways to
achieve an agreement on the committee. If the regime
maintains its opposition, it will be time for the Council
to draw the necessary conclusions and to consider other
ways to make progress.
In
this
respect,
the
establishment
of
confidence-building measures conducive to the creation
of a safe and neutral environment is vital. This will
require, inter alia, progress on the issue of detainees
and missing persons, United Nations access to refugees
and displaced persons who are returning home, and
commitments by the regime to the safety of individuals
and the return of their properties.
Lastly, I would like to record the importance of
the subject of elections with a view to the upcoming
polling. We must begin to reflect, based on resolution
2254 (2015), on the conditions necessary to ensure that
the elections are free and fair; that all Syrians, including
displaced persons and refugees, can participate; and
that the United Nations will be involved in supervising
the process. The Special Envoy here again has our full
support to make headway in this respect.
To resolve the Syrian tragedy, the Syrians need to
be given the chance to freely express their views once
again about the future of their country.
As we all know, only a political solution based
on resolution 2254 (2015) will allow for Syria to be
stabilized once and for all, for the lasting eradication
of hotbeds of terrorism and for the return of refugees
in safe and dignified conditions. France will continue
its mobilization to that end during the upcoming
international meetings, which we hope will allow for
progress to be made.
We once again call on Russia, which has particular
responsibility in this area, to bring pressure to
bear on the regime to restore the ceasefire and to
obtain commitments from it for the relaunch of a
comprehensive political process. Without credible
political progress, our position on reconstruction,
8/20

27/06/2019

sanctions and normalization, which is also the position
of the European Union, will remain unchanged.
It would be a serious error of judgment but also
a serious political failure to consider that the Syrian
tragedy is behind us. Faced with the new, incipient
tragedy in Idlib, based on a scenario that we have seen
time and again, no one will be able to say that they have
been caught off guard. But it would be another error of
judgment and another political error to think that the
path of peace is out of reach. We all convinced of the
opposite: that we can create the conditions to open up a
credible political process, build on our common ground
and once and for all bring peace to Syria. There is not
a minute to lose; it is this pressing appeal that I make
today on behalf of France.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I would like to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for
his briefing and commend him on his recent mediation
efforts. We support his continued efforts, under
resolution 2254 (2015), to facilitate a political solution
to the Syrian issue.
Today I wish to focus on three points about how to
promote the political process.
First, promoting the political process is the only way
forward to solve the Syrian problem. The establishment
of a representative constitutional committee that is
accepted by all parties is the most realistic channel for
the launch of a political process in Syria. In April, the
Syrian parties reached an understanding in the twelfth
round of the Astana talks on the decision-making
mechanisms of the constitutional committee and its
rules of procedure.
At the same time, in terms of the establishment
of the committee, there are a few outstanding issues.
China supports Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts in
this regard to continue mediation and maintain close
communication with all parties. We also support the
continued role of the Astana process.
Secondly, a sustainable political process requires a
secure and stable external environment. China supports
strengthened cooperation between Russia and Turkey
with the aim of continuing the implementation of their
memorandum of understanding on Idlib. The scourge
of terrorism poses a major threat to the political
process and could lead to irreversible consequences
for the process and the future of the country. The
international community should, in accordance with
19-19759

27/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the relevant Council resolutions and international law,
harmonize its standards and crack down resolutely on
all terrorist groups.
Thirdly, the future and destiny of Syria ultimately
lie in the hands of the Syrian people. In promoting
a political solution, we should abide by the Syrianled, Syrian-owned principle, and the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Syria must be
fully respected.
China is ready to work with the Security Council
to enhance our support for the efforts of the United
Nations to facilitate gradual progress in the Syrian
political process.
Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation would like to congratulate Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, on his detailed briefing on the political process
in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Côte d’Ivoire reiterates its deep commitment to
dialogue as the best way to settle disputes in general
and in the Syrian conflict in particular, as part of an
inclusive political process that enjoys the support of
the international community. We support all initiatives
aimed at creating the conditions for a fruitful dialogue
between the parties to the conflict with the aim of
restoring peace and stability in Syria and creating the
conditions for shared prosperity.
In this respect, my delegation welcomes the
holding on 16 and 17 May in Ankara of the meeting
of the joint working group on the situation in Idlib,
and it calls on the Astana guarantors to continue their
efforts to ensure that the parties to the conflict respect
the ceasefire. We welcome the decision by Moscow and
Ankara to meet on the margins of the upcoming Group
of Twenty summit on 28 and 29 June in Osaka to assess
their efforts to relaunch the political process.
Côte d’Ivoire is of the view that actions that aim
to give new momentum to the process of resolving the
crisis must be supported by measures to restore and
build confidence between the parties to the conflict.
Here it encourages the joint working group and the
Syrian parties to continue their cooperation in the
context of the process that allowed for the reciprocal
release of detainees in November 2018 and February
and April 2019.
The resumption of fighting in Idlib Governorate
and its grave consequences for an already disastrous

S/PV. 8567

humanitarian situation is a source of concern for Côte
d’Ivoire. It is undeniable that a lasting settlement of
the Syrian crisis will create the conditions necessary
to better address the disastrous humanitarian situation
and thereby help to provide relief for populations
in distress.
In this context, my delegation recalls that it is the
primary responsibility of the parties to the conflict
under international humanitarian law to create an
environment conducive to the safe, rapid, unimpeded
and sustainable delivery of humanitarian assistance,
including in Idlib Governorate.
To conclude, Côte d’Ivoire would like to reiterate
its full support for the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Geir Pedersen. It encourages him to
continue his tireless mediation efforts to achieve a
political solution to the Syrian conflict, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of resolution 2254 (2015).
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me thank
Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his comprehensive and
insightful briefing. I would like to assure him of our
full support.
As we heard two days ago from Under-SecretaryGeneral Mark Lowcock, the humanitarian situation in
Syria is unacceptable. The impact of the hostilities in
the north-west of the country is difficult to imagine.
Allow me here to echo the comments made by my
United States and United Kingdom colleagues on the
important role of humanitarian workers and to express
our appreciation to and thank them, as I did a few days
ago, for their tireless efforts on the ground in Syria.
We must prevent further military hostilities,
which have disastrous humanitarian consequences.
That is the only path towards a sustainable peace
agreement. The lives of 3 million civilians, including
children, are at stake. Once again, we call for ensuring
that the de-escalation zone in Idlib, as agreed in the
memorandum of understanding between Russia and
Turkey, is effectively restored and fully respected.
It must be emphasized that the political process
has continued to fail to gain traction. That includes the
establishment of the constitutional committee, which
is the first step towards a genuine political process
under United Nations supervision. Launching a lasting
political process should be of the utmost importance
and the Security Council should provide support to
that endeavour.

19-197599/20

S/PV.8567

The situation in the Middle East

We have an international framework to support the
intra-Syrian political process: resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
All necessary elements of the political process under
United Nations supervision are clearly indicated. The
resolution demands that all parties immediately cease
any attacks against civilian targets. It urges all Member
States to support efforts to achieve a ceasefire and
requests the United Nations to convene the parties to
engage in formal negotiations.
Let me underline that the success of that action
requires the full and constructive engagement of all
parties to the conflict. It can succeed only if the Syrian
authorities participate in the negotiations in good faith
and without preconditions. Sustainable peace in Syria
can be guaranteed only by an intra-Syrian framework
political agreement, as the political transition will be
Syrian-led. One element in that process should be free
and fair elections, held under United Nations supervision.
Let me also briefly touch on the very important
issue of accountability for war crimes. We urge all
parties to the conflict to condemn arbitrary detention,
hostage-taking and forced disappearances and to
protect humanitarian workers and journalists.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the European
Union common position on the reconstruction of Syria.
We will be ready to assist in the reconstruction of Syria
only when a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive
political transition, negotiated by the Syrian parties to
the conflict on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015) and
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex), is firmly
under way.
As we fully support the safe return of Syrian
refugees who have fled their homes, we also believe
that a durable solution should ensure the security
of a sustainable, dignified and voluntary return of
Syrians to their country of origin, in accordance with
international law and the principle of non-refoulement.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the distinguished
manner in which you have presided over the Council
for the past month. I would also like to thank Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, for his briefing on the status of the political
process in the country.
South Africa wishes to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution to the conflict in Syria is a
10/20

27/06/2019

comprehensive political one that emanates from an
inclusive Syrian-led dialogue. That process should be
aimed at achieving a political transition that reflects the
will of the Syrian people with guaranteed protection
for all groups of Syrian society. My delegation
appreciates and supports Mr. Pedersen and his team
in their continued engagement and diplomatic efforts
in building trust among the various parties, including
civil society and women’s groups, and we welcome the
progress that he has made thus far. Without trust, there
can be no progress.
South Africa calls on the Council to unite towards
the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) as the
blueprint for a long-term political solution in Syria.
In addition to the Special Envoy’s efforts to engage
with all Syrian stakeholders, my delegation supports
the Special Envoy in his efforts to establish a common
forum with the aim of supporting a common purpose
for peace in Syria. That would be an opportunity to
revitalize broad-based international cooperation and to
support the Geneva processes, including the finalization
of the constitutional committee, with a minimum of
30 per cent representation of women.
As many speakers stated earlier this week during
the humanitarian briefing (see S/PV.8561), the
escalation of violence, particularly in north-western
Syria, undermines the efforts made in the political
process and further aggravates the dire humanitarian
situation in the country. The perpetuation of such acts
has had an increasingly destabilizing impact on the
wider region through the displacement of thousands
of people, the exacerbation of political and sectarian
differences and the potential to spread extremism
beyond Syria’s borders.
The political and humanitarian situations in Syria
cannot be addressed independently of each other. An
escalation of violence and the deterioration of the
humanitarian situation negatively affect the political
progress. In the same vein, progress in the political
sphere will support efforts towards ensuring that
all Syrians can live in a safe, secure and prosperous
environment, free of violence and terrorism.
Peace, stability and democracy are unassailable
rights of the Syrian people. The international
community should fully support the political processes
towards long-term peace in Syria as a matter of priority
and continue to support the United Nations, including
the Special Envoy, as well as other mediation efforts
19-19759

27/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

aimed at resolving the conflict. It is the Council’s
responsibility to ensure that there is political progress
and a return to normality in Syria.
In conclusion, South Africa reiterates its position
that the annexation of any territory seized through
force is invalid under international law and calls on
Israel to withdraw from occupied territories. As many
speakers have previously stated, the need to uphold
and respect international law is essential to restoring
long-term peace and stability in the Middle East. In that
regard, we call on all parties to uphold and respect their
international obligations if they expect the same from
other countries.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We too would like to begin by congratulating you,
Mr. President, on the outstanding way in which you
have presided over our work during the month of June.
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting and
thank Mr. Pedersen for his comprehensive briefing.
We acknowledge his hard work to promote sustainable
peace in Syria. We therefore reaffirm our commitment
to the success of his term.
Peru looks forward to the important meetings being
held between the Special Envoy and various parties,
and between high-level authorities of international
stakeholders in the Syrian conflict, helping to
find points of convergence towards establishing a
constitutional committee that can be recognized as
legitimate, balanced and consistent with the provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
We specifically emphasize the urgent need to
make tangible progress on crucial issues, such as the
representative membership of the committee, the
decision-making process within it and its mandate, and
to ensure that those efforts lead to free United Nationssupervised elections.
We note that further delays on such issues are
unacceptable given their real impact on the credibility
of the process, especially as it is 17 months since the
Sochi congress. In that connection, we consider it
essential that the parties continue to work on measures
that foster a better climate of understanding, including
the release of detainees, the identification of missing
persons and the delivery of mortal remains. We
welcome the work that is being done in that regard
within the Astana framework, but we note the need for
more substantial progress.

S/PV. 8567

We should also emphasize the importance of
avoiding escalations of the conflict that could undermine
the prospects for reaching a political solution. In the
current circumstances, it is crucial to preserve the
agreement on Idlib between Turkey and the Russian
Federation. We condemn the violations of international
humanitarian law that have been happening. The fight
against terrorism is no excuse for non-compliance
with such international obligations. Another major
challenge is addressing the grave situation that
millions of refugees and internally displaced persons
are enduring, which requires mustering not only the
financial resources but, more importantly, the political
will necessary to guarantee them a safe and dignified
return within internationally accepted parameters.
We are at a critical juncture where rapid action
at the political level is vital. The efforts in that
regard should be aimed primarily at avoiding the
country’s further fragmentation and achieving longterm stability, taking into account the strategic and
geopolitical considerations that have largely fuelled
the conflict in Syria, especially when the main priority
is protecting the millions of people who are in such a
terribly vulnerable situation.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, Sir, we very much appreciate your
work as President of the Security Council, as well as
the efforts of the entire Kuwaiti team. We also thank
Special Envoy Pedersen for his briefing. We share the
views he expressed and support his efforts to achieve
a lasting settlement in Syria. It is crucial that he has
been able to establish and maintain an ongoing and
constructive dialogue with all of the parties involved
and is working to bring their positions closer together
on both the regional and international fronts.
Russia is working actively to advance the political
process and restore confidence between the key parties
within and around Syria. We are collaborating diligently
with our Astana format partners, Iran and Turkey, while
staying in constant contact with the Special Envoy and
coordinating with Syria’s Government and opposition.
On 25 June Major General Bakin, the Head of
the Russian Reconciliation Centre, gave the Security
Council a thorough briefing on the military and political
situation in Syria (see S/PV.8561), which we found
extremely useful and informative, with exhaustive
answers to many of the questions that have been raised
in the Council. Members should familiarize themselves

19-1975911/20

S/PV.8567

The situation in the Middle East

with it. The Russian representative gave particular
attention in his statement to the situation in the Idlib
de-escalation zone. There can be no denying that militias
from the terrorist group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which
is essentially the Al-Nusra Front, have not stopped their
provocative attacks on Syrian Armed Forces positions,
the country’s civilian population and the Russian air
base at Khmeimim. Urging or demanding that we do
nothing in this situation is at the very least dishonest,
especially when Major General has confirmed that our
military operations are directed exclusively at targets
that have been confirmed by intelligence. We are
not harming the civilian population or humanitarian
infrastructure in any way.
We are concerned about the fact that the Al-Nusra
Front’s members are trying to refashion themselves
into a moderate opposition. We all know very well that
rebranding does not mean refraining from terrorist
activities. Their content remains the same and the fight
against terrorist organizations that have been recognized
as such by the Security Council — by all of us,
unanimously — must continue. The Astana guarantors
are determined to fully implement the agreements on
stabilizing Idlib and are actively cooperating to that
end with Syria, Iran and Turkey. We are scrupulously
implementing the memorandum that we drafted, agreed
on and signed in Sochi. Instead of demanding that we
implement what we ourselves agreed on and signed, it
would be better for everyone to get involved in the fight
against terrorism. That would be a real contribution to
achieving the Syrian settlement.
We are seriously concerned about the situation in
north-eastern Syria. Ensuring stability and security in
this area will be possible only if it is based on respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country
and the rejection of separatist plans that undermine
the national security of Syria and its neighbours.
Generally speaking, it is baffling that on the one hand
we are being asked to provide more information and
details about what is going on, and then, when we invite
our representative — who is working in the country
and carrying out important national reconciliation
tasks — to brief the Council, that briefing is suddenly
questioned. In fact, it was questioned before it had
even been delivered, and by countries that are illegally
occupying Syria and violating its sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
We hope that we will soon be able to achieve
a breakthrough in the launch of the constitutional
12/20

27/06/2019

committee. Russia’s representatives have been holding
intensive consultations on the subject in the past few
days, with the opposition and other stakeholders involved
in the conflict as well as the Syrian authorities. It goes
without saying that the strategic aim of launching a fullfledged political process in Geneva under the auspices
of the United Nations and Special Envoy Pedersen,
based on resolution 2254 (2015), is unchanged.
I have emphasized that in spite of the situation that
has been whipped up, often artificially, including in
today’s Council meeting, we remain optimistic about
future developments in the Syrian Arab Republic,
because we are working fully in accordance with
international law. We are in Syria at the invitation
of the legitimate Government. It is clear that, as the
situation in Syria is normalized, the main hotbeds of
terrorism are eliminated and the country is restored to
peace, the problems of post-conflict recovery and the
provision of humanitarian assistance will come to the
fore. Humanitarian aid must be provided to all Syrians
throughout Syria, without preconditions. It is important
to provide assistance for Syria’s reconstruction in
strict compliance with the norms of international
humanitarian law and the principles of neutrality and
impartiality, without bias and in cooperation with
the central authorities. We must work to create the
conditions needed to support the safe and voluntary
return of refugees and internally displaced persons
to their homes in Syria. However, there was detailed
information about this in Major General Bakin’s
briefing (see S/PV.8561), so I would once again ask
Council members to read it carefully.
We urge everyone to once and for all reject
unilateral sanctions, which only exacerbate the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Its citizens are
suffering in large part because of those restrictions, and
Syria is experiencing serious problems in its healthcare, fuel and energy sectors. Russia will continue to
provide Syria with comprehensive support on issues
regarding the reconstruction of infrastructure and the
delivery of humanitarian assistance, both bilaterally
and internationally, including through the United
Nations system.
We again underscore that Syria was, is and will
remain a key State in the Middle East and an integral
part of the Arab world. It cannot be artificially
ripped from the broader regional context for the
sake of circumstantial expediency. In that regard, we
support returning Damascus to the Arab family as
19-19759

27/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8567

soon as possible, which will enable the restoration,
normalization and improvement of relations among
Arabs and in the situation in the Middle East as a whole.
Incidentally, that is a natural and objective process that
is progressing despite resistance from outside.

(see S/PV.8561). We reiterate that the parties to the
conflict have an obligation to protect civilians and
respect the principles of distinction and proportionality
in international humanitarian law. As Ms. DiCarlo
mentioned last week,

It is high time that many of our colleagues took
another look at their outdated approaches to the Syrian
issue, which have been overtaken by history. It is time to
abandon the pressure, the attempts at isolation and the
open flirtations with illegal armed groups, which easily
change their loyalties and are not ashamed to cooperate
with outright terrorists. Has history really taught our
colleagues nothing? We need only look at the destruction
of statehood that has resulted from illegitimate outside
interventions in various Arab States.

“Our unflagging efforts to find a political solution
that meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian
people cannot move forward in an environment of
open conflict” (S/PV.8553, p.2).

We call on everyone interested in restoring peace
to Syria to engage constructively with our efforts. We
can end the war and focus on the issues of the political
process and national reconciliation, which Mr. Pedersen
is actively working on. Together we can guarantee the
rights of the minorities, including the Christians who
have lived in the Middle East for thousands of years.
The situation in Syria and the Middle East requires a
comprehensive approach. Establishing international
cooperation requires a decisive rejection of policies of
escalation and a switch from confrontation to dialogue
and cooperation, and I want to emphasize once again
that that applies to Syria, Iran and other countries in
the region.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): I would first like to thank Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen for his briefing and commitment.
Since the start of the conflict nine years ago,
violence has claimed the lives of tens of thousands of
civilians. Syria and its people have witnessed some
of the most serious crimes under international law.
Millions of Syrians have left their country and are still
abroad to this day. Thousands of Syrians await signs of
life from relatives who have been arbitrarily detained
or are missing. It was against that backdrop that the
Special Envoy took up his duties a few months ago. The
situation has deteriorated even further since the end of
April, owing to the escalation of violence in Idlib. As we
all know, that has created a situation could be disastrous
for Syria and the region on both the humanitarian and
regional security fronts. In that regard, I would like
to recall the statement made by the representative of
Germany on behalf of the co-penholders on Tuesday

We urge the parties to reaffirm their full commitment
to the ceasefire agreements of the Russia-Turkey
memorandum signed on 17 September 2018 and reiterate
our call for a nationwide cessation of hostilities. We
call on all stakeholders to take advantage of every
opportunity there may be to achieve a lasting solution,
including on the sidelines of the forthcoming Group of
20 meeting.
There is no military solution to the Syrian crisis. It
was clear from the start and remains so more than eight
years later. The only possible solution is a political one.
In my country’s view, the constitutional committee must
be Syrian-owned and -led and facilitated by the United
Nations. We support the important role of the Special
Envoy in its establishment. However, only the creation
of a credible constitutional committee can demonstrate
the political will of the parties to the conflict to work
constructively towards a solution to the crisis. What
is needed is a balanced and inclusive committee that
represents all elements of Syrian society, with clear
working procedures. It seems to us that despite all the
diplomatic efforts, the process is moving too slowly. We
must redouble our efforts. It is time for the crisis to end.
The peace that the Syrian people are waiting for
is outlined in resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex). We support the
efforts of the Special Envoy to implement the resolution
by establishing a nationwide ceasefire, a political
transition through free and fair national elections that
the Syrian diaspora can participate in, and the building
of a safe, stable and peaceful environment.
Lastly, we must not forget the millions of Syrians
who continue to be subjected to arbitrary arrest and
detention. We encourage the Special Envoy to continue
his efforts on that important issue.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, I would like
to express my delegation’s sincere thanks and gratitude
to you, Mr. President, and to the entire Kuwaiti

19-1975913/20

S/PV.8567

The situation in the Middle East

delegation for presiding so effectively over the Council
during the month of June. Of course, we would also like
to thank Special Envoy Pedersen for his comprehensive
briefing. My delegation really appreciates his hard work
in engaging with the various parties to the conflict.
Two days ago, during the Syria humanitarian
briefing (see S/PV.8561), Indonesia stressed that we
cannot let the escalation in north-western Syria continue
to undermine the Special Envoy’s efforts to reinvigorate
the political process, as the Secretary-General stated
in his report (S/2019/508). Respecting the ceasefire
and de-escalating tensions must therefore be the main
priority. Much is at stake. At this juncture, the Council
must provide its strong support to the ongoing work
on establishing a constitutional committee, within the
framework of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522,
annex) and resolution 2254 (2015). In that regard,
Indonesia would like to focus on three points related to
advancing the Syrian political process:
First, we want to reiterate the key words “Syrianled and Syrian-owned”. They should not be merely
the catchphrase in every Council meeting on Syria
but the main foundation that guides us in the entire
process of finding an inclusive political solution,
with full respect for the country’s sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity. That is obviously easier said
than done.
That brings me to my second point. While we
recognize the obvious challenge, it is critical to sustain
open lines of communication between the relevant
parties and to establish and nurture confidence. The
Council must create an atmosphere that is conducive
to sustained negotiations. We therefore welcome
Special Envoy Pedersen’s efforts, with the support of
key countries, to finalize the composition and terms of
reference of the constitutional committee. Indonesia is
fully aware that a constitutional committee is not the
only objective. However, a first meeting of members
of the committee in Geneva would definitely be a first
tangible step in unlocking the door for political process
in Syria and would also send a strong and positive
signal not only to the international community but most
importantly to the Syrian people.
Lastly, I want to highlight the importance of
compromise and urge all sides to avoid any actions,
activities or statements that could obstruct the political
process. It has been a painful and prolonged conflict.
Any delays on the political front will only bring more
14/20

27/06/2019

suffering to the Syrian people and cost more lives.
Indonesia fully believes that as long as we promote
peaceful ways rather than violence, and dialogue
rather than confrontation, we will be able to achieve
our end goal. In that context, we appreciate the crucial
role of the Astana guarantors on both the political and
humanitarian fronts in seeking a peaceful solution to
the conflict. The Council might also want to consider
the possibility of having a closer, informal discussion
with the guarantors in order to pursue a more tangible
road map on the future of the ceasefire agreement.
Again, much is at stake.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We appreciate the briefing given
today by Mr. Geir Pedersen, who can count on our
full support. Of course, I would also like to thank you,
Mr. President, for your masterful steering of the work of
the Council. We congratulate you and your entire team
on your presidency. The Dominican Republic welcomes
the efforts to bring the relevant actors in the political
process closer and to build bridges between them, and
we commend the broad consultations conducted in the
framework of the quest for an inclusive and sustainable
political solution to the conflict in Syria.
As a guarantor of the full implementation of
resolution 2254 (2015), the Council is called on to
ensure that the conditions that make a comprehensive,
credible, revitalized and inclusive peace process viable
and founded on the confidence of the entire Syrian
population are preserved. That includes the millions
of refugees who are out of the country and who will
eventually return. However, it is impossible to build
trust when the civilian population is still living in
conditions of uncertainty, unrest and insecurity,
and when so many families are separated without
information about the fate of their relatives. The
Dominican Republic understands that the combination
of all these elements makes the political process even
more fragile, and we emphasize that the Council must
do everything to ensure the protection of the civilian
population throughout Syria. It is therefore imperative
to insist on the need for all parties to the conflict to
comply with international humanitarian law and the
protection of civilians. Measures to stop attacks on
civil infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools, must
be taken immediately.
While it is still not enough, we acknowledge the
progress that has been made on forming the constitutional
committee. We believe it is essential to make progress
19-19759

27/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

on designating the outstanding names, outlining the
rules of procedure and establishing a concrete mandate
for the committee’ work. We hope that a solid agreement
on those key aspects of the process will be reached at
the upcoming consultations. We believe it is crucial to
ensure that all those arrangements are fully aligned
with the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and that
they promote the consolidation of the United Nations as
facilitator of the process. We reiterate the importance
of including specific provisions to ensure the active and
meaningful participation of women at every stage, not in
parallel or as contributors, but as entities with their own
voices at the negotiation and decision-making table. In
that regard, we urge the parties to exercise the greatest
possible degree of flexibility and constructiveness in
the consultations and not to lose sight of the need to
alleviate the suffering of a people battered by years of
conflict and to chart their course towards a new future.
In conclusion, we firmly believe that the goal
proposed by resolution 2254 (2015), of promoting a
broad political process that culminates in the holding
of free, transparent and fair elections under the
supervision of the United Nations, is still achievable.
Despite the exhaustion that all of us who want a
peaceful and sustainable solution to this crisis certainly
feel, we must keep this legitimate aspiration alive and
undertake all the necessary efforts to build the political
will that the current situation deserves and achieve
agreements in every area.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting. I also thank Mr. Geir
Pedersen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Syria, for the updated and very useful information he
has given us.
The worsening humanitarian situation, exacerbated
by the renewed hostilities between the parties to the
conflict in north-west Syria, should serve to spur
the international community to join forces to make a
peaceful outcome to this crisis possible. As we have
said many times, we know that there is still much to be
done in Syria. As we search for ways to put an end to
the terrorist groups operating in Idlib and in the nearby
towns, on the basis of the Russian-Turkish agreement,
we must focus on fully stabilizing the situation on
the ground and promoting a political solution based
on resolution 2254 (2015). There can be no question
that we must be utterly determined in our efforts to
accelerate the establishment of the constitutional

S/PV. 8567

committee if we are to truly launch the political
process that can put an end to this protracted conflict.
Equatorial Guinea welcomes all of the Special Envoy’s
initiatives and efforts focused on supporting the five
priority objectives of his mandate, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015).
Apart from the discussions on the establishment
of a constitutional committee and the beginning
of its work, it is essential to ensure that none of the
parties undermines the efforts of the Special Envoy
to revitalize the political process or turn these efforts
into an obstacle. In that regard, we encourage the
parties to be resolute in prioritizing approaches with
a significant degree of convergence, and to ramp
up their diplomatic meetings and frank discussions.
We must be objective and recognize that there is no
longer room for eventualities or expectations. The
constitutional committee should be formed as soon as
possible. Moreover, Equatorial Guinea hopes that the
consultations on Syria to be held next month in NurSultan will serve to open the way decisively to the
beginning of the work of the committee.
I conclude by again encouraging the Special Envoy
to continue considering all opportunities to overcome
the obstacles hindering the establishment of the
committee and to stress that only a broad, inclusive
political solution that is led by the Syrian Arab Republic,
in conformity with resolution 2254 (2015), and meets
the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people can pave
the way to sustainable peace in Syria and put an end
to the unimaginable suffering that the Syrians have
endured for far too long.
Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I too would like to
thank you, Sir, for your presidency. I cannot do so in
as dignified a way as Ambassador Matjila did, but I
mean it. I was very happy to find when I entered the
Chamber this morning that you had the curtains open.
I see that they are closed again. I do not know if that
is due to pressure from the Secretariat or to the very
sombre subject on today’s agenda.
Before I come to the substance of my statement, let
me comment a bit on what United States Ambassador
Cohen said with regard to the Syrian representative. I
can only fully support what he said, but at the same
time I have to ask him: “What do you expect? What
do you expect from the representative of a Government
that bombs its own citizens, that drops barrel bombs
and chemical weapons indiscriminately on its own

19-1975915/20

S/PV.8567

The situation in the Middle East

citizens? What do you expect from the representative
of a Government that puts its people in prisons where
they are subjected to torture and death? The photos
of Syrian prisons that we have all seen are about the
worst we have ever seen. What do you expect from
the representative of a Government that continuously
bombs humanitarian aid workers and says that White
Helmets and humanitarians are terrorists?” That is
something that we totally object to and reject, but we
are not that surprised.
What I was more surprised by was what the Russian
representative just said. He said that the approach we
are taking here — the approach of putting emphasis
on human rights and international humanitarian law;
of seeking a political solution; of not accepting sexual
violence against women — is an outdated approach. I
do not want my children to grow up in a world like that
which he imagines. I want my children to grow up in
a world where humanitarian law and human rights are
respected, where we look for a political solution and
where we do not bomb indiscriminately.
Let me come to the point. Again, I fully support
what Geir Pedersen said and subscribe to the way
forward. I can also only echo his concern with regard
to the military offensive in north-western Syria. It is
unacceptable that there continues to be indiscriminate
air strikes, shelling and barrel bombs. Again, we are
seeing the deaths of innocent civilians. In the fight
against terrorism, nothing justifies the indiscriminate
bombing of civilians or attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure. Anyone who does not believe me should
talk to Mr. Voronkov, the Russian Under-SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism. He clearly says that respect for human rights
is key in the fight against terrorism.
The Russian representative said earlier that all
aerial attacks are against intelligence-confirmed
targets. What kind of intelligence is being used when
clearly identified cars, belonging to humanitarian aid
workers and carrying patients from another attack, are
bombed and killed by the Syrians or their allies on their
way to the hospital? Are these targeted killings? Are
these intelligence-confirmed targets? What happens to
the pilots when they come back to the base? Are they
decorated, or do they go to court?
So, there is no military solution; there is only
a political solution. All parties must comply with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
16/20

27/06/2019

(S/2012/522, annex). Geir Pedersen works very hard
and is working on the 3+3 or 4+2 formulas. I must say
that when one looks at the paragraphs of the various
agreements, it is not that important whether we are
using the 4+2 or 3+3 formula, because a two-thirds
majority, I believe, is needed to take action. So, in the
end, that is only a technical move.
If our Russian friends would only — for one, two
or three days — agree to stop their military support and
intelligence until the Syrian Government agrees to a
certain formula and consents to go to Geneva, that would
happen right away. I can only say what Mr. Pedersen
does — that Geneva has to be supported and that the
political process has to advance. There can be no
military solution. Even if the Syrian regime decides to
try to kill everybody in Idlib, there can be no military
solution. There has to be a political solution. Geneva is
one element, but the other necessary element in Syria is
reconciliation. That is only possible if there is an end to
the arbitrary arrests, killings, torture, sexual violence,
disappearances and denials of humanitarian assistance.
Only then will the return of refugees be possible.
I say to our Russian colleague that we will work
for the preservation of sanctions as long as the Syrian
regime does not change its brutal behaviour against
its own population. The sanctions are not outdated;
we want to preserve them as long as necessary. We
welcome the fact that the Arab family is not welcoming
Syria back as a member of the League of Arab States,
but is keeping the regime out. We very much appreciate
that the League is upholding the values that I spoke of
at the beginning of my intervention.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.
I would like to begin by thanking Special Envoy
Geir Pedersen for his valuable briefing on the political
track in Syria. I take this opportunity to reaffirm the
full support of the State of Kuwait for Mr. Pedersen’s
efforts to revive the Syrian political process. We call
on all parties to support the Special Envoy and work to
help him fully discharge his mandate.
We reaffirm that there is no military solution to
the Syrian crisis. The only solution is a just political
settlement that is facilitated by the United Nations
and Syrian-led and Syrian-owned, in conformity with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). That resolution sets forth the
various steps that are to be taken during the political
19-19759

27/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

transition phase, including the drafting of a new
constitution and the holding of free and fair elections
that include, under the constitution, all Syrians
inside and outside the country, with United Nations
supervision. In that context, we reaffirm the need for
the constitutional committee to be balanced, inclusive
and credible. We hope that the beginning of its work
will pave the way for the long-awaited political process.
We have been following closely and with concern
the military escalation of recent weeks in the north-west
of Syria, which has led to the displacement of nearly
350,000 people, and attacks on civilian infrastructure,
including hospitals and schools, resulting in casualties
among innocent civilians. We once again condemn the
targeting of innocent civilians by any perpetrator and
recall the need for all parties to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
We also condemn all attacks on civilian-populated
areas waged by terrorist groups, including those listed
on the Security Council sanctions list. At the same
time, we recall that anti-terrorism operations in no
way exempt any party to a conflict from its obligations
under international law, including its duty to abide by
the principles of distinguishing targets, proportionality,
precaution and protecting civilians and civilian targets.
Even wars have rules that must be respected.
As military actions continue in north-west Syria, we
express our concern over their effects and repercussions
on the political process. We reaffirm the importance of
the memorandum of understanding between Turkey and
Russia and call for its implementation. We also call for
the implementation of confidence-building measures
between the parties, including making progress on
detainees, prisoners and disappeared persons. We recall
that this month the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2474 (2019), on persons reported
missing during armed conflict. The resolution was
the first of its kind and must be implemented on the
ground. Its provisions must also be implemented in all
conflicts throughout the world, including in Syria. We
emphasize that it will be impossible to achieve a lasting
and comprehensive peace in Syria without justice and
ensuring that there is no impunity for those who have
committed the most heinous crimes since the start of
the Syrian crisis in 2011.
In conclusion, we reiterate that this conflict
must be settled peacefully, in line with resolution
2254 (2015), in order to enable the Syrian people to
fulfil their legitimate aspirations through a political

S/PV. 8567

settlement that covers all segments of Syrian society
and preserves the unity, independence and sovereignty
of Syria. Indeed, since we are speaking of sovereignty,
we reiterate that the Golan is Syrian Arab territory
occupied by Israel, the occupying Power. The seizure
and annexation by force of territories have been rejected
and are in contravention of the Charter of the United
Nations, the principles of international law and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including
resolution 497 (1981).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to welcome the
Special Envoy and wish him every success in carrying
out his mandate.
I will make just a few remarks. I will not speak
at length, so as not to derail the discussion. Today, we
are discussing the political track, not the humanitarian
track. I will therefore not comment at length on some
remarks that pertain to a previous meeting that was
held on the humanitarian situation (see S/PV.8561).
Nonetheless, my country strongly believes in
multilateral diplomacy. That is why we were one of
the founding States of this international Organization.
We emerged victorious over those who would violate
international law. Accordingly, when we speak from a
political and diplomatic perspective, we speak out of
our belief in international law.
The Security Council is not a private-sector
entity owned by one Member State. It is not a store
where the owner selects its clientele. The Council is
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security — nothing more, nothing less. We are not
here to personalize or politicize issues according to
our whims. It is normal not to agree sometimes, but
disagreement has to be expressed according to norms,
and, as they say in English, we go by the book. I would
remind my dear friend, the representative of the United
States of America, that our book is the Charter of the
United Nations and the provisions of international law.
How would the Council react if some country
were to establish the Mexican-American Syrian-Iraqi
Medical Society — call it whatever you wish — and
send it to the border between the United States and

19-1975917/20

S/PV.8567

The situation in the Middle East

Mexico, without the approval of or coordination with the
United States Government, to care for the Guatemalan
refugees who are drowning in the river there on a daily
basis? We have read that story in the New York Times. Is
that international law? Is that respect for the Charter?
Humanitarian work requires that the law be respected.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs is working in Syria with the approval of the
Syrian Government. Its work is purely humanitarian.
There are 27 international non-governmental
organizations operating in Syria with the approval
of the Syrian Government, but it is unacceptable for
certain countries to send intelligence groups to Syria
across the border with Turkey under the pretext of doing
humanitarian work. We need to draw the attention of
the Council to this particular fact.
We objected to our dear colleague the representative
of Britain when she interrupted me while delivering
my statement because her act was not in line with the
rules and procedures. Any representative who wishes
to interrupt another representative has to go through
the presidency. We do not keep interrupting each other
as if we were in a circus. We have to show some respect
for each other, even if we disagree politically. I did not
object to the fact that my British colleague wanted to
take the floor to make a point of order, but she should
have done so in accordance with the proper procedures
by asking the President to give her the floor.
The utter silence of the Security Council after
Israel’s more than 50 years of occupation of the Syrian
Golan — and I thank you, Mr. President, for concluding
your statement with a reference to the Golan — has
encouraged the United States Administration to attempt
to backtrack on the provisions of resolution 497 (1981),
which declared the decision of Israel, as the occupying
Power, according to the description commonly used at
the United Nations, to impose its laws, administration
and authority on the Golan to be null and void and
without international legal effect. This attempted
backtracking is embodied in the recognition by Donald
Trump, the President of the United States of America,
of Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan,
ignoring the commitment of all previous United
States Administrations to upholding the provisions of
resolution 497 (1981).
Naturally, this utter silence has encouraged the
Israeli occupying entity to continue its occupation for
decades with impunity, protected and encouraged by
18/20

27/06/2019

the United States of America and a number of other
Member States. Israel has continued to occupy Arab
territories, confiscate our lands, expand settlements
and reverse itself on its commitment to a just and
comprehensive peace, pushing the region towards war
in an unprecedented manner. The Israeli occupation
has formed an alliance with the takfiri terrorist herds,
providing multifaceted support to these takfiri terrorist
gangs in the area of separation and committing various
aggressions against my country to boost the morale of
these terrorist groups.
In this context, I would like to briefly comment
on the remarks of my colleague the representative
of Germany, in which he said that we accuse those
humanitarian workers of terrorism. Yes, we do. When
his country and other Western countries smuggled
White Helmets from the Syrian occupied Golan into
Jordan and then to Western capitals, this reaffirms
that those groups are terrorists. What were they doing
in the area of separation in the Golan? That area has
troops belonging to the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, and terrorists are prohibited from
being there. Why did those Governments, including
the Government of Germany, receive those terrorists
who were smuggled from the area of separation in the
Golan? Why did they not go through Turkey, Jordan or
Lebanon? They are terrorists.
The United States-Israeli position, which disregards
international law and United Nations resolutions,
does not stop there. Israel has escalated tensions by
announcing recently the creation of a new settlement
in the occupied Syrian Golan, named Trump Heights.
That is how Israel has rewarded the President of the
United States for violating the Security Council’s
resolutions and the provisions of international law by
recognizing Israel’s sovereignty over the Syrian Golan.
In order to complete the series of provocations, which
have been repeatedly condemned by the Council, of
continued violations of international law and of illegal
settlements by the occupying Power, the American
President responded to the Israeli announcement by
saying, “Thank you, Mr. Prime Minister, for this great
honour”. It is a great honour that Israel announces the
creation of a settlement in the occupied Syrian Golan
called Trump Heights. The United States President
responds by expressing his thanks for that great honour.
It is as if he were expressing his happiness that a
residential compound had been added to his worldwide
real estate collection, while ignoring the fact that the
19-19759

27/06/2019

The situation in the Middle East

settlement will be established on Syrian occupied land,
of which neither Trump nor anyone else has the right
to dispose.
The Council’s silence has encouraged senior United
Nations officials to shirk their obligations pursuant to
their mandate, which we, the Member States, conferred
upon them. United Nations officials are supposed to only
follow the United Nations agenda. They are responsible
before us for fully undertaking their functions. Some
members of the Council might say that the Permanent
Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic is unjustly
accusing senior United Nations officials and that this is
not allowed in this Chamber.
No, I am not falsely accusing anyone. I have the best
proof, which is the fact that the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov,
continues to act beyond the limits of his mission and
mandate. In his briefings, he continues to provocatively
avoid, in a manner that can no longer be tolerated,
discussing the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan,
while he fails to point out the position of the United
Nations with regard to the occupation, despite dozens
of relevant resolutions adopted by the international
Organization, in particular the Security Council. In
his periodic briefings to the Council, he deliberately
does not discuss Israel’s continued illegal practices and
violations in the occupied Syrian Golan.
I will provide the Council with the following
example. In his most recent briefing on the situation in
the Middle East, on 20 June (see S/PV.8557), Mladenov
failed to note that the Government of the Israeli
occupation held a meeting in the Golan on 16 June and
that on the same day it announced the establishment
of a new settlement in the Golan, to be named Trump
Heights. However, he was quite forthcoming with
regard to the details concerning a goat that had crossed
the separation line into part of the occupied Syrian
Golan. In addition, his colleagues, senior United
Nations officials, were quite forthcoming with regard
to raising the issue of the Syrian authorities granting
one visa entry here and denying another one there. That
is all they talk about when discussing the situation in
the Middle East — a goat crossing the separation line
from the Syrian side and the issue of entry visas. But
Mladenov never heard of the establishment of Trump
Heights in the Golan.
Attempts to perpetuate the Israeli occupation
throughout the past years have coincided with the

S/PV. 8567

sponsorship by major Western States of terrorism,
extremist ideologies and attempts to replace spiritual
with political Islam, which has nothing to do with
sacred Islam. After having been abandoned by
Europe and seen his dream of joining the European
Union vanish, Erdoğan now looks to his neighbours
to the east and south so as to enhance the illusions of
reviving the Ottoman Sultanate and colonial ambitions
that will never come to fruition. Erdoğan believed
that his illusion of reviving the caliphate could come
true, especially after a number of political Islamic
leaders took power in certain Arab States and much
blood was shed with unprecedented destruction,
which some people praised as the advent of the Arab
Spring. He therefore got involved with a major terrorist
project targeting the destruction of Syria, opening his
country’s borders with us and facilitating the passage of
thousands of foreign terrorists into Syria, after having
provided them with training camps and all kinds of
weapons and logistical support. Subsequently, he even
launched a direct military offensive against my country
and occupied part of our territory.
All of this could be described as an assassination,
masterminded by certain countries, of the Charter of
the United Nations and the principles of international
law. As members know, this was preceded by scores
of other assassinations committed by the same
countries, resulting in the disasters in Viet Nam, the
former Yugoslavia, Somalia, Iraq, Libya, Yemen and
many other countries in Africa and Latin America,
witnessed by all humankind. Those disasters have led
to the killing and displacement of tens of millions of
people, while those countries incurred trillions of
dollars in economic losses. Therefore, the only way
for our Organization to avoid meeting the same fate
as the League of Nations is to ensure that countries
abide by the Council’s resolutions and the provisions
of the Charter, in particular paragraphs 1, 4 and 7 of
Article 2, which provide for the principle of sovereign
equality of all States and for all Members to refrain
in their international relations from the threat or use
of force against the territorial integrity or political
independence of any State. In addition, the Charter
has no provision allowing countries to intervene in the
internal affairs of other countries.
An awakening, an acknowledgment of guilt — or
mea culpa, as they say in English — and a return to
those noble principles would guarantee the unity of the
Council and its defence of the provisions of the Charter

19-1975919/20

S/PV.8567

The situation in the Middle East

and give the necessary impetus and support to the work
of the Special Envoy and to serious parties that have
sought to reach a political settlement to the crisis in
my country, Syria, and have coordinated efforts to
combat terrorism.
My country’s Government affirms that it stands
ready to cooperate with the Special Envoy to make his
mission a success as he facilitates the Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned intra-Syrian dialogue to move forward
on the political track. That is first and foremost in
the interest of Syria rather than any other party. My
country also emphasizes that what is happening in
Syria cannot be reduced to a mere disagreement on
names and procedures in the context of the formation
of the constitutional committee, despite its importance.
There is a much larger picture at stake, as the issue of
the constitutional committee is just the tip of an iceberg
that is kilometres-deep.
In conclusion, without the concerted efforts of all,
without support for the Syrian Government to eradicate
terrorism, without ending the illegal foreign presence
throughout Syria and unilateral economic measures, and
without effectively maintaining the unity, sovereignty
and independence of Syria, any political track that

20/20

27/06/2019

does not take all of that into account would remain
an unrealistic and hopeless solution. When we speak
of effectively maintaining the unity, sovereignty and
independence of Syria, as I and many other colleagues
have said, that is part of the Council’s function and
mandate. These concepts are in line with the provisions
of the Charter and the Council’s resolutions pertaining
to Syria.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the United Kingdom has asked for the floor to make
a further comment.
Mr. Power (United Kingdom): Obviously, again
and as we have often said in the Council, there are far
too many inaccuracies in the Syrian representative’s
statement to go into any detail, but since he mentioned
us I wanted to speak in reply to remind him that we were
given the floor to speak on a point of order yesterday
(see S/PV.8561) to object to his persistent naming of
humanitarian workers as terrorists, which we find
disrespectful to the Council. Furthermore, I would
point out that the length of his intervention and remarks
today further undermine his disrespect for the Council.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

19-19759
