S/PV.8471

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8471st meeting

Tuesday, 26 February 2019, 10.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ndong Mba. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Equatorial Guinea)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Albanai
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018) and 2449 (2018) (S/2019/157)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-05536 (E)
*1905536*

S/PV.8471

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018) and
2449 (2018) (S/2019/157)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Reena
Ghelani, Director for the Operations and Advocacy
Division of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/157, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018) and 2449 (2018).
I now give the floor to Ms. Ghelani.
Ms. Ghelani: I provide this update today on behalf of
the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock.
A fortnight ago, we got a glimpse of what life is
like for some 41, 000 displaced Syrians, mainly women
and children in Rukban, near the Syria-Jordan border.
What our colleagues witnessed is a dire humanitarian
situation — people struggling for survival, facing
hunger and lacking the most basic necessities. The
convoy earlier this month was the largest and one of
the most complex carried out by the United Nations and
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent since the crisis began,
nearly eight years ago. The mission lasted 10 days and
involved 133 trucks loaded with essential humanitarian
assistance, vaccines and logistical items. The assistance
delivered was critical and will save lives.
2/20

26/02/2019

But the gravity of the situation for civilians in
Rukban means that sustained humanitarian access is
needed moving forward. Food supplies, for example,
are expected to last only 30 days. While the primary
objective of this latest convoy was to provide immediate
humanitarian assistance, teams also carried out surveys
of the intentions of internally displaced persons (IDPs)
to inform discussions on possible durable solutions.
An overwhelming majority — about 95 per cent of
IDPs — expressed the wish to leave the camp, while
more than 80 per cent wished to return to their areas
of origin.
However, all those consulted, regardless of their
profile or tribal affiliation, have ongoing concerns
related to the situation at destination — the lack of
civil documentation, concerns about access to their
property and concerns related to their safety and
security, especially the fear of detention and military
conscription — and requested information and
guarantees on all of those issues.
On 16 February, a statement was released by the
Joint Coordination Committees on the Repatriation
of Syrian Refugees of the Russian Federation and
the Syrian Arab Republic regarding the opening of
humanitarian corridors from the Rukban settlement.
The United Nations has not been involved in the opening
of those humanitarian corridors, beyond providing
supplies to the Syrian Arab Red Crescent for immediate
assistance to those who decided to leave through the
evacuation corridors.
The United Nations welcomes all efforts to ease the
suffering of people stranded in Rukban and to identify
durable solutions. These efforts, however, need to
ensure that any returns or relocations are voluntary,
safe, dignified and well-informed and abide by core
protection standards that comply with international
humanitarian law and human rights law. Dialogue is
ongoing with communities in Rukban, the Russian
Federation, the Syrian authorities and others to ensure
that will be the case in any relocation process.
The United Nations remains extremely concerned
about the protection of civilians who remain in the last
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)-held areas in
south-east Deir ez-Zor governorate and those who were
able to flee the fighting. Since late last year, more than
37,000 people have fled from Hajin to the Al-Hol camp
in Hasakah governorate, some 300 kilometres north of
Hajin. Close to three quarters of the total population of
19-05536

26/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the Al-Hol camp is now made up of women and children
under the age of 5. Thousands of additional people are
expected to arrive at Al-Hol camp in the coming days
and weeks.
Extremely harsh conditions are reported along the
route north, including cold temperatures and a lack
of food, water, shelter and health services. At least 75
people, two thirds of them children under the age of 1,
have died since December 2018, either while in transit
or shortly after arriving at the Al-Hol camp, mostly due
to exposure and a lack of access to health care while
making the journey northward.
Response efforts are being scaled up in Al-Hol camp
and in Hajin and surrounding areas, despite considerable
security challenges. For example, on 15 February, a
Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy of six trucks loaded
with United Nations and International Red Cross and
Red Crescent Movement supplies reached Hajin and
distributed aid to some 5,000 people. Late last week,
the United Nations and partners also completed food
distributions to 15 towns and informal settlements in
the eastern part of Deir ez-Zor governorate.
In addition, the United Nations has established a
transit centre in Suwar, midway between Hajin and
Al-Hol, to receive people during the transit journey.
However, the screening sites just outside Hajin still
remain inaccessible to humanitarian organizations.
Moreover, protection concerns for the displaced include
constraints on freedom of movement, with many of
those arriving at Al-Hol expressing a preference to
move to other locations, in most cases to connect with
family members or friends in Deir ez-Zor governorate.
Across
north-west
Syria,
an
estimated
2.7 million men, women and children remain in need of
humanitarian assistance. Some 40 per cent of children
are out of school, while 2 million residents rely on
water-trucking for most if not all their clean water.
Each month, some 1.7 million Syrians are reached with
critical assistance through cross-border operations out
of Turkey. Ensuring sustained humanitarian access is
therefore critical.
To date, the recent expansion of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham areas of influence has not been reported
to have resulted in a significant change in levels of
humanitarian access. The United Nations and partners
are closely monitoring the situation to ensure that
independent, neutral and impartial humanitarian
action is respected. A number of measures are in place

S/PV. 8471

to mitigate the risks of diversion or interference with
aid operations, including screening and vetting of
implementing partners, monitoring of distributions,
commodity tracking systems, facilitating regular
feedback from affected communities and maintaining
engagement with all parties to the conflict in order to
address operational challenges as they arise.
We have frequently reported to the Council on
the plight of civilians in Idlib and surrounding areas
in north-west Syria, who simply have nowhere else to
flee should there be a full-scale military incursion into
the area. While the September agreement of last year
between Turkey and Russia to establish a demilitarized
zone staved off immediate military escalation, the last
few weeks have witnessed an increase in fighting,
with dozens of civilians reportedly killed and dozens
injured. Up to 36,000 people are reported to have been
displaced as a result of intensified shelling, many of
whom have moved northward and are now residing in
camps on the border with Turkey.
As stated last week by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights:
“Large numbers of civilians, including
hundreds of thousands of displaced people in Idlib
and northern Aleppo, are living an intolerable
existence. They are trapped between the escalation
of hostilities and bombardment, on the one hand,
and, on the other, are forced to live under the
extremist rule of Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and other
extremist fighters who regularly carry out targeted
killings, abductions and arbitrary detention.”
I reiterate today that the risk of military
escalation, and potentially catastrophic humanitarian
consequences persists. It is therefore critical to sustain
and fully implement the Russia-Turkey agreement of
17 September 2018.
Staggering levels of humanitarian need persist
throughout Syria. This year, an estimated 11.7 million
people will require humanitarian assistance across the
country. The United Nations and its partners reach
millions each month with life-saving humanitarian
assistance across Syria. That is only possible only thanks
to the generous support of international donors. More
than $5 billion was contributed to the humanitarian
response plan and the regional refugee and resilience
plan for 2018 — a huge amount of money, which has
saved lives and given hope to millions.

19-055363/20

S/PV.8471

The situation in the Middle East

26/02/2019

We would like to take this opportunity to thank
every Government that supported our appeals over the
last year, and to urge Member States to ensure timely
funding for humanitarian operations in Syria and
neighbouring refugee-hosting countries in 2019. The
conference to be held in Brussels from 12 to 14 March
will be a critical marker in that regard.

civil documentation and about access to their property
or housing. Indeed, while the convoy was a muchneeded step, and regular, sustained United Nations
humanitarian access to Rukban remains a necessity
in the short term, a more lasting solution is needed
through collective efforts and arrangements, in full
coordination with the United Nations.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Ms. Ghelani for her briefing.

Those relocation efforts, however, must uphold key
principles. All returns or relocations must be voluntary,
safe, dignified, well-informed and in accordance with
international humanitarian and human rights law
and key protection standards. People must be able to
relocate to a place of their choosing. United Nations
humanitarian staff must be granted access to the
population prior to any departure, during movement and
after relocation in order to provide protection support,
assess needs and deliver assistance. Family unity needs
to be safeguarded and children, women, the elderly
and people with special needs must be afforded special
protection during all phases of the relocation. Regular,
free and unfettered access of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to returnees
is key to finding and successfully implementing durable
solutions for IDPs and voluntary returnees.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium): I will
present this statement on behalf of the co-penholders
on the Syria humanitarian file: Kuwait, Germany
and Belgium.
I would like to start by thanking Reena Ghelani,
Director for Operations and Advocacy of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for her
valuable briefing. I would also like to thank, through
her, all the humanitarian and medical personnel
throughout Syria for their courage and the tireless
efforts to alleviate human suffering in Syria. They have
been there for eight years, since the start of the conflict,
and continue to provide life-saving assistance, including
most recently through the humanitarian convoy to more
than 40,000 internally displaced persons (IDPs) at the
Rukban camp.
The situation for IDPs at the Rukban camp has
further deteriorated over the winter months. That
has put particular strain on the camp’s vulnerable
population, the vast majority of whom are women and
children. After months of inexcusable delays, in early
February the United Nations finally got the green
light to deploy, together with the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent, a joint inter-agency convoy consisting of 133
trucks. Humanitarian workers handed out much-needed
food, sanitation and hygiene supplies, and provided
winterization materials. They also conducted the
vaccination campaign for some 7,000 children. Finally,
they undertook an intentions survey of the inhabitants
of the camp in order to explore a lasting solution to the
dire humanitarian situation in Rukban.
According to the results of the survey, an
overwhelming majority of the inhabitants wish to leave
the camp and many of them want to return to their
area of origin, although they expressed security and
safety concerns, as well as concerns about the lack of
4/20

We continue to urge all parties to grant regular,
safe, sustained and unconditional humanitarian access
across Syria. Parties to the conflict must allow the
humanitarian community to provide protection and
assistance based on needs, including gender-specific
needs, and in an impartial and non-discriminatory
manner. Far too often, constraints of a bureaucratic or
security nature, imposed by all parties, remain. Far too
often, the United Nations is not able to reach people in
need. That considerably affects United Nations access
to areas with high needs, particularly during the current
winter months.
We are closely following the situation in the north
of Syria, specifically in Idlib governorate, where
3 million civilians are located — half of them IDPs.
After a period of relative calm, the recent surge of
violent incidents has resulted in numerous civilian
casualties. The Russian-Turkish ceasefire memorandum
of understanding has been instrumental in preventing
the catastrophic consequences that would be caused by
any military offensive.
We reiterate our call on all parties to continue to
engage in the full implementation of the agreement, as
the situation in Idlib remains particularly fragile. We
19-05536

26/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

also call for a nation-wide cessation of hostilities, as
stipulated in resolution 2401 (2018). Furthermore, we
call on all parties to ensure the protection of civilians
and civilian infrastructure, as laid out by international
humanitarian and international human rights law, as
a matter of priority. We strongly condemn all attacks
against civilian infrastructure, particularly schools and
hospitals, as well as indiscriminate attacks on densely
populated areas.
Following weeks of intense fighting in the area
of Deir ez-Zor, fighting is subsiding. Over the past
weeks, some 25,000 people, especially the most
vulnerable — women, children and the elderly — fled
the area of Hajin to relocate to the Al-Hol camp. Along
the 300-kilometre route, they further encountered
harsh conditions — cold temperatures and a lack of
food, water, shelter and health services — and serious
protection concerns. We deplore the loss of lives amongst
those making this journey northwards, in particular the
many newborns and young children. The situation at
the Al-Hol camp is dire; the camp is overcrowded and
its capacity has been overstretched by the numerous
new arrivals, pushing the number of people at the camp
to almost 47,000. We welcome the installation of a
transit centre, halfway between Haijn and Al-Hol, to
provide urgently needed assistance to IDPs. We support
all efforts to allow United Nations humanitarian access
in order to alleviate human suffering.
Thousands of Syrian men, women and children
continue to be arbitrarily arrested and detained. We
take note of the recent release of a number of detainees
and prisoners. However, more needs to be done, and we
call on all actors to continue work on that important
issue, towards concrete, tangible progress. We condemn
the reported use of torture and sexual violence against
those men, women and children. Perpetrators are to be
held accountable.
The conflict in Syria will soon enter its eighth
year. The humanitarian needs, both inside the country
and in the region, remain particularly high. Inside
Syria, nearly 12 million people — of whom almost
half are children — are still in need of humanitarian
assistance, ranging from food provisions and medical
treatment to water, sanitation and hygiene, protection
and psychosocial support services, child protection,
protection from gender-based violence and mine
action. United Nations humanitarian agencies and
partners continue to reach more than 3 million people
per month, both from inside Syria and through the

S/PV. 8471

cross-border mechanism, as mandated by the Security
Council. Among them, 700,000 people — most of
them displaced — are in acute need and receive
lifesaving assistance.
The third Brussels Conference on Supporting the
Future of Syria and the Region, which will take place
in Brussels in mid-March, will allow us to renew our
focus on the plight of the population affected by the
Syrian conflict, as well as Syrian refugees in the region,
and renew our commitment to and concrete support
for their humanitarian needs. It will offer a forum to
discuss the most critical humanitarian issues, such as
ensuring access and the provision of life-saving aid and
protection, as well as approaches to ensuring livelihoods
and resilience. It will also seek new financial pledges to
address the needs in Syria and the region. We call on all
potential donors to contribute to meeting those needs.
The people of Syria deserve to live in peace.
Only peace, grounded in strong inclusive foundations,
can break the cycle of violence. Therefore, we need
to advance the political process through a genuine
and inclusive political settlement in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), the 2012 Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex) and other relevant Security
Council resolutions.
We also continue to advocate for the accountability
of all those responsible for breaches of international
law, in particular international humanitarian law and
human rights law. To that end, the co-penholders
will continue to support the important role of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria. Without an inclusive political solution in
accordance with resolution 2254 (2015) and without
accountability, no sustainable peace is possible.
I should like to conclude by expressing our full
support for Special Envoy Pedersen in his engagement
to implement resolution 2254 (2015). We look forward
to his first briefing before the Council this Thursday.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Ms. Ghelani for her briefing and the important work
that the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA) and her partners are doing to support
the Syrian people.
We applaud OCHA’s work to facilitate the largestever humanitarian aid convoy in Syria during the
successful joint United Nations-Syrian Arab Red
Crescent delivery from Damascus to the Rukban

19-055365/20

S/PV.8471

The situation in the Middle East

encampment on 6 February. The United States also
salutes the courage and selfless dedication of the
humanitarian workers who so bravely carried out the
delivery to ensure that life-saving aid reached Syrians
in desperate need.
While that convoy was successful in achieving
its aim of providing immediate support for the
Rukban population, that assistance will only sustain
the population for approximately 30 days. Therefore,
the United States urges the Al-Assad regime and the
Russian Federation to facilitate a new United NationsSyrian Arab Red Crescent humanitarian convoy to
Rukban before the end of March. The Al-Assad regime
and the Russian Federation can ensure, if they have
the will, that the United Nations can regularly provide
unfettered humanitarian assistance to Rukban as long
as there are vulnerable civilians at that location.
The United States has not impeded and will
not impede any voluntary departures and has long
advocated for freedom of movement for internally
displaced persons (IDPs) throughout Syria. We remain
steadfast in our support for safe, voluntary, dignified
and informed departures from Rukban. The United
States insists that any process to arrange for departures
be coordinated with the United Nations and reflect
humanitarian principles.
To that end, the United States takes note of the
receptivity of the United Nations to all efforts that
will ease the suffering of those displaced in Rukban,
including Russia’s checkpoint initiative, as long as those
initiatives allow for truly safe, voluntary, dignified and
informed departures. The United States looks forward
to continuing to coordinate with the United Nations,
Russia and other partners to develop a plan to support
voluntary and informed returns from Rukban that best
address the long-term needs of the population.
The United States calls on all parties, including
Russia and the Al-Assad regime, to ensure that
the following five minimum conditions are met on
departures from Rukban.
First, they should ensure that any planning
is coordinated with the United Nations and allow
for United Nations monitoring and oversight of
movements, ensuring that departures are in line with
humanitarian standards.
Secondly, they should ensure that IDPs are given
access to information about potential departure options
6/20

26/02/2019

and accurate information on conditions, including
security, in their preferred place of return.
Thirdly, they should ensure that guarantees are
provided against arbitrary arrest and detention.
Fourthly, they should ensure that a clear explanation
is provided of military conscription requirements for
IDPs who decide to leave.
Fifthly, they should ensure that sustained
humanitarian access is facilitated to allow aid to reach
those who do not wish to depart Rukban.
Rukban is only one example of the extreme and
challenging humanitarian conditions faced by millions
of people throughout Syria. The regime has an obligation
under resolution 2165 (2014) to enable the immediate
and unhindered delivery of humanitarian assistance by
the United Nations and its implementing partners. It
is unacceptable that the Al-Assad regime continues to
hinder regular access for the United Nations and other
relief agencies to eastern Ghouta, Yarmouk and Dara’a.
As long as civilians cannot count on the Al-Assad
regime and its allies to allow the United Nations to
provide sustained unfettered humanitarian aid to areas
under its control, it is clear that conditions are not
conducive for sustained and voluntary returns and that
the time is still not right for the international community
to support reconstruction efforts in regime-held areas
of Syria, absent irreversible steps towards a political
solution to the conflict.
We are also concerned about the increase in IDPs
fleeing the last grip of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS) as it tries to cling to territory in the middle
Euphrates river valley. We thank our partners who
continue to provide additional shelter, medical care and
crucial food assistance to address the needs of IDPs in
places like Al-Hol and across north-east Syria.
We also welcome the recent announcement by
Prime Minister Al-Mahdi that the Government of Iraq
is prepared to help facilitate the repatriation of Iraqi
nationals in Syria. The United States will continue to
work with its coalition partners on stabilization efforts
in north-east Syria to prevent the return of ISIS now
that its territorial control has collapsed.
Finally, concerning the situation in Idlib, the United
States is concerned about the recent increase in shelling
by the regime of Idlib governorate, which has spurred
the movement of an estimated 20,000 people towards
19-05536

26/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

the Turkish border. The United States reiterates its calls
on all parties to uphold the Turkish-Russian brokered
ceasefire in order to prevent a dangerous escalation
of the conflict and a humanitarian catastrophe. The
ceasefire is vital to protecting 3 million civilians and
protecting the border of our NATO ally Turkey.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director
for Operations and Advocacy of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for her very
useful briefing, and to commend the excellent work
of all the teams involved in responding to the urgent
humanitarian situation in Syria. I also commend the
commitment of the humanitarian co-penholders, as was
expressed by the representative of Belgium only a few
minutes ago.
Let us be clear. We would be making a serious
miscalculation and a huge political mistake if we
were to assume that the Syrian tragedy is behind us.
It is not — as the country enters its ninth year of the
conflict, the risks of escalation continue to be very real
and the humanitarian situation remains a disaster.
In the Idlib region in particular, ceasefire violations
are on the rise and the risk of a humanitarian disaster
remains acute, as illustrated by the recent displacement
of more than 20,000 people in less than one week.
Equally distressing are the situations of the besieged
population in Al-Baghouz, where a large number of
people have lost their lives while trying to leave the
area, and of the 47,000 people who are currently living
in Al-Hol camp. Those calamities are the result of the
horrific and systematic policy of Da’esh, in particular
its resort to mining on a massive scale and its use of
human shields. In that context, now more than ever,
we must remain fully prepared to act with regard to
three key inseparable priorities — the need to protect
civilians, ensuring humanitarian access and achieving
a lasting political solution in Syria.
Our first priority is therefore the protection
of civilians. The protection of civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel, must be an
absolute priority for all stakeholders. Hospitals
and schools remain the target of attacks, which is
completely unacceptable and at odds with international
humanitarian law. It must therefore be stressed
that all parties must respect their obligations under
international humanitarian law. That is not a wish but
a requirement.

S/PV. 8471

In particular, we must do everything possible to
preserve the ceasefire in Idlib over the long term, in
accordance with the commitments reiterated at the
Istanbul quadripartite summit. An offensive would
have disastrous humanitarian, migration and security
consequences throughout the region. To avoid that
worst-case scenario, Turkey and Russia must continue
their efforts to preserve the ceasefire agreement that
they were able broker last September and monitor its
proper implementation.
Our second priority is ensuring humanitarian
access. I would like to recall a statistic that is more
eloquent than long speeches — of the 200 requests for
access made to the Syrian regime during the months
of December and January, only 40 per cent were
authorized. In particular, it is unacceptable for the
regime to be blocking access to areas it has reclaimed.
We again call on actors with influence over the regime
to ensure immediate, safe, comprehensive, unhindered
and sustainable humanitarian access throughout
Syria, in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions and international humanitarian law.
Humanitarian access must be respected at all
stages — from independent needs assessment to the
implementation and monitoring of humanitarian
projects — in order to ensure that aid reaches the targeted
populations, in particular and as a priority the most
vulnerable. In Rukban, we welcome the deployment of
the United Nations convoy in early February, but the
situation remains extremely worrisome and calls for a
two-pronged approach.
On the one hand, it is imperative to allow the
United Nations to regularly deploy convoys to meet
the needs of the more than 40,000 people in the
camp, who live in appalling conditions. On the other
hand, the results of the United Nations survey are
clear — 95 per cent of people wish to leave the camp.
The return of displaced persons from Rukban must be
voluntary, safe and dignified and must be conducted in
accordance with international humanitarian law and in
close coordination with the United Nations. We must
also ensure that displaced persons have access to all
necessary information, including information on the
security situation in the areas to which they wish to
return and access to their property and basic services,
as well as the necessary guarantees against the risk of
arrest, arbitrary detention or forced conscription.

19-055367/20

S/PV.8471

The situation in the Middle East

26/02/2019

Reports that the Syrian regime practises such
violations in the territories now under its control, in
particular in the south-west and eastern Ghouta, are
particularly worrisome. I therefore call on the regime’s
supporters to put an end to those violations, which is
a prerequisite before the return of internally displaced
persons and refugees can be considered. In areas
outside the regime’s control, it is crucial that the entire
international community continue its efforts to meet
the urgent needs of the population.

repressive Syrian regime, the recent arrest in France and
Germany of three former security officers suspected of
committing war crimes and crimes against humanity
is an important step, which demonstrates that serious
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights will not go unpunished. In that regard, France
reiterates its support for the International, Impartial
and Independent Mechanism and the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic.

Regarding the north-east in particular, our
mobilization must remain intact — it is a humanitarian
imperative, contributes to the stabilization of the
region and should help prevent the resurgence of
Da’esh. I would also like to sound a warning of the
risk of humanitarian disaster and serious human rights
violations that a military intervention in that area would
pose, regardless of its origin.

The Council can count on France’s full mobilization
at all levels in support of the political process and the
efforts of Mr. Geir Pedersen, the new Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, to whom we pledge
our full support.

Our third priority — a decisive one — is the launch
of a sustainable political process. Only an irreversible,
credible and inclusive political transition will break
the cycle of Syrian tragedy and pave the way for
reconstruction. Concrete progress in the implementation
of all elements of resolution 2254 (2015) is necessary
to achieve lasting improvements in the humanitarian
situation and to make possible the voluntary, safe and
dignified return of refugees. That was the commitment
made by the European Union and the Arab League
at their summit on 24 and 25 February by declaring
that they will pursue their respective policies towards
Syria in line with the tangible progress made towards a
political settlement.
It is our belief that today, perhaps for the first time
in eight years, there is a small window of opportunity
to put an end to the Syrian conflict. Our shared
responsibility is to seize that opportunity through an
inclusive political solution, because that is the only way
to prevent the same causes leading to the same effects
in future repetitions of the Syrian tragedy. That is why
we call on each member of the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities to allow the establishment
of a credible political process, under the supervision
of the United Nations, within the framework of
resolution 2254 (2015).
The Council should be aware that there will be
no lasting political solution without justice for Syrian
victims. Following international arrest warrants
issued by French courts against senior officials of the
8/20

Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes today’s briefing and congratulates
Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for Operations and
Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for her excellent
briefing on the humanitarian situation in the Syrian
Arab Republic.
My country remains concerned about the precarious
humanitarian situation in the country despite the
efforts made by the international community since the
outbreak of the conflict eight years ago. According to
United Nations agencies, at least 50 children died in
January and February from hypothermia, malnutrition
and medical conditions, 11.7 million Syrians currently
living within the country’s borders still need
humanitarian assistance and nearly 5.7 million refugees
have been registered in neighbouring countries.
That is why my country places great hopes in the
third Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of
Syria and the Region, to be held from 12 to 14 March.
The Conference should enable us to take stock of the
humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic and
define the main priorities for 2019. In that regard, Côte
d’Ivoire urges the international community to continue
to support efforts to meet the basic needs and ensure
the protection of those persons in distress.
My country is deeply concerned about the persistent
reports of civilians killed or injured by air strikes and
ground fighting in eastern Deir ez-Zor. The difficult
living conditions of tens of thousands of people,
including women, children and displaced elderly
people in the region, are equally worrisome. With a
view to reversing that pernicious trend, Côte d’Ivoire
19-05536

26/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

urges all parties involved in military operations, both
in Deir ez-Zor and throughout Syria, to comply with
international law on the protection of civilians and
hospital infrastructure. In that regard, my country
would like to recall that obstacles to the free movement
of persons and goods, as well as violations of the rights
of displaced persons, constitute serious violations
of human dignity and are liable to prosecution under
international law.
It is also worth recalling the need to ensure safe,
prompt, unhindered and sustainable humanitarian
access for people in distress, both in Rukban and
throughout Syria, in accordance with resolution 2401
(2018). Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the progress made in
the deployment of a second convoy to Rukban, where
about 42,000 people are living in difficult conditions.
My country is also concerned about the military
escalation in the north-west and north-east of the
country, where the humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate as a result of renewed hostilities. Especially
in Idlib province, civilians are victims of human rights
violations perpetrated by armed groups.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire calls on the parties
to the conflict to uphold the ceasefire in the Idlib
demilitarized zone, ensure respect for international
humanitarian law and intensify diplomatic efforts for
a political solution to the Syrian crisis, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015) and the complementary
Astana and Sochi processes.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Ms. Reena Ghelani, Director for Operations
and Advocacy of the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, for her briefing.
China attaches great importance to the humanitarian
situation in Syria and commends the United Nations
and all the parties concerned for their efforts to improve
the humanitarian situation in Syria.
As we speak, there are still close to 12 million
people in Syria in need of humanitarian assistance.
In north-east and north-west Syria, many localities
have been ravaged by floods. The situation in Rukban
camp remains a cause for concern. A large number
of civilians are heading towards Al-Hol camp.
Humanitarian relief operations are facing challenges.
At the same time, as the overall situation, including
the security situation, stabilizes in Syria, we will see
a more favourable environment for improving the

S/PV. 8471

humanitarian conditions. In that context, China wishes
to make the following observations.
First, the Syrian parties should put the future of the
country and the well-being of the people first, continue
to abide by the relevant Council resolutions, implement
previously reached agreements, continue to engage in
the political process and create conditions to further
alleviate the humanitarian situation. The international
community should steadfastly support the role of the
United Nations as the primary mediator, lend its support
to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and push
the Syrian parties, through a Syrian-owned and Syrianled process and on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015), to
seek solutions through negotiations that accommodate
the concerns of all parties. Council members should
engage in comprehensive consultations and foster
conditions that are conducive to a political settlement
of the Syrian issue. The future of Syria can be decided
only by the Syrian people, without outside interference.
The international community should respect the Syrian
Government and people in their efforts to safeguard
national security and stability.
Secondly, the United Nations and the international
community need to scale up assistance — in cash and
in kind — to the Syrian people. In the light of evolving
needs, they should adjust and improve their humanitarian
relief operations. Cross-border humanitarian relief
measures represent ad hoc arrangements under special
circumstances. Full respect should be accorded to
Syria’s sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity, in strict compliance with Council resolutions.
Humanitarian operations should be guided by the United
Nations guiding principles on humanitarian relief and
the relevant provisions of international law, under the
oversight of the United Nations throughout the process,
with particular emphasis on greater transparency
and better communication and coordination with the
Syrian Government.
Thirdly, the international community needs to
actively support the Syrian Government and people
in socioeconomic reconstruction in order to create
the conditions for the return of refugees and displaced
persons. According to a survey, 83 per cent of the
people in Rukban camp wish to return to their place
of birth; efforts should be made to make that happen.
Steady progress in reconstruction can give hope to the
Syrian people and lead to long-term stability in Syria.
The return of Syrian refugees to their home can also
ease the pressure on host States.

19-055369/20

S/PV.8471

The situation in the Middle East

China attaches great importance to the
humanitarian situation in Syria and has contributed
its part to alleviating the suffering of the Syrian
people. Since the outbreak of the crisis, and acting
through bilateral and multilateral channels, China
has provided much humanitarian aid to refugees, both
inside and outside Syria, including medical, winter and
nutritional supplies. At the opening ceremony of the
eighth ministerial meeting of the China-Arab States
Cooperation Forum in July last year, President Xi
Jinping announced that China will provide additional
assistance to the people in Syria and other regions. Work
has been in full swing to fulfil that pledge. Moving
forward, China will continue to provide assistance to
Syrian refugees in Syria and neighbouring countries to
the best of our ability.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We wish to thank the
Director for Operations and Advocacy of the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), Ms. Reena Ghelani, for her
comprehensive and yet sobering briefing, complemented
by the Permanent Representative of Belgium on behalf
of the co-penholders. We would also like to welcome
our colleague the Permanent Representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
South Africa reiterates its deep concern about the
dire humanitarian situation in Syria. Almost eight
years after the start of the conflict, the situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic remains one of the worst
humanitarian crises in the world. Some 13.1 million
people require humanitarian assistance, including
6.2 million people who are internally displaced. The
humanitarian crisis in Syria has a particularly severe
impact on women, children and people who live with
disabilities. Children have been disproportionally
affected, with over 5 million children at a heightened
risk of undernourishment, dehydration, diarrhoea,
infectious diseases and injury. Millions more will need
to be supported after being exposed to the traumatic
events and violence of the past eight years.
South Africa calls for the full implementation of
resolution 2449 (2018), which renewed the authorization
for cross-border and cross-line humanitarian access
to Syria. My delegation welcomes the successful
humanitarian operation undertaken in Rukban. Initial
reports by OCHA reveal that the operation, involving
133 trucks, was the largest humanitarian operation ever
undertaken by the United Nations in Syria. The Rukban
operation distributed humanitarian assistance to more
10/20

26/02/2019

than 40,000 people in the form of health, nutritional
and education supplies and more 66,000 blankets and
sleeping bags. Additionally, more than 7,000 children
were vaccinated. Given the difficult environment
in which the operation took place, OCHA and its
implementing partners should be commended for their
success. We also commend the Government of Syria for
authorizing and facilitating access to Rukban.
We should be mindful of the fact that there is an
urgent need for humanitarian assistance in northeastern Syria in places such as the Al-Hol camp, three
quarters of whose population are women and children
under the age of five. We also remain concerned about
the situation of civilians, particularly those trapped in
Hajin, the last area controlled by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. We call on all the parties to abide by
their obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights law, for all movements to be voluntary,
for displacement to last no longer than necessary and
for the displaced to be able to return as soon as possible
in safety and dignity.
We welcome the ongoing de-escalation agreement
between Turkey and Russia, which has averted
potentially catastrophic humanitarian consequences,
especially in Idlib province. We urge the parties to
sustain it.
It is important to ensure that the Syrian authorities
allow speedy and sustained access to humanitarian
assistance, bearing in mind the importance of respect
for international humanitarian law and for protecting
the civilian population.
We reiterate our view that the only sustainable
solution to the Syrian question, after so much bombing
and destruction, continues to be a political settlement
achieved through an inclusive Syrian-led dialogue
aimed at a political transition that reflects the will of
the Syrian people, with guaranteed protection for all
groups of Syrian society. We therefore urge the Council
to unite to fully implement resolution 2254 (2013)
and to support Mr. Pedersen, the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, who will be briefing us on Thursday.
Finally, we are looking forward to the release of
the strategic humanitarian needs plan for 2019, as well
as to the pledging conference to be held in Brussels
in March. We call on the international community to
make its support as generous as possible. We, as the
international community, and the Council in particular,
19-05536

26/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

must continue supporting the humanitarian efforts
in Syria.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): My delegation would
like to thank Director Reena Ghelani for her briefing
on the current humanitarian situation in Syria. We
also want to express our appreciation to the United
Nations humanitarian workers for their tireless efforts
in providing assistance in Syria.
We are deeply alarmed by the increase in attacks
and civilian casualties in Idlib, as well as the consequent
additional suffering for many civilians in the Hajin area
caused by air strikes and intense fighting. They are in
an extremely vulnerable position, and it is obvious that
the international community must enhance its efforts
to address the issue, not only by alleviating people’s
suffering but also by halting the attacks and hostilities.
In that context, Indonesia would like to focus on the
following points.
First, with regard to the importance of ensuring the
continuation of well-targeted humanitarian assistance,
more than 11.7 million people in Syria depend on such
assistance, which makes the effort daunting but also
crucial. We were therefore delighted to learn that a
second convoy reached Rukban, where some 41,000
people have received life-saving assistance. Sadly, as
the Secretary-General states in his report (S/2019/157),
eight children have died owing to the dire situation in
the camp, which was exacerbated by the harsh winter
conditions and was something that could and should
have been prevented. With regard to Hajin, it is deeply
disturbing to learn that many civilians have been
reported killed or injured and that thousands have been
displaced from Hajin to the Al-Hol camp. The large
influx into Al-Hol and the current conditions there,
where more than 40,000 people are now living and
thousands more are expected, clearly need particular
attention. We are pleased that the United Nations has
scaled up its efforts by opening a transit centre in
Al-Suwar. However, we need to do more. Sixty-one
children were reported to have died while in transit or
after arriving at the Al-Hol camp. That, too, could and
should have been prevented. We urge all the parties
to the conflict to take all possible measures to protect
civilians, especially women and children, and to ensure
the unhindered delivery of the humanitarian assistance
they need. The urgency of maintaining life-saving
assistance to the millions of people in need of it in Syria
cannot be overemphasized.

S/PV. 8471

Secondly, Indonesia believes that it is crucial to
ensure the safe and voluntary return of refugees to
their home areas in Syria. In that regard, we share
the call made by Russia, Iran and Turkey during the
tripartite summit in Sochi, on 14 February, concerning
the importance of ensuring the safe and voluntary
return of refugees and internally displaced persons.
All interested parties should be on board with this and
should enhance their coordination, in accordance with
international law and taking into account the interests
of the countries that are hosting refugees.
Thirdly, all parties should redouble their efforts and
respect their commitments to maintaining the existing
ceasefire agreements in order to prevent serious
humanitarian consequences. The Secretary-General’s
report has highlighted the risk of military escalation
and the likely catastrophic consequences in Idlib. We
want to reiterate once again that we cannot afford more
setbacks on humanitarian issues. We cannot afford to
see more children losing their parents because of the
crisis, or more people trapped without food, water
or shelter.
My delegation believes firmly that a normal and
peaceful life for all Syrians is possible. However,
everyone in this Chamber is fully aware that in the
absence of a political solution in line with resolution
2254 (2015), the humanitarian situation will continue
to deteriorate. We can and must avoid that. Indonesia
stands ready to support the work of Special Envoy Geir
Pedersen in advancing the political process in Syria and
finding a peaceful solution to the conflict.
In conclusion, my delegation emphasizes the
importance of observing the international principles
of humanitarian assistance, which include humanity,
neutrality and impartiality, as well as full respect for
States’ sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
Director Reena Ghelani for her comprehensive
briefing and to commend the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Syria.
The conflict in Syria has brought enormous suffering
to its civilian population. Almost 12 million people are
in need of multisectoral humanitarian assistance. More
than 6 million are internally displaced, of whom an
estimated 870,000 live in sites of last resort.
The conflict, which has been characterized by
widespread and systematic violations and abuses of

19-0553611/20

S/PV.8471

The situation in the Middle East

26/02/2019

international humanitarian and human rights law,
affects the most vulnerable groups — children,
young people, women and girls, the elderly and
people with disabilities. People with both physical
and psychological disabilities often have particular
problems with protection in humanitarian emergencies,
as they are more likely to be exposed to targeted
violence, exploitation and abuse, including sexual and
gender-based violence. We should do our utmost to
prevent this group from suffering further, as they are
already disproportionately affected by violent conflict,
and should ensure that humanitarian assistance and
all services are available and accessible to those with
specific needs.

unwavering commitment to supporting the millions
of people affected by the conflict. The international
community has contributed on an unprecedented scale
to alleviating the immense humanitarian and resilience
needs in Syria and across the region, and to supporting
a peaceful solution to the conflict. I trust that this year
we will once again be able to prove our solidarity with
all those in need.

Getting back to a broader context, I want to
underline that we continue to be very concerned about
ongoing impunity for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. I want to make it clear that there can
be no peace without justice. Any military operations
should be fully in line with international humanitarian
and human rights law in order to ensure that the
thousands of civilians who are trapped in the middle of
the fighting are not harmed. The protection of civilians
is not a choice but a legal obligation for all parties to
the conflict. Those who do not comply should be held
accountable. In that context, I want to underline the
significance of the agreement between Russia and
Turkey on the Idlib de-escalation zone as a crucial
move in averting a humanitarian catastrophe. All
parties to the conflict should ensure that the agreement
is fully implemented.

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this meeting, and we
thank Ms. Reena Ghelani for her valuable briefing
this morning.

We welcome the arrival in Rukban of a second
convoy at the beginning of February, for which I
want to thank all the actors involved, especially the
United Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent,
which in eight days of operations managed to deliver
humanitarian assistance to 40,000 people in Rukban,
providing them with life-saving support. Nonetheless,
it is only a temporary measure, sufficient for about a
month. We desperately need a long-term, safe, voluntary
and dignified solution for thousands of people, many of
whom have been in the Rukban area for more than two
years now. We are encouraged by the positive steps that
the Syrian authorities have taken recently and expect
them to authorize another convoy.
The European Union is holding a third Brussels
Conference for Syria from 12 to 14 March, in a
demonstration of the international community’s
deep concern about the situation in Syria and its
12/20

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that there
can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A
political agreement in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/522, annex)
remains the only pathway to peace.

Peru has been following the situation in Syria
with great concern. The extreme vulnerability of the
humanitarian situation has been exacerbated by the
escalation of violence in recent weeks. We are alarmed
that some 11.7 million people still require humanitarian
assistance in order to survive, most of them women and
children. There are several focuses of concern right
now, Syria’s north-west being one of the most serious,
given its population density and high volatility. We are
deeply concerned about the fact that the impact on the
civilian population is being aggravated by the growing
control that terrorist organizations have in the area,
with new fatalities, arbitrary detentions, kidnappings
and destruction of infrastructure. Peru reiterates
its firm condemnation of terrorism. While believe
it is essential that the terrorist groups that remain in
Idlib and other parts of Syria be brought to justice,
we emphasize that combating this scourge should not
be seen as a justification for endangering the lives of
millions of people.
In the circumstances, maintaining the agreement
reached by Turkey and the Russian Federation in
September is crucial. We also want to focus attention
on the tragic situation of the nearly 40,000 displaced
people in Rukban, who face daily shortages of food,
drinking water, medical care and supplies, as well as
extreme weather conditions. We acknowledge and
support the humanitarian work carried out by the United
Nations and agencies such as the Red Crescent, and we
welcome the recent provision of assistance in this area.
We emphasize how important it is to ensure that this aid
19-05536

26/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

is provided in a sustained manner, and that at the same
time urgent efforts are made to reach comprehensive
solutions that can put an end to these people’s suffering,
especially considering that 95 per cent of them have
expressed the desire to leave the camp and return to
their places of origin. In that regard, we welcome the
humanitarian corridors that Russia has set up in the area
aimed at ensuring people’s voluntary, safe and dignified
return within internationally accepted parameters. We
also urge the United Nations and other humanitarian
agencies to continue to increase their assistance to the
tens of thousands of internally displaced persons in
north-eastern Syria who are fleeing the violence of the
remaining groups affiliated with the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant.
We encourage efforts to improve the conditions in
the Al-Hol camp, and hope to see more initiatives such
as the transit centre in Al-Suwar, which is providing
urgent medical care to displaced persons en route to
safer places. We also want to point out that any military
operation, such as that under way in Baghouz, must
respect the principles of precaution and distinction
enshrined in international humanitarian law.
In conclusion, I want to stress that only a political
solution that lays the foundations for sustainable peace
in Syria can make it possible to overcome the continuing
humanitarian disaster there.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Reena Ghelani for her briefing.
We are pleased with the steadily declining
violence in Syria. Despite the continuing trend towards
stabilization, however, there are still some hotbeds of
tension in the Syrian Arab Republic, including in Idlib
governorate and east of the Euphrates. The situation in
north-western Syria is fragile and cannot be artificially
maintained for an extended period of time. The threat
posed by militants from the Al-Nusra Front alliance
with the Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, who have taken almost
complete control of these territories, will not disappear
on its own. Calls for freezing the situation only
encourage the terrorists. In that regard, together with
our Turkish and Iranian partners, we are continuing our
efforts to develop a formula that will make it possible
to combat the terrorist threat without harming the
civilian population. The high-level meeting in Sochi on
14 February confirmed that the Astana troika remains
united in its quest for ways to stabilize the situation

S/PV. 8471

on the ground in Idlib and the north-east as soon
as possible.
We support the view of the importance of increasing
the humanitarian assistance to Syria. The Syrians are
indeed in need of a great deal. But while the assistance
entering the country is much needed, it must be
comprehensive and depoliticized. We know that some
countries have been pressured in an effort to dissuade
them from helping people living in territories controlled
by Damascus. That is absolutely unacceptable. The
use of unilateral sanctions, whose greatest impact is
on ordinary Syrians, is equally shameful. Instead of
causing suffering to Syrians with the idea that it will
do damage to the authorities in Damascus, the focus
should be on the most effective way of improving the
humanitarian situation in Syria, which is by helping to
restore its ruined civilian infrastructure and national
economy. We want to stress that if the representatives of
the Syrian Government are not invited to the upcoming
Brussels Conference, it will not carry its full weight.
The number of refugees returning to Syria from
neighbouring States is steadily increasing. I want to
emphasize that no one is forcing refugees to return.
It is estimated that just under 2 million Syrians, in 10
countries, have expressed the wish to return home. Since
30 September 2015 some 370,000 overall have returned
from foreign countries. With the help of the Russian
Centre for the Reconciliation of Opposing Sides in the
Syrian Arab Republic, 12 entry checkpoints have been
set up, including one at an airport and one at a seaport.
The Syrian authorities are taking steps aimed
at making the process of Syrian refugees’ return
sustainable. In 412 towns and villages that have suffered
the least from military action, centres have been set up
for welcoming and housing up to 1.5 million people.
In the Aleppo, Damascus and Hama governorates,
a State programme is being implemented to rebuild
towns that have been liberated from the militants,
including with the provision of water and electric
infrastructure, targeted aid and assistance for people
in returning to their permanent homes. The amnesty
process is continuing for those who evaded military
service, including refugees and former members of
illegal armed groups. More than 55,000 have been
amnestied so far. We hope that those who truly care
about the fate of ordinary Syrians will take a close look
at the situation, considering the realities on the ground,
and join in the efforts to overcome the destruction and
restore normalcy to people’s lives.

19-0553613/20

S/PV.8471

The situation in the Middle East

We want to draw special attention to two issues.
First, we are concerned about the situation in the Al-Hol
camp for internally displaced persons (IDPs), which is
located in north-eastern Hasakah governorate. There
are almost 50,000 refugees there, the majority of them
women and children. All of them had fled Hajin, which
the coalition headed by the United States, together with
its protégé forces on the ground, has razed to the ground,
leaving many civilian victims, incidentally. As far as
we remember, no one called for an end to the bombing
at the time. The camp is now taking in people from
Baghouz, which the coalition is also flattening. People
may say that the air strikes are all high precision, but
the same was said about Raqqa, where bodies are still
being pulled out from under the rubble.
It is time that everyone, including United Nations
bodies, dropped their double standards and looked at
things objectively. The problem in Rukban, where from
6 to 14 February the United Nations and the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent conducted an operation to deliver
and distribute humanitarian assistance, is not related
to a lack of desire on the part of the IDPs to move to
Damascus-controlled territory. On the contrary, a
United Nations survey of the camp showed that 95 per
cent want to leave Rukban, and 80 per cent want to return
to areas under the control of the Syrian authorities. The
problem in Rukban is the illegal occupation by the
United States of part of sovereign Syrian territory in
the area of Al-Tanf, where militants from the Maghawir
Al-Thawra armed group, who have been tarnished by
their ties to terrorists, are nurtured. As far as we can
tell, there is no access to or exit from the area, and
thanks to overcrowding, unsanitary conditions and
inadequate food and medicine, dozens of people have
already died. According to some reports, the camp has
seen its first case of leprosy. In accordance with the
Geneva Convention, the United States, as the occupying
Power, bears full responsibility for the situation of
Rukban’s inhabitants. Article 55 of the Fourth Geneva
Convention states that
“[t]o the fullest extent of the means available
to it, the Occupying Power has the duty of ensuring
the food and medical supplies of the population;
it should, in particular, bring in the necessary
foodstuffs, medical stores and other articles if the
resources of the occupied territory are inadequate.”
Article 56 states that
14/20

26/02/2019

“the Occupying Power has the duty of ensuring
and maintaining ... the medical and hospital
establishments and services, public health and
hygiene in the occupied territory, with particular
reference to ... the prophylactic and preventive
measures necessary to combat the spread of
contagious diseases”.
The Convention emphasizes that external humanitarian
assistance does not relieve the occupying Power
of its responsibility. As a result, the international
humanitarian community, the United Nations and
specialized agencies, donors and partners, are doing
what the United States should be doing in accordance
with international law. We have a proposal for a
way out of the situation and a lasting solution to the
problem of Rukban, which is to evacuate all who want
to leave the camp and go where they choose. “All who
want” are the key words, of course. We must get on
with implementing that idea instead of wasting time
in planning new convoys, which only emphasize the
disregard for international humanitarian law in that
part of Syria.
That is the point of the Russian initiative which on
19 February opened two corridors to enable civilians to
leave the camp, under the humanitarian guarantees of
the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. And people are ready to
leave. We simply need to stop blocking their way.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank Ms. Reena Ghelani for
her comprehensive briefing on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. I would also like to once again
thank the thousands of humanitarian workers in the
camps providing assistance and protection in order
to save lives in Syria. We recognize that ensuring the
necessary conditions for safe, sustained, effective and
quick humanitarian work remains a great challenge.
The Dominican Republic is particularly concerned
about the ongoing violent incidents and military
operations that endanger the lives of civilians and
forcibly displace them in difficult circumstances, often
with deplorable consequences, as was the case with the
recent displacement of thousands of people from Hajin
to Al-Hol camp that in just a few weeks claimed the lives
of 61 children. Moreover, it is estimated that 10.2 million
Syrians are living in hostile zones. We therefore call on
all parties involved in military activities to strictly abide
by international humanitarian law and safeguard the
lives, freedom of movement and integrity of civilians
19-05536

26/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

and civilian infrastructure. While we realize that Syria
is continuing to experience one of the most acute and
urgent humanitarian crises of our times, second only to
that in Yemen, my delegation believes it is important
to consider the real conditions on the ground in order
to enable steps to be taken, even small ones, towards
lasting peace for the Syrian people. We believe that in
order to do so, we must begin by ensuring basic health,
education and security conditions.
The figures are not encouraging. One of three
schools in Syria has been damaged or destroyed. Forty
per cent of health centres are not operating at capacity.
I have already mentioned the high level of insecurity
affecting a large number of people, whose very future
is frankly uncertain. Six and a half million people
are suffering from food insecurity, and 2.1 million
children are not attending school, with a high rate of
child employment.
Those are just some of the poignant statistics coming
out of United Nations reports, which do not enable
envisaging even a budding progress in the years to
come. We therefore believe that the 2019 humanitarian
response plan must include a comprehensive approach
towards laying a firm foundation for ensuring a better
future for the Syrians, including lasting solutions to
the situation facing the millions of displaced persons.
It is very complex situation. We look forward to the
successful outcome of the donors conference to be held
in Brussels in March.
I would like to join the other delegations that
expressed their views earlier on the situation concerning
the makeshift camp in Rukban and the extensive and
effective joint operation carried out by United Nations
agencies and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent — the
largest-scale humanitarian operation that has been
carried out in the country. Concerning the conditions
described by Ms. Ghelani earlier, we would be remiss if
we failed to stress the need for assistance in facilitating
the return to Rukban in a regular and sustained manner.
We urge the Syrian authorities to authorize access to
a fresh convoy as soon as possible. In particular, we
support seeking lasting solutions for the Syrian children
of Rukban and any other affected location, including
local integration and resettlement, and ensuring that
any return of refugees and displaced children is safe,
voluntary, dignified and informed, while at the same
time decisions are made in the light of the best interests
of the children concerned, within the framework of the
family and their overall well-being.

S/PV. 8471

Lastly, we echo the many calls to the parties to fully
implement the Russian-Turkish brokered agreement
on a demilitarized zone in Idlib under international
humanitarian law. As the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and other actors have stated,
an escalation of hostilities would have catastrophic
humanitarian consequences. Equally catastrophic is
the insecurity that the trapped civilians are facing.
According to reports, last week 16 civilians, including
women and children, were reportedly killed and more
than 70 injured in the Al-Qusour neighbourhood of
Idlib by two explosive devices, the second of which
appears to have been designed to kill and maim people,
including medical workers attempting to help the
victims of the first bomb.
Diplomatic efforts must be ramped up to find a
political solution to the crisis in Syria in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015), while avoiding new
military offensives, which inevitably end up harming
civilians, mainly children, women, the elderly and
people living with disabilities.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): At the outset, let me
thank Ms. Reena Ghelani for her briefing, as well as to
pay tribute, through her, to all the United Nations staff
members who are doing such important humanitarian
work in Syria.
Today Ms. Ghelani reminded us that the
humanitarian situation in Syria remains grave. We
cannot afford to lose sight of the 12 million people
suffering daily. Eighty per cent of Syrians live below
the poverty line, and one third of the population
does not have reliable access to affordable food. The
Security Council must therefore step up its efforts to
ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches those who
need it throughout Syria. We must also do much more
to support United Nations-led efforts to end the conflict
through a political process.
I agree with all the remarks made today by the
representative of Belgium on behalf of the three
humanitarian co-penholders, but I wanted to highlight
three points: the situation in Rukban, the situation in
regime-held areas and the situation in Idlib.
First, concerning Rukban, the United Kingdom
welcomes the news that an urgently needed
humanitarian convoy finally reached Rukban on
6 February, delivering assistance to thousands of
people in desperate need. The situation of more than
41,000 people sheltering in Rukban remains a serious

19-0553615/20

S/PV.8471

The situation in the Middle East

concern. We must not see the same repeated delays
before the next convoy, which the United Nations
has now requested. The United Nations-conducted
intention survey in Rukban shows that the majority of
residents wish to leave the camp, but it also highlights
their fears and concerns about doing so. Many are
worried about their safety and security if they choose
to return to their homes. Lack of civil documentation
and concerns about access to their property were also
reported. Those concerns need to be addressed before
people move. The United Nations is therefore right,
as our humanitarian co-penholders have said, to call
for certain conditions to be in place beforehand, while
any return or relocation must be safe, voluntary and
dignified. Any effort to assist in the relocation of the
population of Rukban must be in line with international
protection standards. United Nations humanitarian
staff should be granted access to the population before,
during and after any movement. Children, women, the
elderly and persons with disabilities must be afforded
special protection during all phases of relocation.
Screening procedures must be conducted in accordance
with international law.
Concerning my second point, about the situation in
regime-held areas, the United Kingdom remains deeply
concerned about conditions in former opposition-held
areas that the regime now controls. The Russian
Ambassador spoke of steps by the regime to welcome
back refugees to areas under regime control. You do not
welcome back refugees by arbitrarily detaining them in
conditions in which torture is systematic and rife. You
do not welcome back refugees by forcing them to join
the army and fight in a conflict they have fled. And you
do not welcome back refugees by threatening to seize
their property under Law Number 10.
All of those reasons were cited by Syrians
themselves in the United Nations recent survey as
reasons for why they are not returning to regime-held
areas. That is clearly not an environment for safe,
dignified and voluntary refugee return. It clearly falls
short of the Council’s call in resolution 2254 (2015)
for the establishment of inclusive and non-sectarian
governance in Syria. Three quarters of those
communities that came under regime control in 2018
are considered hard-to-reach areas to deliver aid. Let us
be clear: they are only hard to reach because the regime
chooses not to allow necessary aid to reach those who
need it. We therefore join our French colleagues in
16/20

26/02/2019

calling on the regime to allow unfettered humanitarian
access to all of those people in areas that it controls.
Thirdly, concerning the situation in Idlib, we remain
deeply concerned about the 3 million people in northwest Syria, more than 2 million of whom are entirely
reliant on cross-border aid. We should also remember
that, when we talk about the threat from terrorism in
Idlib, more babies than terrorists remain in Idlib. Fifty
per cent of the population has been displaced from
their homes — sometimes multiple times — thereby
stretching scarce resources beyond their limits and
putting further strain on host communities. We heard
today from Ms. Ghelani that a military escalation in
Idlib governorate would have catastrophic humanitarian
consequences. We therefore call on all parties — but
in particular the regime and Russia — to respect the
ceasefire and facilitate humanitarian access to Idlib.
Finally, I would like to echo the points made
by my South African colleague, the humanitarian
co-penholders and almost all other speakers today
about how we will tackle this humanitarian crisis in
Syria in the long-term only through a political solution
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). That
means, in practice, a political transition. It means the
establishment of credible, inclusive, non-sectarian
governance, which we know is so sorely absent in
Syria today. As my Belgian and Polish colleagues
emphasized, it also means accountability for the war
crimes and crimes against humanity that have been
carried out during the conflict, in particular by the
regime and by Da’esh.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Equatorial Guinea.
I join delegations that took the floor before me to
thank Ms. Reena Ghelani and her team for their detailed
briefing. The Government of Equatorial Guinea
follows very closely the activities of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Syria, as well
as those of all agencies of the United Nations system
and other humanitarian organizations operating in the
country since the beginning of the war. We reiterate our
praise for the arduous and noble work they have carried
out over the past two months, together with the more
than 1,700 United Nations staff deployed throughout
the country.
As can be seen from the briefing provided by
Ms. Ghelani, the situation in Syria remains extremely
19-05536

26/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

serious, not only in the Idlib de-escalation zone, which
remains under the control of terrorist organizations and
non-State armed opposition groups, but also in Aleppo
and in the south-east of Deir ez-Zor governorate. The
risk of military escalation, especially in Idlib, continues
to increase, further complicating the operating
environment for humanitarian organizations aimed
at meeting basic needs and ensuring the protection
of civilians. It should be recalled that air strikes and
intense fighting between the parties continue to have
a direct impact on educational and medical facilities,
injuring and killing dozens of civilians. There is no
doubt that, despite almost eight years of conflict and the
partial easing of the intensity of the overall violence,
the humanitarian crisis in Syria persists. We are talking
about nearly 12 million Syrians who need humanitarian
assistance, and approximately 6 million refugees still
in neighbouring countries. Such statistics are appalling
and require a collective awareness of the urgent need to
end the hostilities in Syria and the permanent spectre
of war.
Moreover, in line with the Secretary-General’s
remarks, Equatorial Guinea strongly condemns
the ongoing serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights violations and
abuses committed by the parties to the conflict. In that
regard, we support the idea that the Syrian authorities
should cooperate closely with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
protect and promote human rights on the ground in the
current context of war.
Despite that bleak backdrop, we welcome the
progress made on the basis of resolution 2449 (2018)
and other relevant Security Council resolutions to
effectively deploy the second convoy of the United
Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent to the
Rukban camp for displaced persons. That humanitarian
convoy, which the Council had called for repeatedly
and is now referred to as the largest of all time, will
help save the lives of more than 40,000 people living in
appalling conditions.
The Syrians have suffered terribly because of this
war — suffering that should prompt us to seek practical
solutions that do not become a dead letter or end up in
statements and lawsuits. In that regard, we believe that
there is still a need to ensure that the Idlib de-escalation
zone be maintained and protected in accordance with
international humanitarian law and that diplomatic
efforts be stepped up in the quest for a political

S/PV. 8471

solution to the crisis in Syria, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s important meeting. I also thank Ms. Ghelani
for participating in it.
Five years ago, on 22 February 2014 to be precise,
the Security Council adopted resolution 2139 (2014), on
the humanitarian situation in my country, Syria. In that
regard, I would like to recall some of what I said in this
very Chamber when that resolution was adopted.
“Humanitarian support to the Syrian people
cannot be effective unless it is accompanied in
word and deed by an end to the efforts to politicize
humanitarian issues and an end to terrorist acts. The
activities of the armed terrorist groups, including
those associated with Al-Qaida, are the main cause
of the humanitarian suffering of the Syrian people”
(S/PV.7116, p. 15).
Today I will briefly explain why I have chosen to
repeat what I said some five years ago. I will do that
by addressing the following three points. First, five
years ago, we said that humanitarian support to Syrians
would be right and effective only if actions were aligned
with words. That remains valid today. How can certain
States, including permanent members of the Security
Council, claim to be concerned about the humanitarian
situation in Syria while the Governments of those
States continue to support terrorism, maintain their
own armed forces illegitimately in Syria and engage in
aggression after aggression against my country? That
has led to thousands of civilian martyrs, the majority of
whom are women and children, and to the destruction
of the infrastructure.
Colonel Francois-Regis Legrier of France, who was
the leader of the French artillery unit in the illegitimate
coalition that was established against my country,
confirmed that point. I am citing from National Defence
Review, in which he said few days ago:
“We have massively destroyed the infrastructure.”

19-0553617/20

S/PV.8471

The situation in the Middle East

The goal of the coalition was to limit its losses. That
has led to a substantial increase in the number of deaths
among civilians and greater destruction.
Colonel Legrier asked:
“How many Syrian villages must suffer the
same fate as Al-Hajin for us to understand that we
are headed the wrong direction?”
He noted that the coalition could have acted more rapidly
and effectively against the terrorists by sending just
1,000 soldiers. He concluded his interview by asking,
“Why do we have an army that we do not dare
to use?”
I will answer that question by recalling what former
American President Barack Obama said here in the
Council about the fact that the international coalition
needed 30 years to eliminate terrorism in Syria. He
predicted that eliminating terrorism and Da’esh would
take three decades. President Obama therefore agrees
with Colonel Legrier. That simply underscores what we
have repeatedly said, that the goal of the illegitimate
coalition was not to combat terrorism, but rather to
target the resources of the Syrian State, prolong the
war that was imposed on Syria and drown the countries
and peoples of our region in the ongoing chaos of
imaginary conflicts.
In that connection, how can some of the permanent
members of the Security Council claim to be eager to
resolve the humanitarian situation in Syria, given that
their Governments have imposed unfair economic
sanctions on the Syrian people? Those sanctions affect
all aspects of daily life and impede the access of
ordinary civilians to food, medicine and milk for their
children, particularly in our harsh winters. The Syrians
are suffering due to those barbaric measures, which
affect the electricity, oil and gas sectors. This is not just
political terrorism, but also economic terrorism, which
is unfair, illegal and illegitimate.
Far from engaging in self-criticism, those States
do not take steps to rectify the errors for which they
are responsible, which would be a very noble task, as
an Arab proverb goes. Nothing of this sort is being
done. When we say “economic terrorism” we are not
exaggerating, because the conditional assistance that
certain States are offering makes us lose twice the value
of that aid as a result of the damage caused by their
coercive measures, which have wrought havoc on our
national economy and international trade transactions.
18/20

26/02/2019

Secondly, five years ago we said that humanitarian
assistance in Syria could be delivered on a fair and
effective basis only if it was free from any politicization
of humanitarian issues, and that statement stands just
as true today. How can the humanitarian co-penholders
within the Security Council discharge their duties
while ignoring the need to consult and coordinate with
the Syrian Government?
We understand that States have the right to govern
and manage their bilateral relations the way they
choose and in accordance with their own interests. Of
course, we enjoy that right and implement our foreign
policies accordingly. However, membership of the
Security Council imposes upon its membership the
responsibility to engage and consult with the countries
concerned so that the members can better understand
the preoccupations, worries and challenges of those
countries. That would be done if Council members
carried out their duties in line with the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, rather than being free
to pursue their own national agendas and short-sighted
political affiliations.
My colleague the Permanent Representative of
Belgium, one of the humanitarian co-penholders,
expressed his deep concern about what he called
25,000 Syrian refugees who have left Hajin town in
Syria, not in Florida, and headed to Al-Hol camp in
Syria, not in California. My Belgian colleague added
that he is sad for the deaths of some 60 children and
adults on the road from the Hajin Syrian town to Al-Hol
Syrian camp. I remind my colleague, the Ambassador
of Belgium, that many of those whom he described as
Syrian refugees are not Syrians at all; in fact, they are
Europeans. Many of them came from Belgium, France,
Britain, Germany, Spain and Sweden. I am of course
talking about thousands of terrorists and thousands of
their family members. All of them are not Syrians.
I did not hear from my Belgian colleague any
call on my country to participate in the third Brussels
Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria. We did
not receive an invitation to participate either in the first
Brussels Conference or in the second. They claim that
they are humanitarian pen-holders. This proves that the
reasons behind the three Brussels conferences are not
humanitarian at all. They are purely political reasons
against my country, Syria. The aim is to prolong
terrorism, while using the humanitarian factor to
blackmail and promote instability among the countries
of the region.
19-05536

26/02/2019

The situation in the Middle East

How could certain countries, some of which
are members of the Council, claim that they are
eager to resolve the humanitarian situation in Syria
while preventing the return of Syrian refugees to
their homes and villages after being liberated from
the terrorists? They put up artificial barriers, while
linking humanitarian and development assistance with
political conditions that contradict the principles of
humanitarian work.
When I talk about the politicization of the
humanitarian assistance in Syria, I need to refer to
what I have said scores of times — the United Nations
reports depend on what is called “open sources”.
Last month, I informed the Council that a reporter
from Der Spiegel, a German magazine, fabricated
information on Syria and had done so for years, simply
to demonize the Syrian Government (see S/PV.8454).
Today I wish to inform the Council that an employee
of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), Riam
Dalati, confirmed that scenes filmed in the hospital of
Douma in the Ghouta, near Damascus, after the alleged
chemical attack there were entirely fabricated. The
BBC therefore distanced itself from Dalati’s fabricated
report and suspended him. I want to make it clear that
if that report had confirmed the alleged attack or the
use of chemical weapons in the Douma hospital, Syria
would have been the target of another tripartite attack
outside the framework of international legitimacy.
Thirdly, five years ago we said that humanitarian
assistance in Syria could be delivered on a fair and
effective basis only if terrorism were eliminated. That
is true again today. How is it possible that certain States,
including some members of the Security Council, can
claim that they are interested in the humanitarian
situation in Syria while they still provide support and
protection to the remaining terrorist groups? How can
certain Western countries claim that they are keen on
combating terrorism and bringing its perpetrators to
justice through mechanisms such as the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria while
they refuse to refrain from the political exploitation
of terrorism and to repatriate their own nationals who
have been engaged in terrorism in Syria? The policies of
certain countries have made international instruments
and Council resolutions on counter-terrorism a mere
cheap trade commodity like that of Da’esh.
In conclusion, what is required today is to sincerely
work with the Syrian Government in accordance
with resolution 46/182, with full respect for Syrian

S/PV. 8471

sovereignty. A few days ago we saw the fruits of the
engagement between the Syrian Government and its
humanitarian partners, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
and the United Nations, in the absence of obstructing
external factors.
By engaging with the United Nations, we were able
for the second time to deliver assistance to the camp
where terrorists are deployed and that is occupied
by the American troops that invaded a dear part of
my country. We provided life-saving assistance and
medical care services to the inhabitants of the camp.
In complementing that effort, the Syrian Government,
in cooperation with our friendly Russian partner, has
opened two humanitarian corridors to allow for the
voluntary, safe and dignified exit of Syrian civilians
who are besieged by the American troops and their
affiliated terrorist groups. One of those terrorist
groups is called Suqour Al-Sahra. It attacked the city
of Al-Suwayda, where it killed 327 civilians at dawn
and captivated 32 women then returned to its lair,
which is under American protection. We look forward
to supporting the Syrian and Russian efforts to ensure
an end to the suffering of those living in the camp,
where the majority would like to return to the areas
that are under the control of the Government, as noted
by Ms. Ghelani and according to a survey conducted
recently by the United Nations. We also look forward to
ending the illegitimate presence of the American troops
and the terrorist gangs that they support..
My colleague the Ambassador of France said that
the Syrian Government had approved only 40 per
cent of requests for humanitarian assistance. That
is categorically untrue. The report of the SecretaryGeneral before the Council — that is the report of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) — and which was referred to by my colleague
the representative of France, does not mention that the
Syrian Government approved without exception all
requests submitted by the World Food Programme,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, UNICEF and the non-governmental
organizations, all acting under their respective mandates
and within their spheres of competence. The requests
were for the delivery of vital foodstuffs, medicines and
vaccines. This failure to include that information in
the Secretary-General’s report is the responsibility of
OCHA. It should be contained in the report so that my
colleague the representative of France does not make
the same mistake again.

19-0553619/20

S/PV.8471

The situation in the Middle East

The Security Council must uphold the principles
of international law and the Charter of the United
Nations. It must prevent the noble issue of humanitarian
assistance from being used as a means to destabilize
States or interfere in their internal affairs. Regrettably,
we see that happening flagrantly again today in the
Republic of Venezuela. That would not be happening
in Venezuela if some States had not succeeded in using
the humanitarian issue to politically blackmail certain

20/20

26/02/2019

Member States in exactly the same way as we have seen
in Syria.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council Members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

19-05536
