United Nations

A/RES/67/190

General Assembly

Distr.: General
27 March 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 103

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2012
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/67/458)]

67/190. Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking
in persons
The General Assembly,
Reiterating its concern that, despite sustained measures taken at the
international, regional and national levels, trafficking in persons remains one of the
grave challenges facing the international community, which also impairs the
enjoyment of human rights and needs a more concerted collective and comprehensive
international response,
Recalling the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime 1 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime, 2 which provided the definition of the crime
of trafficking in persons, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography 3 and the
Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and
Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery, 4
Recalling also its resolution 64/178 of 18 December 2009 on improving the
coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons and other relevant General
Assembly resolutions on trafficking in persons and other contemporary forms of
slavery, 5
Reaffirming its resolution 64/293 of 30 July 2010 on the United Nations
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 2008/33 of 25 July 2008 on
strengthening coordination of the United Nations and other efforts in fighting
trafficking in persons and previous Council resolutions on trafficking in persons,
_______________
1

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2225, No. 39574.
Ibid., vol. 2237, No. 39574.
3
Ibid., vol. 2171, No. 27531.
4
Ibid., vol. 266, No. 3822.
5
Resolutions 55/67, 58/137, 59/166, 61/144, 61/180, 63/156 and 63/194.
2

12-49000

*1249000*

Please recycle

A/RES/67/190

Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons

Affirming Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice resolution
20/3 of 15 April 2011, entitled “Implementation of the United Nations Global Plan
of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons”, 6
Affirming also Human Rights Council resolution 20/1 of 5 July 2012, entitled
“Trafficking in persons, especially women and children: access to effective
remedies for trafficked persons and their right to an effective remedy for human
rights violations”, 7 and other relevant Council resolutions on trafficking in persons, 8
Recognizing that, in accordance with the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, the Conference of the Parties to the Convention is
established to improve the capacity of States parties to combat transnational
organized crime and to promote and review the implementation of the Convention,
including the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, by facilitating the development and exchange of
relevant information, programmes and practices and by cooperating with relevant
international and regional organizations and non-governmental organizations, and
recognizing also that each State party shall provide the Conference of the Parties
with information on its programmes, plans and practices, as well as legislative and
administrative measures to implement the Convention,
Recognizing also the importance of bilateral, subregional, regional and
international cooperation mechanisms and initiatives, including information exchanges
on good practices, of Governments and intergovernmental and non-governmental
organizations to address the problem of trafficking in persons, especially women and
children,
Recognizing further that broad international cooperation between Member
States and relevant intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations is
essential for effectively countering the threat of trafficking in persons and other
contemporary forms of slavery,
Recognizing that victims of trafficking are often subject to multiple forms of
discrimination and violence, including on the grounds of gender, age, disability,
ethnicity, culture and religion, as well as national or social origin, and that these
forms of discrimination may themselves fuel trafficking in persons, and that women
and children without nationality or without birth registration are particularly
vulnerable to trafficking in persons,
Recognizing also the important role of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group
against Trafficking in Persons in fostering coordination and cooperation in the
global fight against trafficking in persons, in particular the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and
the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women), the International Labour Organization,
the International Organization for Migration and other intergovernmental
organizations, within their existing mandates,

_______________
6
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2011, Supplement No. 10 (E/2011/30), chap. I,
sect. D.
7
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53 and corrigendum
(A/67/53 and Corr.1), chap. IV, sect. A.
8
Human Rights Council resolutions 8/12, 11/3, 14/2 and 17/1.

2/6

Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons

A/RES/67/190

Recognizing further the need to continue fostering a global partnership against
trafficking in persons and other contemporary forms of slavery and the need to
continue to work towards an enhanced comprehensive and coordinated approach to
prevent and combat trafficking and to protect and assist victims of trafficking in
persons through the appropriate national, regional and international mechanisms,
Stressing the need to promote and protect the rights of victims of trafficking in
persons and to reintegrate victims into the community by taking into account the
Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking 9
and the commentary thereon developed by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as the Guidelines on the Protection of
Child Victims of Trafficking developed by the United Nations Children’s Fund,
Recognizing that poverty, unemployment, lack of socioeconomic opportunities,
gender-based violence, discrimination and marginalization are some of the
contributing factors that make persons vulnerable to trafficking in persons,
Recognizing also that the ongoing global economic crises and increasing
inequalities and social exclusion and their consequences are likely to further
aggravate the conditions that render people and communities vulnerable to
trafficking in persons and the smuggling of migrants,
Affirming that capacity-building is a very important component in combating
trafficking in persons, and in this regard stressing the need to intensify international
cooperation to combat trafficking in persons, as well as technical assistance for
countries aimed at strengthening their ability to prevent all forms of trafficking,
including supporting their development programmes,
Aware of the need to raise public awareness with the aim of eliminating the
demand for trafficking in persons, in particular for the purpose of sexual
exploitation and forced labour,
Reaffirming the commitment made by world leaders at the Millennium
Summit, the 2005 World Summit and the high-level plenary meeting of the General
Assembly on the Millennium Development Goals, held in 2010, to devise, enforce
and strengthen effective measures to combat and eliminate all forms of trafficking in
persons, to counter the demand for trafficked victims and to protect the victims,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
the mandates of the United Nations crime prevention and criminal justice
programme, with particular reference to the technical cooperation activities of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 10 which focuses, inter alia, on issues of
trafficking in persons,
Welcoming the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council
on trafficking in persons, especially women and children, 11
Taking note of the outcomes of the sixth session of the Conference of the Parties
to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, held in
Vienna from 15 to 19 October 2012, 12 and the outcomes of the fourth session of the
Working Group on Trafficking in Persons, held in Vienna from 10 to 12 October 2011, 13
_______________
9

E/2002/68/Add.1.
A/67/156.
11
A/67/261.
12
See CTOC/COP/2012/15.
13
See CTOC/COP/WG.4/2011/8.
10

3/6

A/RES/67/190

Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons

Reaffirming the importance of humanitarian, legal and financial aid to victims
of trafficking in persons, including through governmental, intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations, including the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund
for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, established
in compliance with the United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking
in Persons, as well as the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund on Contemporary
Forms of Slavery,
Welcoming the interactive dialogue of the General Assembly on the theme
“Fighting human trafficking: partnership and innovation to end violence against
women and girls”, held in New York on 3 April 2012, which provided an
opportunity for Member States, international organizations, civil society and the
private sector to unite as one in the global fight against trafficking in persons,
Welcoming also the signing, ratification and accession by a number of Member
States in the period from 2010 to 2012 to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, which brings the number of parties to 172, and the
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women
and Children, which brings the number of parties to 153,
Affirms that trafficking in persons violates and impairs the enjoyment of
1.
human rights and fundamental freedoms and requires a concerted international
assessment and response and genuine multilateral cooperation among countries of
origin, transit and destination for its eradication;
Urges Member States that have not yet done so to consider ratifying or
2.
acceding to, as a matter of priority, the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime1 and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United
Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,2 taking into consideration
the central role of those instruments in the fight against trafficking in persons, and
also urges States parties to those instruments to implement them fully and effectively;
Also urges Member States that have not yet done so to sign and ratify or
3.
accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography,3 the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, 14 the Supplementary
Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and
Practices Similar to Slavery,4 and the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), 15
the Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, 1957 (No. 105) 16 and the Worst Forms
of Child Labour Convention, 1999 (No. 182), 17 of the International Labour
Organization, and also urges States parties to those instruments to implement them
fully and effectively;
Notes with appreciation the steps taken by human rights treaty bodies
4.
and the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on trafficking in persons,
especially women and children, the Special Rapporteur of the Council on violence
against women, its causes and consequences, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children, the Special Rapporteur of the
Council on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography and the
_______________
14

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1249, No. 20378.
Ibid., vol. 39, No. 612.
16
Ibid., vol. 320, No. 4648.
17
Ibid., vol. 2133, No. 37245.
15

4/6

Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons

A/RES/67/190

Special Rapporteur of the Council on contemporary forms of slavery, including its
causes and consequences, and United Nations agencies and other concerned
intergovernmental and governmental organizations, within their existing mandates,
as well as civil society, to address the serious crime of trafficking in persons, and
encourages them to continue doing so and to share their knowledge and best
practices as widely as possible;
Calls upon Governments to continue their efforts to criminalize
5.
trafficking in persons in all its forms, including for labour exploitation and sexual
exploitation of children, to take measures to criminalize child sex tourism, to
condemn the practice of trafficking in persons and to investigate, prosecute,
condemn and penalize traffickers and intermediaries while providing protection and
assistance to the victims of trafficking with full respect for their human rights, and
invites Member States to continue to support those United Nations agencies and
international organizations that are actively involved in victim protection;
Encourages all stakeholders, including the private sector, to strengthen
6.
the coordination of efforts to prevent and combat trafficking and to protect, assist
and provide effective remedies to the victims of trafficking, including through the
Inter-Agency Coordination Group against Trafficking in Persons and regional and
bilateral initiatives that promote cooperation and collaboration;
Recognizes the importance of comparable data disaggregated by type of
7.
trafficking in persons, including sex and age, as well as of strengthening national
capacity for gathering, analysing and reporting such data, and welcomes the efforts
of the Inter-Agency Coordination Group, drawing on the comparative advantages of
the respective agencies, to share information, experiences and good practices on
anti-trafficking activities of the partner agencies with Governments, other
international and regional organizations, non-governmental organizations and other
relevant bodies;
Acknowledges the important work on data collection and analysis
8.
conducted by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime under its Global
Programme against Trafficking in Human Beings, by the International Organization
for Migration through its Global Counter-Trafficking Module database and by the
International Labour Organization through its global database on forced labour,
trafficking and slavery-like practice;
Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to provide the United
9.
Nations crime prevention and criminal justice programme with sufficient resources
for the full implementation of its mandates on combating trafficking in persons, in
conformity with its high priorities, and to provide adequate support to the
Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, and invites Member States
to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
for the purpose of providing assistance to Member States upon request;
10. Welcomes the work done by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and expresses its full support for its activities in fighting trafficking in persons, and
looks forward to the launch, within existing resources, of the report on global patterns
in trafficking in persons, produced by the Office, as called for by the General Assembly
in resolution 64/293, at United Nations Headquarters no later than January 2013;
11. Invites States and all other relevant stakeholders to continue contributing
to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children, and acknowledges previous and ongoing
contributions to other funding sources that support efforts to combat trafficking
in persons;
5/6

A/RES/67/190

Improving the coordination of efforts against trafficking in persons

12. Recalls its decision to conduct, in 2013, an appraisal of the progress
achieved in the implementation of the United Nations Global Plan of Action to
Combat Trafficking in Persons, 18 and therefore decides to convene, within existing
resources, a high-level meeting of the General Assembly at its sixty-seventh session,
no later than July 2013, in order to assess achievements, gaps and challenges,
including in the implementation of the relevant legal instruments;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with Member
States, to take all necessary measures to arrange the high-level meeting, and invites
the President of the General Assembly to appoint two co-facilitators to assist him in
conducting open-ended informal consultations with Member States with a view to
determining the modalities of the meeting, including on the participation of
international, regional and subregional organizations, as well as civil society,
including non-governmental organizations, the private sector and the media, whose
role is emphasized in the Global Plan of Action;
14. Requests the President of the General Assembly to prepare a summary of
the high-level meeting;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to continue, within existing reporting
obligations, the practice of including a section on the implementation by the United
Nations system of the Global Plan of Action in his report to the General Assembly
under the item on crime prevention and criminal justice, and further requests the
Secretary-General to include therein a section on the implementation of the present
resolution, bearing in mind the scope of previous reports on this issue. 19
60th plenary meeting
20 December 2012

_______________
18
19

6/6

Resolution 64/293.
A/63/90, A/64/130 and A/65/113.
