316 (IV) . Advisory social welfare
services
The General Assembly
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General to place
on a continuing basis, rather than on the present
year-to-year basis, the advisory social welfare
services originally authorized by its resolution
58 (I)4 of 14 December 1946;
2. Directs the Secretary-General :
(a) To include an amount for these services in
the budget of the United Nations in the future;

( b) For I 950, to continue this work at approximately the same level of expenditure on the part
of the United :-J ations as in 1949;

3. Requests the Economic and Social Council
to review the terms of resolution 58 (I), in the
light of the provisions of paragraph 1 above and
in the light of the discussions and suggestions
made in the Third Committee of the General
Assembly, and to recommend to the next regular
session of the General Assembly any modifications
which it may consider necessary therein.
243rd plenary meeting,

17 November 1949.

SI 7 (IV). Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and
o.f the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others
The General Assembly
Approves the following Convention, and proposes that each Member of the United Nations
and each non-member State which the appropriate
organ of the United Nations may invite to <lo so
become a Party thereto.
264th plenary meeting,

2 December 1949.
Annex

Text of the Convention
PREAMBLE

Whereas prostitution and the accompanying evil of
the traffic in persons for the purpose of prostitution
are incompatible with the dignity and worth of the
human person and endanger the welfare of the individual, the family and the community,
Whereas, with respect to the suppression of the
traffic in women and children, the following international instruments are in force:
I. International Agreement of 18 May 1904 for
the Suppression of the White Slave Traffic, as
amended by the Protocol• approved by the General
Assembly of the United Nat ions on 3 December 1948,
2. International Convention of 4 Mav 1910 for
the Suppression of the White Slave ·Traffic, as
amended by the above-mentioned Protocol,
3. International Convention of 30 September 1921
for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women and
Children, as amended by the Protocol• approved by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on 20 October 1947,
4. International Convention of 11 October 1933
for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women of Full
Age, as amended by the aforesaid Protocol,
• See Resolutions adopted by the General Assembly
during the second part of its first session, page 93.
• See Official Records of the third session uf the General Assembly, Part I, Resolutions, page 165.

Whereas the League of Nations in 1937 prepared
a draft Convention' extending the scope of the abovementioned instruments, and
Whereas developments since 1937 make feasible
the conclusion of a convention consolidating the
above-mentioned instruments and embodying the substance of the 1937 draft Convention as well as desirable alterations therein;
Now therefore
The Contracting Parties
Hereby agree as hereinafter provided:
ARTICLE 1
The Parties to the present Convention agree to
punish any person who, to gratify the passions of
another:
I. Procures, entices or leads away, for purposes of
prostitution, another person, even with the consent of
that person ;
2. Exploits the prostitution of another person, even
with the consent of that person.
ARTICLE 2
The Parties to the present Convention further
agree to punish any person who :
1. Keeps or manages, or knowingly finances or
takes part in the financing of a brothel;
2. Knowingly lets or rents a building or other place
or any part thereof for the purpose of the prostitution
of others.
ARTICLE 3
To the extent permitted by domestic law, attempts
to commit any of the offences referred to in articles
1 and 2, and acts preparatory to the commission
thereof, shall also be punished.
ARTICLE 4

To the extent permitted by domestic law, intentional participation in the acts referred to in articles
1 and 2 above shall also be punishable.
To the extent permitted by domestic law, acts of
participation shall be treated as separate offences
whenever this is necessary to prevent impnnity.
ARTICLE 5

In cases where injured persons are entitled under
domestic law to be parties to proceedings in respect
of any of the offences referred to in the present
Convention, aliens shall be so entitled upon the same
terms as nationals.
ARTICLZ 6

Each Party to the present Convention agrees to
take all the necessary measures to repeal or abolish
any existing law, regulation or administrative provision by virtue of which persons who engage in or
are suspected of engaging in prostitution are subject
either to special registration or to the possession of a
special document or to any exceptional requirements
for supervision or notification.
ARTICLE 7
Previous convictions pronounced in foreign States
for offences referred to in the present Convention
shall, to the extent permitted by domestic law, be
taken into account for the purpose of:
1. Establishing recidivism;
2. Disqualifying the offender from the exercise of
civil rights.
ARTICLE 8

The offences referred to in articles 1 and 2 of the
present Convention shall be regarded as extraditable
offences in any extradition treaty which has been or
• See Official Records of the second session of the
General Assembly, Resolutions, page 32.
• See League of Nations Official Journal, 18th Year,
No. 12, page 955.

Until such notification is made by a State, its
existing procedure in regard to letters of request
shall remain in force.

may hereafter be concluded between any of the Parties to this Convention.
The Parties to the present Convention which do
not make extradition conditional on the existence of a
treaty shall henceforward recognize the offences referred to in articles 1 and 2 of the present Convention
as cases for extradition between themselves.
Extradition shall be granted in accordance with
the law of the State to which the request is made.

Execution of letters of request shall not give rise
to a claim for reimbursement of' charges or expenses
of any nature whatever other than expenses of
experts.
Nothing in the present article shall be construed as
an undertaking on the part of the Parties to the
present Convention to adopt in criminal matters any
form or methods of proof contrary to their own
domestic laws.
ARTICLE 14

ARTICLE 9

In States where the extradition of nationals is not
permitted by law, 'lationals who have returned to their
own State after the commission abroad of any of
the offences referred to in articles 1 and 2 of the
present Convention shall be prosecuted in and punished by the courts of their own State.

Each Party to the present Convention shall establish or maintain a service charged with the coordination and centralization of the results of the
investigation oi offences referred to in the present
Convention.
Such services should compile all information calculated to facilitate the prevention and punishment
of the offences referred to in the present Convention
and should be in close contact with the corresponding
services in other States.

This provision shall not apply if, in a similar case
between the Parties to the present Convention, the
extradition of an alien cannot be granted.
ARTICLE 10

The provisions of article 9 shall not apply when the
person charged with the offence has been tried in
a foreign State and, if convicted, has served his
sentence or had it remitted or reduced in conformity
with the laws of that foreign State.

ARTICLE

15

To the extent permitted by domestic law and to
the extent to which the authorities responsible for
the services referred to in article 14 may judge desirable, they shall furnish to the authorities responsible
for the corresponding services in other States the
fol!owing information:
1. Particulars of any offence referred to in the
present Convention or any attempt to commit such
offence;

ARTICLE 11

Nothing in the present Convention shall be interpreted as determining the attitude of a Party
towards the general question of the limits of criminal
jurisdiction under international law.
ARTICLE 12

2. Particulars of any search for and any prosecution, arrest, conviction, refusal of admission or expulsion of persons guilty of any of the offences
referred to in the present Conve'ltion, the movements
of such persons and any other useful information
with regarq to them.
The information so furnished shall include descriptions of the offenders, their fingerprints, photographs,
methods of operation, police records and records of
conviction.

The present Convention does not affect the principle that the offences to which it refers shall in each
State be defined, prosecuted and punished in conformity with its domestic law.
ARTICLE 13

The Parties to the present Convention shall be
bound to execute letters of request relating to offences referred to in the Convention in accordance
with their domestic law and practice.
The transmission of letters of request shall be
effected:

ARTICLE 16

The Parties to the present Convention agree to
take or to encourage, through their public and private
educational, health, social, economic and other related services, measures for the prevention of prostitution and for the rehabilitation and social adjustment
of the victims of prostitution and of the offences
referred to in the present Convention.

1. By direct communication between the judicial
authorities; or
2. By direct communication between the Ministers
of Justice of the two States, or by direct communication from another competent authority of the State
making the request to the Minister of Justice of the
State to which the request is made; or
3. Through the diplomatic or consular representative of the State making the request in the State to
which the request is made; this representative shall
send the letters of request direct to the competent
judicial authority or to the authority indicated by
the Government of the State to which the request is
made, and shall receive direct from such authority
the papers constituting the execution of the letters
of request.

ARTICLE 17
The Parties to the present Convention undertake,
in connexion with immigration and emigration, to
adopt or maintain such measures as are required,
in terms of their obligations under the present Convention, to check the traffic in persons of either sex
for the purpose of prostitution.

In particular they undertake:
1. To make such regulations as are necessary for
the protection of immigrants or emigrants, and in
particular, women and children, both at the place
of arrival and departure and while en route;

In cases 1 and 3 a copy of the letters of request
shall always be sent to the superior authority of the
State to which ap1,lication is made.

2. To arrange for appropriate publicity warning
the public of the dangers of the aforesaid traffic;

Unless otherwise ag-reed, the letters of request
shall be drawn up in the language of the authority
making the ~eqne!'J. provided always that the State
to w!frj: ·};,_ n,qu<'st i!'- made may require a translation in its ,,,vn l~nguag-c, certified correct by the
c1.utlrnrity maLing the- requecil..

3. To take appropriate measures to ensure supervision of railway stations, airports, seaports and
en route, and of other public places, in order to prevent international traffic in persons for the purpose
of prostitution;
4. To take appropriate measures in order that the
appropriate authorities be informed of the arrival
of persons who appear, prima facie. to be the principals and accomplices in or victims of such traffic.

Each Party to the present Convention shall notify
to each of the other Parties to the Convention the
meth'><l or methods of transmission mentioned above
which it will recoRnize for the letters of request of
the latter St:ite.

34

ARTICLE 18

The Parties to the present Convention undertake,
in accordance with the conditions laid down by
domestic law, to have declarations taken from aliens
who are prostitutes, in order to establish their identity
and civil status and to discover who has caused them
to leave their State. The information obtained shall
be communicated to the authorities of the State of
origin of the said persons with a view to their
eventual repatriation.

also on behalf of any other State to which an invitation has been addressed by the Economic and Social
Council.
The present Convention shall be ratified and the
instruments of ratification shall be deposited with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
The States mentioned in the first paragraph which
have not signed the Convention may accede to it.

ARTICLE 19

Accession shall be effected by deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations.

The Parties to the present Convention undertake,
in accordance with the conditions laid <lown by
domestic law and without prejudice to prosecution
or other action for violations thereunder and so far
as possible:

For the purposes of the present Convention the
word "State" shall include all the colonies and Trust
Territories of a State signatory or acceding to the
Convention and all territories for which such State
is internationally responsible.

I. Pending the completion of arrangements for the
repatriation of destitute victims of international traffic in persons for the purpose oi prostitution, to make
suitable provisions for their temporary care and
maintenance ;

Tbe present Convention shall come into force on
the ninetieth day following the date of deposit of
the second instrument of ratification or accession.

2. To repatriate persons referred to in article 18
who desire to be repatriated or who may be claimed
by persons exercising authority over them or whose
expulsion is ordered in conformity with the law.
Repatriation shall take place only after agreement
is reached with the State of destination as to identity
an<l nationality as well as to the place and <late of
arrival at frontiers. Each Party to the present Convention shall facilitate the passage of such persons
through its territory.
Where the persons referred to in the preceding
paragraph cannot themselves repay the cost of repatriation and have neither spouse, relatives nor
guardian to pay for them, the cost of repatriation
as far as the nearest frontier or port of embarkation
or airport in the direction of the State of origin
shall be borne by the State where they are in residence, and the cost of the remainder of the journey
shall be borne by the State of origin.
ARTICLE 20

The Parties to the present Convention shall, if
they have not already done so, take the necessary
measures for the supervision of employment agencies
in order to prevent persons seeking employment, in
particular women and children, from being exposed
to the dangn of prnstitution.
ARTICLE 21

The Pa,·ties to the present Convention shall communicate to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations such laws and regulations as have already
been promulgated in their States, and thereafter
annually such laws and regulations as may be promulgated, relating to the subjects of the present Convention, as well as all measures taken bv them
concerning the application of the Conventi(;n. The
information received shall be published periodically
by the Secretary-General an<l sent to all Members
of the United Nations ancl to non-member States to
which the present Conyention is officially communicated in accordance with article 23.

ARTICLE 24

For each State ratifying or acceding to the Convention after the deposit of the second instrument of
ratification or accession, the Convention shall enter
into force ninety days after the deposit by such State
of its instrument of ratification or accession.
ARTICLE 25

After the expiration of five years from the entry
into force of the present Convention, any Party to the
Convention may denounce it by a written notification addressed to the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
Such denunciation shall take effect for the Party
making it one year from the date upon which it is
received by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
ARTICLE 26
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall
inform all Members of the United Nations and nonmember States referred to in article 23:
(a) Of signatures, ratifications and accessions received in accordance with article 23;
( b) 0 f the date on which the present Convention
will come into force in accordance with article 24;

( c) Of denunciations received in accordance with
a1·tide 25.
ARTICLE 27
Each Party to the present Convention undertakes
to adopt, in accordance with its Col16titution, the
le~ islati vc or other measures necessary to ensure the
application of the Convention.
ARTICLE 28

The prov1s1ons of the present Convention shall
supersede in the relations between the Parties thereto
the provisions of the international instruments referred to in sub-paragraphs 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the
second paragraph of the Preamble, each of which
shall be deemed to be termin:ited when all the Parties
thereto shall h:ive become Parties to the present
Convention.

ARTICLE 22

FINAL PROTOCOL

If any dispute shall arise between the Parties to
the present Convention relating to its interpr<:tation
or application and if such dispute cannot he settled
by other means, the dispute shall, at the request of
any one of the Parties to the dispute, be referred
to the International Court of Justice.

Nothing in the present Convention shall be deemed
to prejudice any legislation which ensures, for the
enforcement of the provisions for securing the suppression of the traffic in persons and of the exploitation of others for purposes of prostitution, stri_ctt·r
conditions than those provided by the present 'ConARTICLE 23
~
:. ~:J"q~i...~~-.•
,,.,t ..!tf,P,.-'
s 3 t6
The present Convention shall be open for signature
on behalf of any Member of tbe United Nations and the
apply to the present Protocol.

f'~J~~l"bt

35
