34

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Republic of China are already parties to Additional
Protocol II of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear
Weapons in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco),
1. Again urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to sign and ratify Additional Protocol II of the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America (Treaty of Tlatelolco);
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session an item entitled "Implementation of General Assembly resolution 31/67 concerning
the signature and ratification of Additional Protocol II
of the Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
in Latin America (Treaty of Tlatelolco) ".
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/68.

Effective measures to implement the purposes and objectives of the Disarmament
Decade

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2602 E (XXIV) of 16 December 1969, in which it declared the decade of the
1970s the Disarmament Decade and envisaged a link
between the Disarmament Decade and the Second
United Nations Development Decade,
Deeply concerned that, despite the repeated requests
by the General Assembly for the implementation of
effective measures aimed at its cessation, the arms race,
particularly of nuclear armaments, has continued to
increase at an alarming speed, absorbing enormous material and human resources from the economic and
social development of all countries and constituting a
grave danger for world peace and security,
Considering that the ever spiralling arms race is not
compatible with the efforts aimed at promoting international peace and security as well as establishing a
new international economic order, as defined in the
Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order,
contained in its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974, and in the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, contained in its resolution
3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974,
Recalling its resolution 1722 (XVI) of 20 December 1961, in which it recognized that all States have a
deep interest in disarmament negotiations,
Convinced that the participation of all nuclear-weapon
States in the efforts to contain the nuclear-arms race and
to reduce and eliminate all armaments is indispensable
for a full measure of success in these efforts,
Conscious that, disarmament being a matter of grave
concern to all States, there is a pressing need for all
Governments and peoples to be informed about and
understand the situation prevailing in the field of the
arms race and disarmament, and that the United Nations
has a central role in this connexion in keeping with its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations,
Noting the suggestion made by the Secretary-General
in the introduction to his report on the work of the
Organization that the General Assembly might discuss
various ways in which public concern about disarmament could be stimulated and channelled in constructive
ways, 21
21 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 1 A (A/31/1/ Add.l), sect. V.

Having received the report of the Conference of the
Committee on Disarmament, including, in particular,
the part dealing with its mid-term review of the Disarmament Decade with a view to reappraising its tasks
and duties in order to accelerate the pace of its efforts
to negotiate truly effective disarmament and arms limitation agreements, 22
l. Reaffirms the purposes and objectives of the
Disarmament Decade;
2. Deplores the meagre achievements of the Disarmament Decade in terms of truly effective disarmament
and arms limitation agreements, and the detrimental
effects on world peace and economy of the continuing
unproductive and wasteful arms race, particularly the
nuclear-arms race;
3. Calls again upon all States, as well as the organs
concerned with disarmament issues, to place at the
centre of their preoccupations the adoption of effective
measures for the cessation of the arms race, especially
in the nuclear field, and for the reduction of military
expenditures and to make sustained efforts with a view
to achieving progress towards general and complete
disarmament;
4. Calls upon Member States and the SecretaryGeneral to intensify their efforts in support of the link
between disarmament and development, envisaged in
General Assembly resolution 2602 E (XXIV) on the
Disarmament Decade, so as to promote disarmament
negotiations and to ensure that the human and material
resources freed by disarmament are used to promote
economic and social development, particularly in the
developing countries;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure a
proper co-ordination of disarmament and development
activities within the United Nations system of organizations and to report to the General Assembly at its thirtysecond session;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to offer appropriate assistance and information to Member States that
may require them in pursuance of the purposes and
objectives of the Disarmament Decade;
7. Urges the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament to adopt, during its 1977 session, a comprehensive programme dealing with all aspects of the
problem of the cessation of the arms race and general
and complete disarmament under strict and effective
international control, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 2602 E (XXIV) proclaiming the
Disarmament Decade;
8. Calls upon non-governmental organizations and
international institutions and organizations to further
the goals of the Disarmament Decade;
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Effective
measures to implement the purposes and objectives of
the Disarmament Decade".
96th plenary meeting
JO December 1976
31/69.

Implementation of the Declaration on
the Denuclearization of Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1652 (XVI) of 24 November 1961, 2033 (XX) of 3 December 1965, 3261 E
2 2 [bid.,

Supplement No. 27 (A/31/27), paras. 227-246.

III.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

35

(XXIX) of 9 December 1974 and 3471 (XXX) of
11 December 1975, in which it called upon all States
to consider and respect the continent of Africa, including the continental African States, Madagascar and
other islands surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weaponfree zone,
Recognizing that implementation of the Declaration
on the Denuclearization of Africa adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity in 196423 would contribute to the security of all the African States and to
the goals of general and complete disarmament,
Bearing in mind that the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity
at its thirteenth ordinary session, held at Port Louis
from 2 to 6 July 1976, expressed grave con~ern over
the continuing collaboration between cert~m ~t~tes
Members of the United Nations and the racist regime
of South Africa, particularly in the military and nuclear
fields, thereby enabling it to acquire nuclear-weapon
capability,
Concerned that further development of South Africa's
military and nuclear-weapon potential would _frustr~te
efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones m Afnca
and elsewhere as an effective means for preventing the
proliferation, both horizontal and ver~ic~l, ?f nuclear
weapons and for contributing to the ehmmatlon of the
danger of a nuclear holocaust,
l. Reaffirms its call upon all States to respect and
abide by the Declaration on the Denuclearization of
Africa;
2. Further reaffirms its call upon all States to consider and respect the continent of Africa, including ~e
continental African States, Madagascar and other ISlands surrounding Africa, as a nuclear-weapon-free
zone;
3. Appeals to all States not to deliver to South
Africa or place at its disposal any e9uipment or fissio!lable material or technology that will enable the racist
regime of South Africa to acquire nuclear-weapon capability;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to render all necessary assistance to the Organization of African Unity
towards the realization of its solemn Declaration on
the Denuclearization of Africa, in which the African
Heads of State and Government announced their readiness to undertake, in an international treaty to be concluded under the auspices of the United Nations, not
to manufacture or acquire control of nuclear weapons;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the item entitled "Implementation of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of
Africa".
96th plenary meeting
10 December 1976

prchensive study of the question of nuclear-weaponfree zones in all its aspects,

31/70.

6. Conveys the comprehensive study and the report of the Secretary-General to the Governments concerned, to interested international organizations and to
the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament for
the further consideration and measures that they may

Comprehensive study of the question of
nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its aspects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3261 F (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, by which it decided to undertake a corn2s Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 105, docwnent A/5975.

Recalling further its resolution 34 72 (XXX) of 11
December 1975, by which it, inter alia, commended the
special report containing the comprehensive study24 to
the attention of all Governments, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and other relevant international
organizations and invited them to transmit to the
Secretary-General before 30 June 1976 such views,
observations and suggestions on the special report as
they might deem appropriate,
Having considered the special report of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament containing
the comprehensive study of the question of nuclearweapon-free zones in all its aspects prepared by the
Ad Hoe Group of Qualified Governmental Experts for
the Study of the Question of Nuclear-Weapon-Free
Zones,:! 4
Having noted the comments made by States members
of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament
concerning the study, 25
Considering that the question of nuclear-weapon-free
zones is included in the provisional agenda of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament as adopted
on 15 August 1968,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
containing the views, observations and suggestions on
the special report by Governments, the International
Atomic Energy Agency and the Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America;26

2. Expresses once more its appreciation to the Ad
Hoe Group of Qualified Governmental Experts for the
Study of the Question of Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones
for the preparation of the study and conveys its thanks
to the Secretary-General of the United Nations, the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency and other relevant international organizations
for the assistance they have given for the preparation
of the study;
3. Reiterates its conviction that the establishment
of nuclear-weapon-free zones can contribute to the
security of members of such zones, to the prevention
of proliferation of nuclear weapons and to the goals
of general and complete disarmament;
4. Draws the attention of Governments to the comprehensive study and the views, observations and suggestions on that study contained in the report of the
Secretary-General;
5. Expresses the hope that the comprehensive study
and the views, observations and suggestions on that
study will enhance further efforts of Governments concerning nuclear-weapon-free zones and will be of assistance to States interested in the establishment of such
zones;

24 Ibid., Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 27A (A/10027 /
Add.I). annex I.
25 Ibid., annex II.
26 A/3 l /189 and Add.1 and '.!.
