A/RES/72/266 B

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
17 July 2018

Seventy-second session
Agenda item 134

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 5 July 2018
[on the report of the Fifth Committee (A/72/682/Add.2)]

72/266.

Shifting the management paradigm in the United Nations
B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 41/213 of
19 December 1986 and 72/266 A of 24 December 2017,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Shifting the
management paradigm in the United Nations: implementing a new management
architecture for improved effectiveness and strengthened accountability ”, 2 as well as
the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, 3
1.
Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly and its relevant
intergovernmental and expert bodies, within their respective mandates, in planning,
programming, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation;
2.
Also reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee
of the General Assembly entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and
budgetary matters, and reaffirms the role of the Committee in carrying out a thorough
analysis and in approving human and financial resources and policies, with a view to
ensuring full, effective and efficient implementation of all mandated programmes and
activities and the implementation of policies in this regard;
3.
Further reaffirms the role of the General Assembly with regard to the
structure of the Secretariat, including the creation, conversion, suppression and
redeployment of posts;

__________________

Resolution 72/266, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session,
Supplement No.49 (A/72/49), vol. I, becomes resolution 72/266 A.
2
A/72/492/Add.2.
3
A/72/7/Add.49.
1

18-11300 (E)

190718

*1811300*

A/RES/72/266 B

Shifting the management paradigm in the United Nations

4.
Reaffirms the established budgetary procedures and methodologies, based
on its resolutions 41/213, and 42/211 of 21 December 1987, and calls for strict
adherence to the framework contained in its resolution 72/266 A;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly for its
consideration and approval any proposed amendments to the financial and staff
regulations, along with the rationale for the proposed amendments;
6.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General; 2

7.
Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 3 subject to the
provisions of the present resolution;
8.
Welcomes the commitment of the Secretary-General to improving the
ability of the United Nations to deliver on its mandates through management reform;
9.

Stresses that accountability is a central principle of management reform;

10. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General towards a strong culture of
accountability throughout the Secretariat, acknowledges that a culture of
accountability stems from the leadership of an organization, and stresses that an
effective accountability system is central to successful management of the
Organization;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to develop a clear, simple and
transparent system for delegating authority, to ensure that responsibilities and
accountability are aligned;
12. Underlines the crucial role of oversight bodies, including the Office of
Internal Oversight Services, the Board of Auditors and the Joint Inspection Unit, and
calls upon the Secretary-General to make use of the expertise of these bodies in the
reform process, as appropriate, by implementing their relevant recommendations;
13. Decides to approve the reorganization of the current Department of
Management and Department of Field Support into the proposed new Department of
Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance and Department of Operat ional
Support;
14.

Takes note of paragraph 31 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

15. Requests the Secretary-General to put in place additional measures aimed
at ensuring operational effectiveness and strong internal controls for enhanced
accountability;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at
the main part of its seventy-third session, for its consideration and decision, a
comparative assessment of placing human resources functions in a single
consolidated department or two distinct departments, with a view to ensuring a
unified approach, optimizing the distribution of functions and avoiding duplication;
17. Approves the proposed new subsections 29A to 29D of section 29,
Management and support services, of the programme budget for the biennium
2018–2019;
18. Decides that the proposed Office of Finance and Budget shall be
designated as the Office of Programme Planning, Finance and Budget;
19. Approves the consolidation of the functions currently under the Offi ce of
Information and Communications Technology of the Department of Management and
the Information and Communications Technology Division of the Department of Field
Support;
2/3

18-11300

Shifting the management paradigm in the United Nations

A/RES/72/266 B

20. Welcomes the proposal by the Secretary-General to create a new
Uniformed Capabilities Support Division as a single point of contact for troop- and
police-contributing countries on all administrative and logistical issues related to
force generation, memorandums of understanding, contingent -owned equipment and
reimbursement, and requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen its role in
order to streamline payments to troop- and police-contributing countries in a timely
manner;
21. Decides to maintain the current name of the Headquarters Committee on
Contracts and place its secretariat within the Office of the Under-Secretary-General
for the Department of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance;
22. Also decides that the proposed Enabling Section shall be established as an
“Enabling and Outreach Service”, to be headed at the D-1 level, tasked, inter alia,
with outreach to Member States;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals on strengthening the
role of regional procurement hubs, in particular the Regional Procurement Office in
Entebbe, Uganda, in the context of his next report on procurement;
24. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure compliance with the relevant
resolutions, regulations and rules governing United Nations procurement;
25. Further requests the Secretary-General to consider options for the
Department of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance to have necessary and
sufficient information to strengthen compliance and accountability in the procurement
function within the Secretariat, and to report thereon in the context of his next report
on procurement;
26. Recognizes the high level of risk inherent in United Nations procurement
activities, and requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal
Oversight Services with continuing to monitor United Nations procurement and
report thereon biennially in conjunction with the related report of the SecretaryGeneral on procurement;
27. Decides that the proposed reorganization shall be implemented within the
approved resources allocated for the current Department of Management and
Department of Field Support;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake a comprehensive review of
the implementation of the present resolution and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at the main part of its seventy-fifth session.
104th plenary meeting
5 July 2018

18-11300

3/3
