further informed the Council that the Governments of
Afghanistan and Pakistan had undertaken to provide full
support and co-operation to his representative and to all the
personnel that might be required, grant them the relevant
privileges and immunities and be responsible for their
safety. He added that these arrangements were scheduled to
become fully effective on 15 May 1988 and that it was
therefore envisaged under the agreements that the required
personnel should arrive in the area no later than 20 days
before that date.

In a letter dated 22 April 1988." the Secretary-General
transmitted to the President of the Security Council the texts
of the agreements on the settlement of the situation relating
to Afghanistan and made a number of observations regarding the strength, mandate. duration and cost of the military
observer mission. The Secretary-General informed the
Council that he intended to propose to the General Assembly that the cost of the mission, including equipment,
should be covered by the regular budget of the United
Nations.

In a letter dated 25 April 1988." the President of the
Council informed the Secretary-General as follows:
"I have the honour to inform you that your letters dated
14 April'' and 22 April 1988" concerning measures
envisaged by you have been brought to the attention of
the members of the Security Council, in particular the
arrangements for the ten,iJorary dispatch of military
officers from existing United Nations operations, and for
ensuring the safety and security of the United Nations
personnel as well as the financing.
"Having consulted the members of the Council, I
would like to inform you of their provisional agreemf"nt
,. Ibid., document S/19835.
'' S/19836.

to the proposals contained in your letters, pending formal
consideration and decision by the Council later.
.. The members of the Council requested that it be
underlined that this exchange of letters not be regarded as
a precedent for the future."

At its 2828th meeting, on 31 October 1988, the Council
proceeded with the discussion of the item entitled "The
situation relating to Afghanistan".

Resolution 622 (1988)
of 31 October 1988

The Security Council,
Recalling the letters dated 14 April" and 22 April 1988"'
from the Secretary-General to the President of the Security
Council concerning the agreements on the settlement of the
situation relating to Afghanistan. signed at Geneva on 14
April 1988,"'
Recalling also the letter dated 25 April 1988" from the
President of the Security Council to the Secretary-General,
I. Confirms its agreement to the measures envisaged in
the Secretary-General's letters of 14 and 22 April 1988, in
particular the arrangement for the temporary dispatch to
Afghanistan and Pakistan of military officers from existing
United Nations operations to assist in •he mission of good
offices;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to keep the Security
Council informed of further developments, in accordance
with the Geneva agreements.
Adopted unanimously at the
2828th meeting
,. Official Records of the Security Council, Pony-third Year; Supplement

for April. May and June 1988, document S/19835, annex I.

LETTER DATED 19 APRIL 1988 FROM THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF TUNISIA TO THE
UNITED NATIONS ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

Decisions

At the same meeting, the Council also decided, by a vote,
that an invitation should be accorded to the representative of
the Palestine Liberation Organization to participate in the
debate and that that invitation would confer upon it the same
rights of participation as those conferred on a Member State
when it was invited to participate under rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.

At its 2807th meeting on 21 April 1988, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Egypt, Gabon.
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Morocco, Mozambique, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Tunisia to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the
item entitled "Letter dated 19 April 1988 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/
19798)"."
"See Official Records of the Security Council, Fortv-third
Supplement for April, May and June /988.

Adopted by JO votes to 1 (United
States of America). with 4 abstentions (France, Germany, Federal
Republic of. Italy, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

~a,;

14
