TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

AUG 2

‘1q: ]

tJl
MEETING:

NEW

21/22 OCTOBER

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
. .. , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . .. . . .. .. .. .

Page
1

.. , .. . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . .. . . ... . .. .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1747)

Statement

by the President

Adoption

of the agenda . . . . , , . . , . , . . . , . . . . . , . , . . . . , . .

.. .. .. .

I

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent Representative of the United
States of America to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1010) . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1747

‘a,

<

,,

,

‘,.i

>., x..
’

NOTE

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplernerzts of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given,
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in year& volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

IIUNDRED

AND FORTY-SEVENTH

Held in New York on Sunday, 21 October
Prcside/rt: Sir Laurence MclNTYRLi (Australia).
I+rsfrzt:
The represcntativcs of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, l:rancc, C;uinca, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Llnion of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ircla~~cl, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

MEETING

1973, at 9 pm.

righl to vote. I shall ask them to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber, on the understanding that they will be called LI~OII to take a place at the
Council table when it is their turn to address the Council,

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 747)
4. The PRESIDENT: I wish to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to a draft resolution, sponsored by
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United
3I. ‘;he situation in the Middle East:
:, F$a,t,e-sof America[S/lIO36/.
.d&.&+..-.,“-.~-“.J a
1
Lcttcr dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanctit
Representative of the United States of America to
S,!,,JJ&...$CALI @n&d -Statcs’Tif Ameri&‘The
LJnited
the United Nations addressed to the President of r- St&s, togdGF’&th
theU~~~;-j:lls-~~i~~l
for this meeting
the Security Council (S/l 1010).
of the Security Council with one purpose in Inind: to take
joint action and to present a joint proposition to tllc
Council whose aim is to bring an immediate cease-fire in
place a11r1 to begin promptly negotiations bctwecn the
Statement by the President
part& under approprintc auspices looking toward a just
and durable peace based on Security Council resolution
I. The PRESIDENT: I am grateful to tllc members of the
242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.
Council for agreeing at such short notice to attend this
rnccting, which I have c:illctl
at the
urgent quest of the
6. As the members of this Council know, the tragic
rcprcscntativcs
of the Unitctl States and the Soviet Union.
fighting over the past 17 days has been both furious and
costly. We bclievc that the prolongation of the war is not in
Adoptiorl of the agenda
the intcrests of the parties or the peoples in the area, and its
continuance carries grave risks for the peace of the world.
Uecausc of this, Prcsidcnt Nixon agreed that Secretary
Kissinger should
fly to Moscow, in rcsponsc to an invitation
The situation in Ihe Middle East:
of General Secretary Ureziuncv. As a result of these
Letter dated 7 October 1973 from the Permanent
discussions, tllc Council has before it the draft resolution
Representative of the United States of America to the
agreed jointly by the Llnited States and the Soviet
Unitecl Nations addressed to the President of the
Governments, on which both our Governments rcqucst
Security Council (S/ I 10 10)
irnmcdiatc action on the part of the Security Council.
I.

Adoption of the agenda.

2. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision
taken at the 1743rd meeting, I propose now, with the
consent of the Council, to invite the reprcsentativcs of
Egypt, Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic to take thei
places at the Council table in order to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote.

3. The PRl!SIDENT: In accorda~m
with further decisions
taken at previous meetings, I propose also, with the corlscnt
of the Council, to invite the rcprescntativcs of Nigeria and
Satlcli Arabia to participate in the discussion without the

7. Let me make a few brief remarks regarding the three
short paragraphs of the draft resolution, for they all stand
clearly 011 their own words and speak for themselves.
8. Paragraph 1 calls for an immcdiatc ccasc-fire. In OUI
view, as well as that of the Soviet Union, this applies not
only to the partics directly concerned but also to those who
have joined in the fighting by sending units. This paragraph
calls for the stopping of fighting in the positions at present
occupied by the two sides. WC believe that I2 hours should
allow :llTliJle
time to achieve the practical inzplementation
of this pa:agrap!i.
2 calls Ibr tllc implementat ion of the
3. Pal2 :raph
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in all of its parts

after the cease-fire, The members of this Council as well as
the parties concerned are fully familiar with that resolution
and it needs no elaboration here. The paragraph is linked to
paragraph 3 which calls for the immediate beginnkg of
negotiations between the parties concerned under appropriate auspices aimed at establishing a just and durable
peace in the Middle East. We believe that from the tragic
event’s of the past 17 days there must be a new resolve, a
new attempt to remove the fundamental causes that have
brought war to the Midclle East so frequently and so
tragically. Another respite between two wars is just not
good enough. And for our part, both the United States and
the Soviet Union are ready to make our .joint good offices
available to the parties as a means to facilitate the
negotiating process.

of a peaceful and just settlement. Tim: will not wait, It is
the opinion of the Soviet delegation that the Council must
act without delay in accordancewith the Charter andmoist
take the necessary decisions on this very day, at this
meeting. The Soviet delegation appealsto the membersof
the Security Council to do this.
‘“z-7%
12. The PRESIDENT: 1 now invite the representativeof
Saudi Arabia to take a place at the Council table andlo
makea statement.
.)
. _ _.._
‘I I cannot colnproniisc
13.r Mr. BAROODY (Saudi.Arabia),:
my cdnsdienk bi; k&ping silent about this momentous
meeting of the C&ncii which reaffirms what has becolnc
common knowledge all over the world, namely, that tllc
two super-Powers,the United States and the Soviet Union,
are once again engagedin the game of power politics and
spheresof influcncc.

IO. Finally, 1 want to report to the Council that both the
Soviet Union and the United States believe that there
should be an immediate exchange of prisoners of war. We
believe this is an historic moment for the Council. We
believe that this Council, in exercising its primary responsibility in the field of peace and security, can make a majot
contribution to this end by adopting this draft resolution
promptly.
..yy.&~pr ..m1,..31..
iL ., _.. ,j_.s. ,./
111. Mr. MALI& (UQ@~~,\of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(tramlatiolz from RussimJ: In the Middle East, becauseof
the absenceof a political settlement, the war iscontinuing.
For the third week now fierce and bloody battles have been
raging, causing casualties and destruction. The situation
that has arisen in that area posesa seriousthreat to the
maintenance of international peace. The dangeroussituation in that part of the world requires that the Security
Council take the most urgent and immediatemeasuresboth
to call a halt to the bloodshed and to bring about a
practical peaceful settlement on the basisof the notable
resolution 242 (1967) adopted on 22 November 1967. We
are a11aware that in recent days intensive multilateral
consultations have been in progress, including high-level
meetings,with a view to bringing an end to the war in the
Middle East. At the present time, as a result of these
Consultations,the Soviet Union, together with the United
States of America, is submitting to the Security Council a
draft resolution [S/11036/
designed to bring about the
cessationof military activities and the immediate practical
implementation of resolution 242 (1967) regardinga political settlement in the Middle East. This draft resolution
would have all parties to the present fighting ceaseall firing
and terminate military activity immediately, no laler than
12 hours after the moment of the adoption of this
resolution by the Security Council, in the positions they
now occupy. The draft resolution also provides that the
parties concerned should start immediately after the ceasefire the practical implementation of resolution 242 (1967) in
all of its parts. The draft also embodiesa decisionby the
Council that immediately and concurrently with the ceasetire, negotiations should start between the parties concerned under appropriate auspicesaimed at establishinga
just and durable peace in the Middle East. The dangerous
turn of events in the Middle East, running counter to the
easing of tension which has recently been achieved,
demandsthat all those concerned with strengthening the
cause of peace must make urgent efforts to channel the
course of events in that areatowards the early achievement

14. In 1947, by the partition of Palestine, the usurpLg
State of Israelwas created by these two self-samePowers,
abetted by their client States. The creation of Israel was
accomplishedfor different motives. The chief architect of
that State was,however, the late J’resident Harry Truninll.
He flagrantly threw by the wayside the principle of the
self-determination of the Palestinian people, and not only
personally involved himself in opting for having the
Palestiniansrobbed of their hontclancl but brought pressure
to bear on many States which needed United States aid
after the Second World War. All this Mr. Truman did
contrary to the advice of his State Department. “Who are
these striped-pants experts to tell the President of the
United States what he should do’?” was his over-cunfident
remark. The erstwhile haberdasher from Kansas knew
better than the specialistsof his State Department who told
him that the partition of Palestineand the establishmentof
a Jewish State in the Middle East would causecontinuous
disturbancesand eventually would alienate the Arabs from
the United States. President Truman is reported to have
retorted that he had many Jewsand very few Arabs in his
constituency.
15. Thirty years before the partition of Palestine, Arthur
Balfour had obtained the approval of the Zionists in
Englandfor the infamous andequivocal Declaration knowll
by his name. The Rothschildsapproved it as the corner.
stone for the creation of the Jewish State. The reasonWhy
Balfour gave in to the Zionists is clearly explained in a
relatively recent book by Sir John Glubb--although I knew
about it as far back as the 1920s,wllcn as a young man1
beganseriousresearchon the perfidious policies adopted in
Versaillesafter the end of the First World War. I can do no
better than quote from a book by Sir John Glubb. I-lc says:
“It is necessaryto rememberthe war situation in 1917.
Russia ceased to fight, and the whole strength of
Germany, Austria and Turkey was turned against the
Ailies. When the Balfour Declaration was issued. the
continued independcnccof Britain and France themsclvcs
hung in the balance.The best, perhaps the only hope 01
being able to repulsethe German offensive in the spring
of 1918 was to securethe entry of the Llnited States into
the war. The British Government was advised that this
could most easily be achieved by conciliating Jewish
2

opinion, in view ;3f the powerful
leading Jews in America.”

influence cxcrtcd by

green light for his adventure in Ethiopiaprovided that he,
Mussolini, did not ally himself with the Germans.That is
why the Leagueof Nations founclercd.They wanted to sell
the peoplesof Asia and Africa downthe river.

16. Is it any wonder that the Germans in the 1920s
considered the Jews their enemy’! After the Weimal
Republic,evenduring the WeimarRepublic,they considered 26. Hence the corner-stone of Israelwaslaid by Balfour.
that they had been sold out by the Jews,sincethe Kaiser A~ltl Truman was the President who from the beginning
failedin 1898helped to build the structure. Balfour acted to saveBritain
and its Empire from possibledefeat at the handsof the
17. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr. President,1 do not believe Germans in 1917; and Truman obtainedthe Jewishvole
that at this important moment the United Nationsshould wholesale,and through the Zionistshc alsogot the votesof
be subjected to hearing a defence of Hitler, Hitlerian gentiles brainwashedby them. Hence,from the beginning
theoriesandNazi politics.
justice flew out the windows of Downing Street and,
subsequently, from the windows of the White I-louse,and
18. The PRESIDENT: I think I shall allow the represen- the Palestinians were sold down the Thames and the
tative of SaudiArabia to proceedfor the time being,but 1 Potomac. Where is t’le British Empire which Balfour and
would appealto him, asI have on earlieroccasions,to keep subsequentlyChurchill tried to save? It went down the
his remarks within what I think are regardedas the
drain. And what has happened to the United States,
reasonablestandardsof debate in the Council. Hc may because Truman helped create and subsequentUnited
proceed.
States Governments have supported Israel’? I leave the
answer to the membersof the Council. Billions upon
19. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): With all due respect billions of American dollars arc being squanderedto
to you, Sir, as President,I shouldlike to saythat I did not
maintain Israel, a usurping State which hasbeenlarding it
mention Hitler. But this gentlemanwantsto interrupt me. over the Arab world.
Do you mean to say I should tailor my speechto his
liking’? I never interrupt him. lie has said many things 27 What have the Arabs, at a distanceof 3,000 milesfrom
about the Arabs that have beendistortions,but 1havenever London, done to the British to have them perpetratethis
interrupted him. Therefore it is uncalledfor to makeany
tragedy upon them? They fought with the British in the
remarksas to how I should deliver my speech.If he hasa
First World War. it was the perfidy of Balfour which sold
bad conscience,lebhim cleanseit and then he will not be them down the Thames.
disturbed.May I proceednow?
28. And what have the Palestinians
andthe Arabs doneto
20. The PRESIDENT: The representativeof SaudiArabia the Americans and their Chief of State, the late Harry
may proceed.
Truman, and other United States Presidentsto deserve
United States unremitting enmity? America is at a distance
21. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I do not wishhim to
of from 3,000 to 6,000 miles from the shoresof Palestine.
interrupt me, but if he does, by Jove I will interrupt
My dear Mr. Scali, you are a learnedjournalist and a
him too.
statesman.Have WCever threatenedthe American people01
Government since they liberated themselvesfrom the
22. The PRESIDENT: I hope that the representativeof
British in 1776? Have we? It isyour privilege to remain
Saudi Arabia will take notice of my appeal. He may
silent and not to exerciseyour right of reply, but I should
proceed.
welcome it if you would tell me of one instancewhen the
Arab people hurt the United States.What have WCdoneto
1.23. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): ,Thank you for your
your Mr. Nixon and to the Congress
and to the Senateof
kindness.
the United States to have them side with the usurper
amongstus? We opened our doorsto you, It wasWestern
24. Is it any wonder that the Germansin the 1920s and not Russiancompanieswhich developedour oil and
considered the Jews their enemies’?That is what 1 had other resources. We have repeatedly warned American
started to say when I wasinterrupted. Again I quote from
Governments that thcrc would be no peaceaslong asthe
the book by Sir John Glubb:
Zionists were supported by them-the more so when they
were supported militarily. They turned deaf earsto our
“The Mandate of Palestineallotted by the Leagueof
pleasand warnings.
Nations cons&cd principally of provisionsin favour of
the Jews,although the Jewsconstituted7 per cent of the
29. I rememberwhen in 1967 I sat at this very table and
population. The word ‘Jews’ or ‘Zionists’ appeared12
asked the United States representativethe samequestion,
times in the Mandate. The Arabs, who were 93 per cent
my dear Mr, Scali-I asked him to tell his Governmentto
of the popualtion, werenot once mentioned.”
leave us alone. You would not leaveusalone. And on that
day, arriving from Geneva, Switzerland,I picked ~13 The
25. What kind of Mandate was that? What kind of
New York Times which was sayingwhat a good thing had
businesswasthat at Versailles?What a travesty of justice. happened. No, it was not 7’/1eNew York Times; it wasthe
late Robert Kennedy, who belongedto the Democratic
No wonder the Leagueof Nationsfounderedandpavedthe
way for the Second World War. I was in London in
Party, and Nelson Rockefeller of the Republican Party
1937-or was it 1936-when Sir Neville Chamberlainsent who, each to make sure he would not be outdone by the
other, said-and I amparaphrasing:“What a great thingthat
his brother, Austin, to Mussolinjto tell him that hehadthe
3

the Zionists should vanquish the Arabs. They bring civilization to them.” I retorted: “What kind of civilization?
Hot dogs and miniskirts? ” I think today the miniskirts are
shorter and the hot dogs adulterated.

35. Finally Mr. Dulles “goofed’‘-to
use an American
term--and rebuffed the late President Gamal Abdel Kasscr
on the financing of the Aswan Dam. The Soviet Union WBS
ready to come to the assistance of E,gypt, and the rest is
history.

30. That is what has happened to the United States:
squandering its substance in order to suppress the .2rab
world.

36. In short, the Middle East thenceforth became the
chessboard on which the United States and the Soviet
Union have been pIaying th_eir political chess game--not with
wooden pieces but with the destiny of the peoples of the
area. Who can refute this statement of mine?

31. Now I come to the Russians. Laugh, laugh: Phase Five
is coming, when the dollar will go down to 10 cents and we
will all suffer. As I say, I now come to the Russians. After
the Second World War the Russians had practically no
influence in the Middle East, and almost no chance to set
foot in that region. Do you remember, my good friend
Ambassador Malik, the McCarthy era in the United States?
The Russian Communists were ogres: they were said to be
bent on destroying the Western world. Many innocent
Americans who were not Communists were nevertheless
considered traitors because they sometimes spoke fairly
about the Russians. Had it not been for the Russians the
Western Powers would have been crushed by Hitler. They
forgot that; they have short memories. However, you, like
any other great Power, wanted to set foot in the Middle
East-l will not go into the details of your reasons for that.

37. One day we are with you; one day we are not with
you; one day we help this party; one day we come to 811
understanding. Did they ask your Government, my good
friend from China‘? I do not think Peking has even had
time to reflect on this Kissinger-Brezhnev pact. At whose
expense? Not necessarily at the expense of the Arab
people, but at the expense of the Palestinians, who are the
indigenous people of that land who were driven out by
terrorism perpetrated by the Zionists in the 192Os, when, as
my good friend Sir Donald Maitland, who is an Arahist,
knows, they hanged Tommies from the trees and bombed
the King David Hotel, from where the officials of the
Mandate functioned. He also knows how they killed Lord
Moyne, how they blackmailed the United Kingdom, and
how
the United Kingdom finally found that it had made a
mistake, and sent various Royal Commissions, the last beitlg
the Peel Commission. The United Kingdom regretted what
had happened. And finally it was dragged into the Second
World War, from which it emerged almost insolvent.

32. But the Russians had practicaIly no influence in the
Middle East, and almost no chance to set foot in the region.
The United States, by its support of the Zionists, provided
them with a unique opportunity.
I still remember how
Mr. Gromyko took issue with tile United States delegation
at Lake Success-you
remember, I was sitting in those
meetings at Lake Success. Mr. Gromyko took issue with the
United States delegation to the United Nations at Lake
Success for wanting to postpone the vote on the partition
of Palestine for a few days so that some other solution
could be explored. Mr. Gromyko insisted on a quick vote,
and it looked to me at the time that both the Russians and
the Americans were vying for Zionist favour. I am talking
about myself: that is how it looked to me, and I was
vindicated by what happened later.

38. So the United States came to the financial rescue of
the Allies, and finally the United Kingdom threw the whole
question into the lap of the United Nations, just as the
United Kingdom left the question of the Mandate to the
Versailles politicians, who sold the Palestinians down the
river.
39. My memory goes back: I was sitting here; Ambassador
Fedorenko of the Soviet Union was sitting where Arnbassador Sen of India is now sitting; and wllen they came to
the question of resolution 242 (1967).--by the way, why do
you not add it to the New Testament, my good friend
Mr. Scali; it is not apocryphal; everybody is charmed by
242-I told Lord Caradon and Ambassador Fedorcnko that
that wasthe knot that would break the carpenter’s saw-as
the Arabic proverb says-and I told my Arab colleaguesthat
they had been duped. They rushed to me, saying: “For
heaven’ssake, Baroody, do not oppose 242,” I opposed
242; I opposedthe transfer of this question of the Middle
East to a specialsessionof the GeneralAssembly: I knew it
was a trap. But whatever you may say about the Arabs,
they are good-hearted. I hope they will not be duped
anymore. Resolution242-it is the eleventh commandment;
Moses had ten, and this is the elcvcnth commandment.
Resolution242-I have heard it umpteen times.

33. It was an opportunity
for the Soviet Union to enter
the Middle East arena. But no sooner had partition been
voted in 1947 and Israel recognized by Mr. Truman in May
1948 than the Zionists turned their backs on the Soviet
Union. Just the other clay Mr. Tekoah took issue with you,
my good friend Mr. Malik: he reminded you how you had
voted for partition, and wondered how come you had now
turned your back on this usurping State.
34. The Zionists turned their backs on the Soviet Union;
they knew what side their toast was buttered on and where
the money was at the time. Where? In the United States, of
course. From 1948 through the early 1950s the United
States Government dominated the Arab world and made
sure that the Soviet Union would be sealed off by what
they termed “the Northern Tier of Defence”: Turkey, Iran
and all those countries-Pakistan,
India, Afghanistan-the
Northern Tier. I do not have to tell you what it is; I
mention it for those who do not know what “the Northern
Tier of Defence” meant.

40. They have no businessin our arca. The other day
when I repliedta Mr. Eban in the Security Council or in the
General Assembly-I forget which-l said that it is immaterial who wins this war; there will be another rcund. It is,
as I said,a link in a long chain of conflicrs.
4

41. And this brings me to the best parallel that had
happened in our area-the Crusades. Do we not learn
anything from history’? There are parallels -not identical
events, parallel events. The motivation of the Crusades was
religious, just as Zionism was predicated on the premise that
God gave Palestine to them. And time and again I have said
that God was not in the real estate business. But now they
do not reply to this. “Our people, our Jewish people.”
Their Jewish people arc of many cultures, of many
languages, of many backgrounds. There is no such thing as
one Christian people, one Jewish people, one Muslim
pcoplc. There arc peoples. But the motivation they used
was a religious motivation to play on the duped fundamentalists in the West who still believe literally in every
word of the Bible.

46. I can go on and on citing history. I told the Zionists,
when I was on talking terms with them, that we have
nothing againstthe Jew assuch,but the exploiting Zionists
will not survive in the long run. I amnot talking about the
fact that they would twist my wordsto meanthat the Arabs
would want to throw the Jewsinto the Mediterranean.I am
saying that, like the Crusaders,the Zionists have no
opportunity to survive in the long, longrun. *

42. But the leaders knew what they were aiming at. Of
course, some of them felt reverence for the land of
I’alestinc bccausc there were Jewish prophets. But what
about Jesus, who they say is a false prophet? Well, in spite
of what they say, they arc a billion Christians, and to them
Jerusalem is holy. And what about the 600 million Muslims
to whom Jerusalemand the land of Palestineis sacred?
Urban II, the Pope uf those days, when he sawthat his
vassalswereveeringaway from him-he wasthe temporalas
WC11as the spiritual power in Western Europe--hada
propagandist,none other than Pctcr the Hermit. And there
was famine and there was pestilencein those daysin the
Middle Agesin I~uropc.
43 So what was the motivation of PopeUrban II but to
USCChristianity, the religion of peaceandlove, to motivate
the people of Wcstcrn Europe’? They were told that
pcnitencc and the pilgrimageto Palestine,in order to wrest
the land from the hands of the infidels--meaningthe
Muslh~s--would bc their way to heaven.Jerusalemfell
scvcral times into the hands of the Crusaders,many of
whom were opportunistswho had no religionin their heart,
who massacred
anyone whom they met on their way.
44. I have a quotation from WesternEuropeansourcesscholars who decried the Crusades,eight of them. When
Jerusalem surrenderedto the Crusaders,after more than a
month’s scigc, on 1.5 July 1099, the Crusadersput the
pcoplc of Jerusalemto the sword and the blood of the
natives of the city ran in streams.The Crusaderson the
same day cntcred the Church of the l-loly Sepulchreand
clasped their blood-stainedhands, praying to Jesus,the
Prince of Peace. What hypocrites, what bandits. TIE
Crusades wcrc motivated by religion for a political and
economic encl.

5

..

”

_*-

48. Now, what is the alternative? It is a fait accompli,as
De Gaulle once said to King Faisalin 1967 before the
conflict
of that year. It wasin May. De Gaulle wasmaligned
by many Zionists. IHe said: “But what can you do, it is a
fait accompIi.” And His Majesty King Faisalretorted: “Did
you consider the invasion of the Nazisa fait accompli,OI
did you leave and struggleuntil the Naziswere defeated?”
49. And now, and tomorrow, andthe day after tomorrow,
sho~~ld
there be a fait accompli, the Arab youth will not
stay qJict. They will call those who make pcacc with the
usurpersof the Palestinepeopletraitors. Mark my words.I
may not be living then, but here in the record let it figure:
traitors. 1 know the youth in the Arab lands. That is the
best we can do, the Security Council.As long asthere isan
injustice which is perpetrated, there will bc anotherround,
and still another round. I cannot tell you the intervalsof
those rounds becausethe age of prophecy hasgone, but
having been seized of the situation sincethe early 192Os,I
hope you will heed what 1 am saying. I am giving you
warning here, membersof the Council,that you arc solving
nothing-just becauseit dots not suit the Soviet Union and
the United States to come to grips. A military confrontation will bring down mankind. It might bc suiciclc.
50. Thcrc will be other conflicts as long as the major
powers do not formulate their policies on the basisof
justice. And the Arab people will struggleuntil in.justicc
disappearsin their area.

45. Set the parallel, membersof the Council. I-Icre WC
have a movementcalledzionismwhich wantsto ingatherall
the Jews of the world in I’alcstinc, if it can, so that it may
duvclop and exploit the three continents from that crossroad: Palestine.And even Mr. Ebanthe other day said,Why
clo not WCand the Arabs have a commonmarket’? 1 am
paraphrasing. They went there to trade. The Rothschilds
and their ilk, who feel that taxesarc risingin Europeandin
the United States, considerthat place virgin territory fol
the invcstmcnt of their capital. Whom do they think they
are fooling, those Rothschilds?I knew someof them in the
I 930s; anything for money.

‘i

47. Here we come to the draft resolution, which, if
adopted, may create a phoney ddtcnte, like the clCtentewe
arc witnessingbetween the superPowcrs.This time it will
be a dktente bctwecn someof the Arablcadcrsandsomeof
the JCWS,or the Zionists rather, becausethe Zionistswant
to expand until they get to westernIraq, until they get to
the Nile. Then what will we have profited: the United
Nations asan instrument for peaceor asan instrumentfor
delaying tragedy and perpetuatingit?

51_ Now, is there a solution’? It soundslike warlike talk
here. Yes, thcrc is a solution. Instcaclof the two supcrPowersbecoming the arbiters of what they think they may
accomplish to servetheir nationalinterests,ict metell them
what 1 think would be a fair solution.WCdo not want the
Jews to suffer, nor do WCwant the Arabs to suffer. They
hoisted a flag of their own, which is a symbol of
ccllonialism--extreme cc~loninlism,becnusc the colonial
Powers did not expropriate in the past the assetsof the
natives of the land. Live asJews,if you want to, amongst
us, but not as Zionists. That flag is the symbol of your
aggression.
But you could adopt anotherflag, a flag that will
fly over Jews and Arabs of’ l~alostinc. Let it be a crescent
and inside of the crcsccnt we will accept your star as
Jewish, what you call tllc Star ofDavic1asJews.Rcmcmbcr,

that crescent is always surrounding you. If you try to be
aggressive, it will close tip on you. Otherwise that symbol of
aggression will lead to further aggression. Who begins it is
beside the point. As we say in Arabic, “He who starts evil is
really the aggressor”. WC did not go and hurt any Jew in
Eastern and Central Europe, just as we have never hurt
either the British or the French or the Americans. And they
come to our region and wage war by proxy. Beware. There is
no one who went to our area but disappeared. I am not
going back before Alexander the Great. The Romans, the
Seleucids, the Byzantines, the Seljuks, the Crusaders from
all Western Europe, and our brothers the Ottomansalthough it was a sort of a commanwealth,
the Ottoman
Empire.
52. Then it was the turn of the British and the French, in
their Mandates, which was a sort of colonialism. And now it
is the turn of whom? Of the Eastern and Central European
Zionists who have started that movement of aggression
amongst us. Where arc those who preceded them? Cone
with the wind. And you also in time will go with the wind.
But we do not want to hurt you as pcoplc. We arc
defending ourselves from an alien culture, from an alien
language, from an alien way of life. And that is why you
have become a foreign clement in the body social and body
politics of the Arab world, causing an abscess, and the
abscess is causing a high fever. And not until the puss of
aggression is squcezcd out for good and people live like
brothers in peace, Jew or gentile, under a common flag, will
there be peace in the land of Palestine and in the Middle
East.
,..“-------~-

57. My Government has too close a knowledge of tllc

difficulties which will have to be ovcrcomc to believe that a
settlement can bc achieved tomorrow. A period of hard
negotiation liesahead.
58. But as we call tonight for a cease-fire,the membersof
the Security Council possess
one valuable assetwhich was
not available on 6 June 1967. The only prescription for a
settlement which commands unanimous agreement is
already on our statute book as resolution 242 (1967). All
energiescan not be dcvotcd to the implementation of that
resolution in all of its parts. After six years of fruitless
activity, the Security Council is fully justified in calling
upon the partiesto take immcdiatc stepsto that encl.
59. The United Kingdom delegationwill vote for the draft
resolution sponsoredby the Soviet Union and the United
States (S/11036/. We believe that it offers a unique
opportunity to stop the fighting and to start real progressat
last towards a settlement.
60. I remindedthe Council at the beginningof this debate
of my Government’s views on the detailed provisions of
such a settlement, which would combine the requircmcnts
of sovereignty with those of security. I do not propose to
restate those views tonight. I wish only to say that they
have not changed.
61. With regard to the draft resolution now before US,I
should like to add two points. First, my Government
bclicves that the efforts,aimed at establishing a just and
durable peace in the Middle East would best be pursued
under the aegis of the United Nations. This is IIOW 111~
delegation would interpret the reference to “appropriate
auspices”in paragraph3 of the draft resolution before US.

53. Sir Donald MAITLAND
(United Kingdom): When 1
adclrcssed this Council on 8 October /I 743rd meeting/ I
suggested that we had two immediate responsibilities: first,
to seek the earliest possible cease-fire and, second, to treat
the renewal of hostilities as a catalyst for starting a genuine
diplomatic process which would lead to a settlement.

62. My secondpoint is this. Since, as 1 have argued, there
is no security in resort to military force and real pcacc can
cometo the Middle East only in the wake of a settlement,
my Government hopes that as soon as the cease-fire has
becomeeffective, the Unitccl States and the Soviet Union
will ceasesupplying arms to the area. As membersof the
Council know, my Government suspendedall shipment of
armsto the battlefield assoon ashostilities broke out. MY
Government acted at once out of the conviction that this
was the only right policy if the aitn is, as it must be, to seek
reconciliation and prevent any further war between the
Arab Statesand Israel.

54. In the 17 clays since the present war began, this
Council has been unable to find a way of discharging either
of these responsibilities. Meanwhile, the States involved in
the fighting have suffered tragic losses and the risk to
international peace and security has grown alarmingly. The
conclusion must inevitably suggest itself that a solution to
the Middle East problem is not to be found by military
means. There is only one decisive victory to be gained. That
is the achievement of a just and lasting peace.
55. The just and lasting peace which must now be sought
with the utmost vigour could bring great benefits to the
people of the Arab States and Israel. WC know that they
have for long sought the opportunity to devote their talents
and their resourcesto the economic and social problems
that face them and so create stability in place of tension,
hostility and violence.

63. In conclusion,may I say that my Government stands
ready to play its full part in the urgent effort which must
now be madeto seeka lastingsettlement.
64. Mr. DE GUIRINCAUD (France) (interpretation fiorn
Frel?chj: Following the grave developmentsin the situation
in the Middle East, the llnitcd Statesand the Sovjct Union
jointly called for Lhc immccliateconvening of the Security
Council in order to place bcforc it the draft resolution now
before us for consideration. Mindful of the urgency of the
matter, 1 shall be very brief. While we sit hcrc Iistcning to
speeches,in the Middle liast men are figliting, 11lcn urc
dying.

56. But it is not only the Arab States and Israel which
have suffered. For many years now the intcrcsts of many
countries in Europe, Africa and Asia have been closely
affected. The will is strong in these three continents To]
lasting peace in the Middle East and they have the
opportunity to cxpressit in this debate.
6

._,’
-

b

65. My delegation will vote in favour of the text submitted by the delegations of the Soviet Union and the
United States, because that text meets the necessity of
putting an immediate end to a struggle that has claimed far
too many viMims, a struggle the prolongation of which can
bring only greater suffering and perhaps other dangers.

General Assembly and the entire Organization. Article 23
of the Charter clearly stipulates that in the election of
non-permanent members of the Security Council due regard
should be “specially paid, in the first instance to the
contribution of Members of the United Nations to the
maintenance of international peace and security”.

66. My delegation, however, would wish to make the
following observations. The draft now before the Council
responds to the concerns of the French Government as
expressed by our Prime Minister on 9 October in an address
before the National Assembly. In that statement,
Mr. Messmcr emphasized the link that must exist between a
cease-fire and the immediate start of the process that
should lead to a definitive settlement of the conflict in
accordance with resolution 242 (1967), which was accepted
by all and which offers to all the necessary guarantees for
security. The draft before us also provides for the implementation of resolution 242 (1967) in all of its parts.
France abides by its interpretation
of resolution
242 (1967) in particular as regards withdrawal, and by its
conception of the role of our Council and its permanent
members in the peace settlement and its implementation.

73. For the last 2.5 years, since the Arab invasion of Israel
in 1948 in defiance of the United Nations, Iraq has pursued
war against Israel, refusing to sign the armistice of 1949,
which had been sponsored by the Security Council, and
actively supporting terror warfare against Israel, and joining
in the Egyptian-Syrian aggression of 6 October 1973.
Throughout this period Iraq has openly proclaimed its
objective to be the total destruction of a Member State and
the denial to the Jewish people of Israel of its right to
self-determination and freedom.

67. In submitting this draft resolution, the United States
and the Soviet Union assume, in our view, the responsibility
for contributing
to the best of their ability to the
implementation
of resolution 242 (1967). However, as
regards the negotiations provided for in the SovietAmerican text in paragraph 3, my delegation wishes to
stress that the phrase “under appropriate auspices” can
mean nothing other than under the aegis of the Security
Council.
68. Lastly, I should like to emphasize that the text on
which the Council is about to vote will have its full effect
and have a chance of leading to the restoration of peace
only if it is understood that the Powers that have proposed
this text intend to cease very soon their massive deliveries
of armaments to the belligerents.
69. My delegation fervently hopes that the Council will
take a decision at the earliest possible moment in favour of
the text before us. Too much blood has already been shed
for the Council to show any hesitation whatsoever in
adopting a draft resolution that offers the immediate
advantage of bringing about a cease-fire and thus putting an
end to the fighting, while at the same time opening the way
to the over-all negotiation which alone will make possible
the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
70. The
Israel.
,

PRESIDENT:
L

,.*

“-““.

XI

I call on the representative of
,.

”

I
/ 71. Mr. TEKOAH (IsraeQ: _I*&ould be remiss in my duty
if, in asking to speak’?odaT, I did not mention something
which took-place-in our Organization last week and which
directly concerns the Security Council. I refer to Iraq’s
election on 15 October to membership of the Security
Council of the United Nations.
72. Iraq’s election is a travesty of the Charter of the
United Nations. It further debases the Security Council; the

74. The election of Iraq to this Council, only a few days
after it had resumed active aggression, again illustrates the
shortcomings and failings of the General Assembly and the
Security Council in matters concerning the Middle East.
75. It was not my intention to speak at this stage of the
meeting; the statement delivered by the representative of
Saudi Arabia compels me, however, to do so. Only the
other day I was interrupted five times in this very chamber
in the course of expressing grief over the death of innocent
civilian victims of the war, whether they be Egyptian,
Syrian, Israeli, or nationals of other States. Yet today we
listened to a statement by the representative of Saudi
Arabia into which he succeeded in packing the maximum of
nonsense into maximum of verbiage and venom. He did not
stop at distorting fact and history. He insulted Heads of
States, including those of permament members of the
Security Council. He slandered nations. He abused civilizations and religions. He extolled Hitler and anti-Semitism.
Yet no one except me tried to call him to order. His
falsifications and calumnies do not deserve any response. I
should, however, like to refer to one point in his speech: his
attack against zionism-because he is not the only one who
resorts to these perfidious views and expressions.
76. Zionism is the love of Zion, Zionism is the Jewish
people’s liberation movement, the quest for freedom, for
equality with other nations. Yet in an organization in which
liberation movements are hailed and supported, the Jewish
people’s struggle to restore its independence and sovereignty is maligned and slandered in an endless spate of
malice and venom.
77. In his drive to annihilate the Jewish people, Hitler
began by distorting the image of the Jew, by rewriting
Jewish history, by fabricating some of the most odious
historic and racial theories. The Arab Governments, in their
campaign to complete Hitler’s crimes against the Jewish
people and destroy the Jewish State, have adopted the same
method of falsifying Jewish history, and in particular the
meaning of the Zionist movement and the significance of its
ideals.
78. What is zionism? When the Jews, exiled from their
land in the seventh century before the Christian era, sat by
the rivers of Babylon and wept and prayed but also sought

ways to go home, that was already Zionism. When in a mass
revolt against their exile they returned and rebuilt the
temple and re.established their State, that was zionism.
%‘hen they were the last people in the entire Mediterranean
basin to resist the forces of the Roman Empire and to
struggle for independence, that was zionism. When for
centuries after the Roman conquest they refused to
surrender and rebelled again and again against the invaders,
that was Zionism. When, uprooted from their land by the
conquerors and dispersed by them all over the world, they
continued to dream and to strive to return to Israel, that
was Zionism, When, during the long succession of foreign
invaders, they tried repeatedly to regain sovereignty at least
in part of their homeland, that was Zionism. When they
volunteered from Palestine and from all over the world to
establish Jewish armies that fought on the side of the Allies
in the First World War and helped to end Ottoman
subjugation, that was Zionism. When they formed the
Jewish Brigade in the Second World War to fight Hitler,
while Arab leaders supported him, that was Zionism. When
Jews went to Nazi gas chambers with the name of
Jerusalem on their lips, that was Zionism. When, in the
forests of Russia and the Ukraine and other parts of Eastern
Europe, Jewish partisans battled the Germans and sang of
the land where palms are growing, that was zionism. When
Jews fought British colonialism while the Arabs of Palestine
and the neighbouring Arab States were being helped by it,
that was Zionism. Zionism is one of the world’s oldest
anti-imperialist movements. It aims at securing for the
Jewish people the rights possessed by other nations. It
harbours malice .towards none. It seeks co-operation and
understanding with the Arab peoples and with their
national movements.

How is the world to regard the new repulse given to Arab
aggression? What is the world to think and to say of
Governments which for six years have prepared themselves
for war, armed their military Forces with the most
sophisticated weapons, supplied in unlimited quantities,
tried to weaken Israel by a war of attrition and by terror
warfare, and then attacked on Judaism’s holiest of days;
attacked when all Israel was at prayer, fast and rest, when
the cease-fire lines were manned by a handful of defenders;
attacked with all the might of 4,900 tanks, 1,100 aircraft,
hundreds of missiles, and over 800,000 men under arms,
and then find themselves in the situation which they arc in
today? There is only one word to describe such a
development: disgrace. Disgrace not for the Arab soldier
who fought as a soldier fights; disgrace not for the Arab
peoples, which, like all peoples in the world, aspire to
peace; but dishonour and disgrace for those leadersof
Egypt and Syria and their supporters who have led their
States into more devastation and sorrow. It is nothing but
disgraceto sacrificethe lives of thousandsand thousandsof
young men in order to escapethe necessity of building
peace.It is nothing but disgraceto engulf the entire Middle
East in flames in an attempt to sabotagepreparations for
peace.
82. In I967 the pica of humiliation was an invention of
Arab leaders to justify their rejection of peace and their
refusal to negotiate peace with Israel. This time their
disgraceis a fact. The annalsof history mirror few instances
in which a policy of war has come to a more ignominous
fate. This time, no pretexts, no inventions, no pleasmust be
permitted to enablethe Arab leadership to free itself from
the consequencesof its abject disgraceof preferring war
over peace. They must be persuadedonce and for all to
abandon those politics which have caused the present
conflagration.

79. Zionism is as sacred to the Jewish people as the
national liberation movements are to the nations of Africa
and Asia. Even if the Arab States are locked today in
conflict with the Jewish national liberation movement, they
must not stoop in their attitude towards it to the fanaticism
and barbarism of the Nazis. If there is to be hope for peace
in the Middle East, there must be between Israel and the
Arab States mutual respect for each other’s sacred national
values-not distortion and abuse.

83. To the Arab Governments the Egyptian-Syrian aggrcs.
sionof 6 October hasbrought failure and disgrace.To Israel
it hasconfirmed the correctnessof its views and the reality
of its apprehensions.It is clear now that, after having
launched war 25 years ago againstIsrael’s existence, Arab
leadershipstill aims at Israel’selimination as a sovereign
member of the family of nations. The nature, the timing,
the extent of the Yom Kippur aggressionleave little room
for doubt. The active participation of such States asSyria,
Iraq, Saudi Arabia and Libya, which openly and officially
go on denying till this very day Israel’s right to independence,strengthensthis grim truth.

80. Zionism was not born in the Jewish ghettoes of
Europe, but on the battlefield against imperialism in
ancient Israel. It is not an out-moded nationalistic revival
but an unparalleled epic of centuries of resistance to force
and bondage. Those who attack it attack the fundamental
principles and provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations.

84. President Sadat’s close confidant and adviser Has
seneinHeykal had no qualmsabout reiterating publicly the
real objective of Egypt’s renewed assault. In his weekiy
article in AZ Ahraln he wrote the following on I9 October
1973, last Friday:

XI. Egypt’s and Syria’s Yom Kippur aggression against
Israel is in its third week. What has it brought the
aggressors? Nothing. Nothing but another debacle. Those
who chose war and not peace have again exposed themselves to the inevitable consequences of war. Those who
preferred to deal with Israel through bloodshed and not
agreement have brought bloodshed upon themselves. When,
six years ago, the Arab assault against Israel’s existence was
foiled and the armies of Egypt and Syria repelled to the
1967 cease-fire lines, Arab leaders complained of humiliation. The world was called upon to consider Arab failure to
destroy Israel’s independence as Arab humiliation by Israel.

“The aim at this phaseis not a piece of territory in the
Golan, the Golan as a whole, a part of Sinai, or all of
Sinai. Nor is the problem Jerusalem,the West Bank of the
Jordan River, Gaza and the rights of the Palestinians.The
matter does not relate to the liberation of the Arab
territories which were occupied since 5 June 1967, but
strikes further and deeper against the future of Israel,
even if this is not immediately apparent. If the Arabs will
8

.-‘

succeed in liberating by force their lands occupied on
5 June 1967”.-

85. Mr. MALIK

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translation front Russian): Mr. President, you advised the
previous speaker to be more reasonable. Could you give the
same advice to the present speaker? Thank you.
86. The PRESIDENT: May I say to the representative of
the Soviet Union that I shall be glad to advise the
representative of Israel in the same terms that I used in my
word of advice to my friend and collcague the representative of Saudi Arabia. In other words, 1 would ask the
representative of Israel to bear in mind what I said earlier in
the meeting on the subject of the reasonable licence that we
members of the Council and those who are invited to speak
before it normally observe and are normally given by the
President. The representative of Israel may proceed.
87 i Mr. TEKOAH
_,_.___..,,..I.cIsrael):\
.-_,.,...
_ Thank you Mr. President. I
wa$-Giibting from a statement made by ‘Mr. Iieykal in his
weekly editorial article of last Friday. 1 shall conclude that
quotation. Mr, Heykal said:
“If the Arabs will succeed in liberating by force their
lands occupied on 5 June 1967, what can actually prevent
them in the next phase from liberating by force Palestine
itself! “,

91. The PRESIDENT: There are no further nameson the
list of speakers,unlessthe representativeof SaudiArabia
wishesto speaknow, it would be my intention to proceed
to the voting. Doesthe representative
of SaudiArabia wish
to speak at this point or does he wish to speak in
explanation of vote if we shouldproceedimmediatelyto
the vote?
92. Mr. BAROODY (SaudiArabia): How can I speakin
explanation of vote? I am not a memberof the Council
and I cannot vote. If I couldvote. I would casta veto. You
know very well that I cannotvote.
93. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President,I think the point made
by the representativeof Saudi Arabia is very valid. As a
Member of the United Nationsinvited to take part in oul
debate, he should be giventhe floor to exercisethe right of
reply after the business
of the Councilis over.
94, I did not inscribe my nameon the list of speakers.I
think the meetingwasconvenedin sucha hurry that there
wasvery little consultation,very little orderly arrangement
of statements and so on. I would therefore suggestthat,
particularly since the purposeof the draft resolution is to
stop the fighting, the soonerwe adopt it, the better it will
be. That is only one aspect.I was therefore wondering
whether you, Sir, in your wisdomwould not allow the
membersof the Councilto speak,vote-decide on the &aft
resolution-and then perhapsgive the representativeof
Saudi Arabia the opportunity to exercisethe right of reply.
From what I gathered from his statement,he would be
perfectly happy with this solution.If that is so, andif there
are no other nameson the list of speakers,I shouldlike to
speaknow.

88. NOW, after two weeksof fighting, the situationon the
ground is asit is. This is neither the time nor the placeto
analyse the factors that have brought it about. One factor
does belong, however, to this debate.Inherent in it js the
very essenceof the Middle East conflict. That factor is the
spirit of the Israeli fighting man. For 25 yearshc hasbeen 95, The PRESIDENT: I call on the representativeof Saudi
Arabia.
in a war which he did not want, a war which had been ,@
_....”‘” ”
imposed on him, but he knew at all times that he was
,&%,-.-Mr.*
BAROODY (SaudiArabia)liIf my good colleague
defending his life, the life of his family, the existenceof his
“from
India
wishesto speaknow, I shallbe all earsto listen
people, the independenceof a State. Opposinghim were
to what he has to say. If he wantsto speakafter the vote,
armies which were told that the Jewishpeoplehasno right
to equality with other nations. They were told that sand then I do not mind replyingafter the vote.
dunes and rocks are more sacred than life, that the
restoration of artificial lines through the desert is more 97. But while 1 havethe floor, Sir, I shouldlike to saythat
I have a great deal of respectfor you andto askyou please
important, more valuablethan peaceand constructionand
to
bear with me sometimes
whenI take the floor to explain
creativity. The Israeli soldier fought to defend the livesof
those he loved. The Egyptian and Arab soldierwasordered the situation-which perhapsby this time you know by
heart, having servedfor many yearsin the Ilnited Nations.
to fight and die in the nameof hatred andhostility. This is
But I do not speakfor the benefitof the old timers,I speak
the difference between Egyptian-Syrian aggressionand
for
the benefit of the new membersof the Council who
Israel’s struggleof self-defence.This is why aswe meethere
have
had no opportunity to research
the Palestinequestion
this evening the Israeli forces, and behindthem the entire
and
zionism.
people of Israel, can look to the future with certainty and
assuratlce.
..bG
/i 1
98. On the other hand,I amspeakingalsonot to Mr. Scali
alone but to the people of the United States who are
89. The PRESIDENT: The representativeof SaudiArabia hosting this Organization,becauseof the fact that the mass
has asked to be allowed to speak,and I now call on him
media of information are controlledand manipulatedto a
with an appealto him to cast his eyestowardsthe clock. I
large extent by the Zionists, So it standsto reasonthat I
a171 sure that he will.
should explain the situation of the Arabs beyond these
chambers,unless,of course,my statementsare either cut
off, slanted or distortedashasbeenthe casefor the past25
90, Mr. BAROODY (SaudiArabia): Mr. President,I would
abide by the rulesandexercisethe right of reply later. But I
years by none other than the Zionist pressas well asradio
should like to ask you if there are memberswho wishto
and television in this city and in many other cities of the
United States.
speak. If there are, I defer to them.

tc~speak now:
l_ll_..”
_...
~~.-------‘-“.._~“*~
100. Mr. SEN (India): By all standards 1 should be happy
that fig/lting and bloodshed would end by the adoption of
the draft resolution before us, but 1 am not, and this for
two weighty reasons, First, for years now we have
mailltaincd that iustice must be combined with peace. The
justice we have‘ repeatedly emphasized is that the Arab
lallds occupied by Israel must be evacuated before serious
and fruitful negotiations could start. SecorW, we have
always been cautious, if not obstreperous, about any
solution arrived at by the great Powers without full
consultation with the general membership of the United
Nations,

would
bring
Bearing
sponsored

s norIn&Zation

possible Ct>IlS?W~~lW
of relnti0Ils
hl the

in mind,

WClCORleS

participate

about
this
by

in

tile

every

Kenyn
Soviet

Union

and

the
thf!

drilft
Ullitcd

Cffdrf

h!idLfk

b-

~.%~

ft%dU~la~~
Statf%

&KL

101. One might argue that that is exactly what we have
been doing tonight, but let us examine briefly what has
happened. At 8.30 tonight we made a formal call to find
out if the Council was meeting tonight, having been told at
7 p.m. that such a meeting was planned and that a draft
resolution had been worked out. The next two or three
hours we spent in intensive consultation, but of course
without instructions or guidance from our own Government.

just introduced by the delegations of tll0.W tWO count&s

102. Two matters are quite clear. The first is that the
military situation on the field is difficult to assess and that
the United States and the Soviet Union have come to an
agreement the details of which are not fully known and
perhaps cannot and should not be known to us now or in
the foreseeable future. So, given this lack of knowledge-a
lack explained by the United States reference to the
prisoners of war, which is not mentioned in the draft
resolution--we are indeed in great diffidulty, which I do not
have to elaborate.

107. Referring to pnragraph 2, i have said Ijclijrc. 31ed
implementatic,n ttl
have just said, that
242 (1967) forms the basis for a solution in the hfi&&~
East, But for six years this resolution has tltbt hr~
implemented. I hope that now there is @Gig t<> IM ZS~:
honest and earnest desire to Ilave peace in tllis irk*uh!c&
area. Therefore it is hoped that the facttrrs tIltit IMC
frustrated a realizatiorl of the implen~erlt~tio~~of r~stnla~i~~
242 (1967) will not no w occur again.

106. Referring to paragraph 1, m) dekgalit~n
hart&
welcomesthe call for an immediate cessation of Cigtllialy Dd
he Middle East. All men of good will WOUld CSl’cCt f!:a
Council to do no lessiI1 the wake of the ~ILLII\‘>’
1011tba’ii!?! w
far, the grave injuries inflicted C)I~ITEIII~ [X%)~~~C 3rd 1h
incalculabledestruction of property in the :Irc”ii sirw
Bhc
war broke out on 6 October.

108. Referring to paragraph 3, I believe that iI pern~:r?r!
solution can be found only if both parties it) the hl~.lJl~
East conflict have the will and the desire tt, live is, ~KX;S
with one another. No resolution can bring p~‘ace tir als;&:
ravagedsection of the world unlessthe will to Iivu in ~~c”;Kc
exists in both parties. If we are to undcrst;md ftt;tt hi&
partiesare willing to lneet and negotiate tcl tirriuc at a pa
and lasting peace, my delegation wiH wclc~rnlc this. IBM
must make someobservations in this rcgarrl. 1 wwlt~
CSJ~;
upon
the super-Powers
to desist
from iicccler;ititlg ttlc .~ricb
race in the area, because as long
as lllosc \~~i~l~rl~~S
~$a”
suppliedth aregoing to act ascataipsts LOwarfilrr: iar EBLL:
region.

103. Our second difficulty is that the two Powers,
however great and however powerful, have come to an
agreement and we have to underwrite it quickly. No
non-aligned country
can welcome this turn of events, not
merely for this specific case but as a general rule to which
we have repeatedly drawn attention, None the less, the
general conclusion is clear: for whatever reasons the
principal parties to the fighting seem to have accepted the
joint draft resolution and we have very tittle choice left to
us except to support it. But in doing so, we should make it
clear that the implementation of resolution 242 (1967)
meansfirst that the Arab territories mustbe Vacatedsubject
to minor adjustmentsagreedto by the parties, secondly,
that h’ael has a right to exist as a sovereignState and,
thirdly, that a proper settlement of the rights of the
Paiestinianpeoplemustbe accepted.

109.
At the
sanle
time,
my
delegatil)ll I,c]icvcs tti;it IQ
implementresolution 242 (19673, to accltmplis1r the t5~112drawal of troops, to erasure the itzviolahility and ~~~xti~~iM~~
indewndence of every state in the area. 10 ~~~~~~~~
tite
104. Therefore, while we shall support the draft resolu. freedon and r&h of Ilnvigation in the region :lllt~ ;llsr, rgEC
tion, we cannot be unaware that it is vague-a vagueness rights of the refugees, an intcrnationd
systcn>
v.$li
!W
compoundedby the reference to resoIution 242 (1g67),
required
to guarantee
all
tllese
points.
\IJC~ I believe
tilLIt
ajlr:
which has bedevilledour discussions
for six years because system
should
come
from
the
Uaitcd
Natic,Ils
iII&J
11s;tt
Of these
C~laracteristics-and
we shallsupport
it in the hope
thereshouldbe regular reports to the Security (*trL~nc~~.
that this vagueness
will not come in the way of a just
solution.It iSon this understandingthat we areprepare-J
to
suPPortthe joint draft resolution, with many hesitations 110. We in Africa are desirous of having pui’cc it) titan
regiOrl.We are a developing nation, and I’ stl,)~llt~ like la*
and
WWa~
reSerVatiOns,
not
the least of which is with
elwhasize
that
we
want
t0
develop
ullrl
,VC
C31,
q,iBlv
regard to the referenceto “appropriate
auspices"
under
develop
in an
atmosphere of pcaCC
in
tile
s.vc,rlcl.
hrtl&

10

there is peace we cannot achieve the results we should like
to have. Although we are a small nation and not in a
position to dictate any terms to anybody, I believe even
small nations can come up with words of wisdom occasionally. Therefore I feel that the African countries should be
listened to when we talk here, because of our small size and
of our desire to have-pe?ce so that we can develop.
I;c;l.-

Council adopted resolution 242 (1967), in its wisdom it
left the provisions of that resolution open to contradictory interpretations, a priori dooming to failure efforts
for their implementation. It seems to my delegation that
adherence to resolution 242 (1967) alone will not help us
towards a solution of the Middle East conflict, as has
been proved by the failure of all efforts during the last six
years. If resolution 242 (1967) has to be the basis of the
search for a solution, the Council has to agree on one and
the same interpretation in order to be able to implement
its provisions effectively . . . ,

111. Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretation from Spanish):
We consider that the joint action taken by the United
States and the Soviet Union in proposing the draft
resolution in document S/11036 represents a step in the
right direction, and for this reason the delegation of
Panama will vote in favour of it.

I

“As far as my delegation is concerned, the only
interpretation of resolution 242 (1967) that can lead us
toward peace in the Middle East is to follow the sequence
of, first, withdrawal
of Israel from occupied Arab
territories, then negotiation as to the outstanding issues,
including the rights of the Palestinians. If these two
aspects are settled, secure and recognized borders can be
established and peace has a realistic chance of returning
the
Middle
East . . .‘I. [1744th
meeting,
Eras. 169-l 70.1

112. The suffering and pain of the peoples of the Middle
East that are parties to the conflict have been enormous. In
particular we deplore the large number of innocent victims.
We hope that this cease-fire will minimize the serious risks
to world peace because of this war. As the draft resolution
we are to vote on speaks of the implementation of
resolution 242 (1967) in all of its parts, it is worth recalling
that my delegation, in this Council on 14 June last/l 726th
meeting], set forth the position of the Government of
Panama as regards the interpretation of resolution
242 (1967).

120. It is with this understanding that my delegation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution, especially with regard
to its operative paragraph 2.

113. In conclusion, we express the hope that the negotiations to be carried out between the parties will lead to the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

121. In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council that
Indonesia will co-operate in all efforts to establish a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East.

114. The PRESIDENT: I had understood that the representative of Saudi Arabia was willing to postpone his
statement until after the voting. Does he wish to
speak now?

122. Mr. PEREZ de CUELLAR (Peru) (interpretation
from Spanish): My delegation could not oppose the
adoption of the joint draft resolution submitted by the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the United States
of America, despite its obvious vagueness, since it is
intended to put an end to the bloody conflict that has
intensified over the past three weeks, and since it reaffirms
that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) is the framework for a just and final settlement of the Middle East
problem.

115. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): If you do not want
me to speak now, I will speak after the vote is taken, or
whenever you say; but I do not want to be interrupted when
I speak. It is up to you-to call on me now, or after the
vote. I am at your command, so to speak.
116. The PRESIDENT: May I say to the representative of
Saudi Arabia that there are now two members of the
Council who wish to address the Council, and I feel I
should give them priority.

123. We fully agree that the cease-fire should determine
the concomitant initiation of negotiations among the
parties concerned, since, as we said on 11 October, this
appeal for an end to the fighting “must be couched in terms
which will facilitate and, if possible, give an advance
indication of th.e complete and long-term solution of the
problem” [1745th meeting, para. 561.

117. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): With pleasure. It is
up to you, Sir, to call on me, before the vote or after the
vote. I will respect your wishes.

124. We trust that the “appropriate auspices” mentioned
in the draft will directly involve the United Nations through
the Secretary-General and the Security Council. And it is
worth recalling that the Council is composed of 15
members, eight of which represent the so-called third
world.

118. Mr. ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): I will be extremely
brief, as I cannot improve on what my colleague from
India, Ambassador Sen, has so clearly stated.
119. My delegation has decided to vote in favour of the
draft resolution which has been jointly submitted by the
Soviet Union and the United States of America. In doing so
I would like to remind the Council of what I said in my
statement on 9 October last:

125. We shall vote in favour of the draft resolution with
satisfaction, because it represents the will of the Council to
assume its responsibilities; and with hope, since we trust
that the parties-that is to say, all the States and peoples
concerned that should and must participate in the negotiations-are at last embarked upon the road to peace.

“Members have referred to resolution 242 (1967) as the
basis for finding a solution to the Middle East problem.
My delegatiol~ agrees with that view. However, when the
11

133. The hostilities launched on 6 October have resulted
in hundreds of military personnel becoming prisoners of
war. We regard the release of all prisoners of war now held in
the countries involved in the conflict as an indispensable
condition of any cease-fire agreement.

126. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Israel, who, I understand, wishes to supplement his earlier
remarks.
.” ., ,_. _ -.... .i
\, 127. Mr. TEKOAH (IsraeI):’ I should now like to refer to
the draft resolutjon onewliich the Security Council is about
to vote. In the General Assembly on 8 October’ and in the
Security Council at its recent meetings, the Israel delegation
explained its view on the origin of the war now raging in
the Middle East. Israel has successfully resisted an attack
which, had it succeeded in its objective, would have placed
Israel’s security in great jeopardy. Our Prime Minister said
on 11 October that we have no ambition in this war except
to repel an assault on our security. Our supreme national
objective is the attainment of a negotiated peace.

134. In conveying its positive response to the pra;pusa\
made by the United States of America and the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, the Government of Israel hopes
that the bloodshed and hostility which have tormented the
Middle East for so many years will be replaced by an era of
peace and co-operation between all the States in our region.
Q----w~~,
135. Mr. HUANG Hua (China) (interpretation
fium
Chinese): In our statement at the meeting of the Security
Council, on 8 October, in considering the question of Israeli
aggression against Egypt and Syria, the Chinese delegation
clearly pointed out that:

128. Those considerations explain our positive attitude to
the draft resolution, paragraph 1 of which:
“Culls tcpon all parties to the present fighting to cease
alI firing and terminate all military activity immediately,
no later than 12 hours after the moment of the adoption
of this decision, in the positions they now occupy;“.

“If the Security Council is to adopt any resolution at
all, it must condemn all the acts of aggression by the
Israeli Zionists in the strongest terms, give the firmest
support to the Egyptian, Syrian and Palestinian peoples in
the just action they are taking to resist the aggressors,
demand the immediate withdrawal of the Israeli Zionists
from all the Arab territories they have occupied and
explicitly provide for the restoration of the national
rights of the Palestinian people.” [I743rd
meeting,
para. 57. J

129. It is evident that Israel’s compliance with the
proposed cease-fire is conditional on its acceptance and
observance by all the States taking part in this fighting.
Moreover, every Government accepting the cease-fire must
obviously be responsible for ensuring that it should apply
not only to its own troops but also to troops from other
countries operating on its soil, as well as to irregulars of any
kind, We-have in mind, for example, the terrorists firing on
villages in northern Israel from Lebanese territory, 01
infiltration across the border. The cessation of military
activity must include the elimination of the blockade now
imposed by the Republic of Yemen at the Bab el Mandab
Straits. The obstruction
of waterways
to international
navigation is certainly an act of war which this resolution
should bring to an end.

136. The draft resolution tabled today by the United
States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics delegations has failed to reflect that just position. It must also be
pointed out that what the two super-Powers have done in
the whole course of the current event has revealed their
contention as well as collusion in the Middle East and their
attempt to impose the situation of “no war, no peace”
again on the Arab people. This time, these two super.
Powers have hurriedly introduced a draft resolution of their
concoction to the Security Council and asked for its
immediate adoption allowing of no full consultation between
the States members of the Security Council and preventing
them from seeking instructions
from their respective
Governments. This practice of imposing one’s views on the
Security Council is most unreasonable and is one we cannot
agree to.

,130. We accept paragraph 2 of the draft resolution in the
sense defined by Israel in its decision of 4 August I970 in
connexion with the United States cease-fire initiative, and
also in our communication
to the Secretary-General of
4 August 1970, and in the address of our Prime Minister,
Mrs. Golda Meir in the Knesset on that day.
131. We attach great importance to the provision of the
draft resolution in paragraph 3 deciding “that tinmediately
and concurrently with the cease-fire, negotiations shall start
between the parties concerned under appropriate auspices
aimed at establishing a just and durable peace in the Middle
East.”

137. In view of the foregoing, the Chinese delegation
decides not to participate in the voting on the draft
resolution.
138. Mr. KHALID (Sudan): For over two weeks now the
Middle East has been inundated in blood while its children
wailed and its mothers wept. In the process more countries
were engulfed and the whole area was about to be
incinerated by a contagious war. Ever since the outbreak of
hostilities on 6 October, none of us has sat idly by. With no
serlse of partisanship-this
is no moment for that-let us
praise the solidarity, serenity and sense of justice with
which the problem was handled here by the oppressed and
their supporters. Without their solidarity and serenity we
could not have reached even this initial step. All that they
have been calling for, and are still calling for, is an
honourable peace, a peace without vilification, blood and

132. We have constantIy emphasized that the absence of
free, direct, normal peace negotiations between Israel and
its neighbours lies at the heart of the deadlock in the
Middle East. Paragraph 3 of the draft resolution, and the
statement made by the representative of the United States
represent important progress in international policy on this
crucial point.
1 See Oljcicial Records
Session, PlelzarJr Meetings,

of the C;enernl Assembly,
2143rd meeting.

T~uenty-eighth

12

;
!
r

I
I

hard feelings among countries that know full well that they
depend on each other in a world where no country is an
island unto itself.

145. There is no peace with occupation, Occupation
invites resistance, and resistance is war. There is no peace
without going to the root causes of the problem: the
Palestinian reality in which face many of us have chosen to
fly, including, I should say, some of the successive
American administrations. Peace cannot be achieved by
clinging to territory.

139. Tonight we were hastily prcsentecl with a draR
resolution that ostensibly seeks to bring permanent peace
to the Middle East. To us--as to our Indian colleague-this
draft resolution came as a surprise which we received with a
great deal of misgiving, if only because of the complete lack
of prior consultations.

146. The experience of G October is a telling evidence of
that. A pax Ivaeliana would have no better luck than the
.?)ax Romma. The only peace that is valid within the United
Nations is the peace of the just.

140. Some have already welcomed this draft resolution in
the sense that all’s well that ends well. But is it really going
to end well? The cease-fire is an initial step towards the
badly needed solution of a problem that needs all our
humility and awareness of the consequences attendant on
any further faltering. By those words we mean humility and
dispatch.

147. May I refer to one important additional point. The
draft resoiution is telling us of negotiations “under appropriatc auspices”. For us there arc no auspices more
appropriate than the United Nations. Any other interpretation will be the first transgression of resolution
242 (1967). In this year we have all been preoccupied with
the reform of the United Nations, until we were deflected
from that honourable cause by the fourth war in the Middle
East. I hope we may tnake a start on this long&erished
hope by putting this new-born babe in its lap. It is the
proper ward. Under its auspices, let us hope it will grow and
prosper. One cannot conceive of a more appropriate ward,
nor of a better-equipped auspices. The big, the medium and
the small must stand by it.

141. If there has been no peace in the Middle East for the
last 25 years, it was because of national vanity and
the ignorance that such vanity made possible. Israel and its
supporters were prompted in their actions by an irrational
subjective certainty which leads individuals as well as
nations--to use the words of one of the better minds of this
csntury--to what Freudians call “the death wish”.
142. Now that the myth of invincibility has been dislodged, one would hope that the pertinacity with which
some people clung to myth will be at least diluted if not
dissolved. But what is more important than this is that the
great Powers which have always viewed the Middle East
through the distorting prism of the Israeli myth should now
have a fresh look at the problem, a look with realism and a
sense of justice. This is why we guard against any further
faltering, and this is how we view the references in the draft
resolution to, first, the immediate implementation of
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) in all its parts, and
second, immediate negotiations concurrently with the
cease-fire for the establishment of a just and durable peace
in the Middle East.

148. That is our understanding of resolution 242 (1967).
It is the understanding of all but one in this Council, and
we hope that the one is coming at long last to the fold.
That is our sense of a just and durable peace: the peace of
understanding, not dictation of humility, not vanity; of
accommodatio:l, not subjugation; of the rule of law and not
the logic of expediency and necessity. With the old logic of
necessity came the tyrant’s plea that excused his devilish
deeds. That old logic was the one of a paradise lost. Those
who plead it today are only yearning for an impossible
dream.
149. With this understanding, and only with this understanding, the Sudan will not adopt a negative attitude
towards the draft resolution which is before us.

143. For this end, all must be clear. We need not resort to
ambiguities for the sake of a compromise. Compromise is
not an end in itself. Just and durable peace is the end.
Ambiguity is the source of all our agony. Mr. Scali told us
that we are all familiar with resolution 242 (1967), and
indeed we are. We know what peace means. We know what
territorial integrity means, and we know what inadmissibility of occupation means. We hope that at long last our
minds will be at one with that of the United States on this
issue, rather than resorting to the vacuous terms of
constructive ambiguity.

150. Mr. JANKOWITSCH
(Austria): My delegation has
welcomed the speed with which the Council has been called
to meet tonight and is about to act. The terriole war in the
Middle East, the renewed bloodshed and destruction, has
been a source of deep and growing concern for the world
community. In these days the eyes of the world community
have been set on the United Nations, and I believe they are
set upon us tonight.
ISI. The new and tragic events in the Middle East have,
moreover, cast a large and menacing shadow over the
prospects of peace in the world at large, prospects enhanced
by recent progress in world dt%ente.

144. Our labours have not been in vain thus far. Let us
start again now that the chance is afforded the world.
Without any intention to introduce any element that might
lead to argument, I find it my duty to say clearly that a
cease fire, important step that it is, cannot be but a prelude
to peace. Peace can only be achieved through the full
implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations.
Those resolutions speak the mind of the world that wants
this crisis out of its way once and for all- and I say the
res’olutions of the United Nations.

152. My delegation took the earliest possible opportunity
in the Council, on 9 October /744th meeting], to call for
an immediate cessation of hostilities and renewed efforts to
build a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. In the days
following the first meetings of the Council, in the face of
continued fighting, my Government repeated this call for
13

an end to the hostilities. In a communiquC signed in Vienna
on 12 October, the occasion of the visit of the President of
Bulgaria to Austria, the two sides expressed their deep
concern about the resumption of hostilities in the Middle
East. It was their unanimous understanding that all efforts
ought to be made for the immediatecessationof hostilities
between the parties to the dispute, and that all the possible
appropriate measuresought to be supported in order to
attain, in the shortest possibletime, ajust and lasting peace
in the Middle East on the basisof resolution 242 (1967).
153. It is, therefore, for these reasonsthat my delegation
will support with its vote the draft resolution submitted
jointly by the USSR and the United States of America. If
the cease-fire is the most important step of the hour,
concerted efforts to achieve peace, asset out in paragraphs
2 and 3 of the draft resolution before us, will be the next
commandto be followed immediately and concurrently.
154. As to the nature and shape of this peace, Austria
remains firmly committed to the principles set forth in
resolution 242 (1967), whoseimmediate implementation in
all of its parts is now called for. We are fully aware of the
delicate structure of balance represented by this draft
resolution, whose combined elements have all to be
faithfully respected in order to be operative. But we are
sure that the cause of peace and the cause of justice can
prevail only if this resolution is implemented.
155. We trust that in this task ahead the vast capital of
experience and knowledge accumulated by the United
Nations in 25 years of continuous peace efforts in the
region will be a safe basison which this new search for
peace can be conducted. The Council is now about to
exercise its primary responsibility for peace and international security. The Council and the United Nations, in
the days to come, will need the full support of the
international community, the support of the parties,whose
fighting we hope will now come to an end, and the support
of the permanent members of the Council, on whom the
Charter confers a particularly heavy burden of responsibility.
156. We trust, however, that with this support, rapid and
constructive action will be forthcoming, and my delegation
is fully preparedto lend its support to all theseefforts.

arrogant domination and of living by terror and trying to
act asinvincible supermen.
160. Having saidthal, let me state againthat the targetsof
Egypt as I have explained them still stand: liberation of cur
lands, preservation of our territorial integrity, determination that the usurpedrights of the Palestinianswill be
preserved.Theseare targetsthat are not oursalone. Indeed,
they are yours; they are the targets for which the
overwhelmingmajority of this Council voted and for whicll
the overwhelmingmajority of the General Assemblyvoted,
proclaiming again that the acquisition of territory as2
result of war is inadmissible;that the territorial integrity or
all nations is sacred; that the right of self-determinationis
one of the most fundamental rights, a right for which ~nclb
have fought and for which this United Nations will always
stand.
161. But I really askedto speakin order to saythat I have
not heard the two sponsorsof the draft resolutiotl say
anything concerning the absurd conditions in the para.
graphs of the Israeli diktat which we have heard in this
room. Unlessthey are really adopted by the two sponsors
and we hear them say so, I would consider them to be null
and void and having no meaning at all, especially asthey
comefrom someonewho has given pain to you, I amsure,
Mr. President, and to everyone around this table by
speakingabout this Council and saying that it has been
further debased.I am not a member of the Council. HadI
been a member,I would certainly have moved that all those
wordsof insult bc stricken from the records of this Council.
162. Mrs. JeanneMartin CISSEfi (Guinea) (intelpmutim
from I;renck): I shall be very brief. My delegationwill vote
in favour of the draft resolution in document S/l 1036,
submitted by the Soviet Union and the United States,
becauseour affirmative vote will express our position in
favour of peaceand an endto violence.
163. For 17 days now war has been raging in the Middle
East, blood is once again being shed and thousandsof
human lives are being sacrificed. For these reasons,WC
welcomeparagraph1 of the draft resolution which callsfor
an immediatecease-fire.
164. We are happy that the Council has assumedits
responsibility for the rc-establishment of peace and the
maintenanceof security in that part of the world that has
suffered for 25 years. The joint initiative of the two
Powers, the Soviet Union and the United States, was
greeted with relief by my delegation, which has always
placed responsibility on the great Powers in the conflict
that pits the Powersin the Middle East againsteach other.
The events we have been witnessingfor the last few hours
show
that we have been quite right.

157. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representativeof
Egypt+
(1%: &lr..EL-ZAYYAT (Egyp$$ I did hope that this would
be ‘a’meeting at which I would’iot speak. But now, having
asked for the floor, let me first send a fervent and
respectful greeting to those who are standingon both sides
of the’suez Canal,defending the freedom and the territorial
integrity of their land, Egypt. Let me send an equally
fervent and proud greeting to those who are standingon the
territory. of Syria, fighting for the freedom and territorial
integrity of their Iand, Syria. Those are men who have
preferred to stand on their feet and die, rather than to live
on their knees,

165. We expressthe hope that the resolution on which we
shall shortly be voting will actually be put into effect. WC
should like to believe that its adoption will mean the
withdrawal by Israel from all occupied Arab territories and
the preservation of the inalienable rights of the people of
Palestine. It will also mean for us that the negotiations
envisagedin paragraph3 of the draft will be carried out at
the United Nations, through the United Nations.

159. My heart also goesout to the families of the victims
of the policies of aggressionand violence, of the dreamsof
14

--.-.-------2__

166. The PRESIDENT: Does the representative of Saudi
Arabia insist on speaking now? We had understood that he
was happy to accept a promise from me that after we had
completed the voting I should be glad to call on him.

mcnts made by the sponsors of the draft resolution, the
representative of the United States, Mr. Scali, and the
representative of the Soviet Union, Mr. Malik. Let us hope
that the joint action of these two permanent members of
the Security Council will indeed make a major contribution
167. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I will speak after the
to a lasting and just peace, because peace without justice
will bring the same consequences as those with which we
voting, Mr. President, if you insist. I know what the voting
will
be. But if you insist, I will abide by your wish. I think I \ have been faced during all these years. Let us also hope that
should be afforded a chance to say a few words, but if you
the termination of all military activities not only will save
human lives, the lives of fighters and civilians of all the
want me to speak later, I will. However, I do not see why
an exception should be made with regard to my request.
present belligerent parties, but will also save future generaStill, I am in your hands, but I do not want anybody to say
tions from the same tragic losses, suffering and sacrifices.
that YOU took advantage of me, because we are friends,
outside of politics,
177. In explanation of the vote of the Yugoslav delegation
I would like to state clearly the following. The Yugoslav
168. The PRESIDENT: The last thing I wish to do is to
position on the matter of the Middle East crisis, its origins
deny my friend the representative of Saudi Arabia full
and the steps to be taken towards its settlement is both
opportunity to express his views, However, I do appeal to
firm and well known. It was recently stated clearly in the
him, if I may, to withhold his request to speak until after
Council’s debates in June and July. It was contained in the
we have finished the voting. There will, I think, be other
non-aligned countries draft resolution [S/l 09 741, which
statements at that time and we shall be very happy to listen
received I3 affirmative votes in the Security Council. It was
to him then.
stated at the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or
Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, in Algiers, and it
169. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I will do that-but
was also stated in our statement in the general debate in the
only to please you, Sir.
General Assembly,3 as well as in our statement in the
Security Council on 9 October last [I 744th meetitzg].
170. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers, and
it is therefore my intention to ask the Council to proceed
to the vote on the draft resolution contained in document
178. Concerning the provisions of the resolution which
S/11036. As no representative wishes to speak at this stage
has just been adopted, we note that the provision for the
in explanation of his vote, I take it that the Council is ready
cease-fire in place is firmly linked to the immediate start of
to vote on the draft resolution.
negotiations for the implementation of Security Council
resolution 242 (1967). We have supported resolution
A vote was taken by show of hands.
242 (1967) since its adoption and have always considered it
as an agreed basis for a settlement, and therefore all the
One member (China) did not participate in the voting,
principles and requirements of that resolution must be
equally implemented. And here we would like to state most
The draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none.2
categorically our firm understanding of what that entails.
171. The PRESIDENT: I call on the representative of
Yugoslavia in explanation of vote.
f72.

179. First, it clearly requires the withdrawal of Israeli
forces from all the territories occupied as a result of the
1967 war; and that means withdrawal to the lines of 5 June
1967. There can be no other interpretation because that
same resolution postulates another basic principle which is
generally accepted by the United Nations, and that is the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by war.

Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): Point of order.

173. The PRESIDENT: I give the floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia on a point of order.
174. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): My understanding
was that I would take the floor after the voting. I do not
know whether explanations of vote are.part and parcel of
the voting. The vote is one thing, and an explanation of
yote is another. I do not want to be left to the last. I was
generous with my colleagues, although I could have
exercised my right of reply as Mr. Tekoah did But
generosity has gone far enough. May I now take the floor?

180. Second, following those two principles, it recognizes
the right of all States and peoples in the region to live in
peace within secure and recognized boundaries, free from
threats or acts of force. Secure and recognized boundaries
cannot be based on conquest, terror or military occupation.
We indeed agree that occupation means resistance, and that
justified resistance leads to war, and that therefore peace
and occupation cannot coexist. Secure and recognized
boundaries result from peace, from the legal acceptance of
such boundaries through the liquidation of the state of
belligerency and any need to make war-which means that
the occupation of all Arab territories acquired by war must
be terminated, Such secure and recognized boundaries can
then be guaranteed through some international system

17.5. The PRESIDENT: I assure the representative of
Saudi Arabia that he will not be the last speaker, but I do
appeal to him to be patient a little longer while I calI on the
representative of Yugoslavia. Then I shall call on the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
176. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): The YugoslaV delegation
has listened most attentively and carefully to the state-

3 See Official
Session, Pletzary

2 Seeresolution 338 (1973).
15

Records
Meetings,

the Gemzrul Assembly,
2130th meeting.

of

Twenty-eighth

within the framework of the United Nations, once we have
the commitment on the essential point: the withdrawal of
troops from all occupied territories,

remember, why doesn’t Congress open the gates of the
United States to Soviet Jews, especially those emigrating
from the Soviet Union? They can give them territory h
Texas, or in Kansas. New York does not have any more
room for them.

181. Third, the Iegitimate rights of the Arab people of
Palestine must be recognized and implemented. Our debates
here in June and July, numerous resolutions of the General
Assembly, and subsequent events have again proved that
the plight and the fate of the Arabs of Palestine and their
rights are one of the fundamental issues at stake. We cannot
build the structure of peace leaving out the solution of this
problem which, if left unsettled, will continue to cause
major convulsions in the Middle East.

186. why, my dear Mr. Scali, do you not ask your
Government-through
you I am asking them-“Why
do you
want to go to Palestine? ” Now, for your information-I am
sure you are a learned man, and know the Zionist
ideology-it is for the ingathering of all the Jews of the
world in the land of their so-called ancestors. They had
forgotten that this was the land of Canaan, populated
before our Jewish tribes sauntered to the south and finally
went to Egypt.

182. In saying all that, I should like everyone to note that
it is the most fundamental Yugoslav position, the position
of basic principle, that we the United Nations cannot
negate any people’s right to fight for the liberation of its
territory. No cease-fire, including the one on which we have
just decided, should be a cover for continued occupation
and annexation. No cease-fire can survive unless it is clearl;
and specifically linked to the immediate beginning of the
process of solving the basic problem, which is the problem
of the occupation
of all Arab territories. Resolution
242 (1967) postulates the territorial integrity of all the
States in the area too. On the basis of that, a system can be
devised to enable all the States in the region, including
Israel, to live in peace within secure and recognized
boundaries, with all the other principles of resolution
242 (1967) implemented as well.

187. Of course, Ambassador Malik of the Soviet Union
does not know any more than I do what secret deal was
struck between Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Brezhnev. Surely the
two super-Powers have come to an agreement without
consulting with the members of the Cou~dl. We ourselves
who are not membersof the Council were left outside the
pale of Mr. Kissinger’s negotiation with Mr. Brezhnev,
Without observing diplomatic niceties and antiquated
decorum,I would be failing in my duty if I did not saythat
both thesePowers could have prevailed on Israel to abide
by the Charter and to respect the score of resolutiotls
passedby this Council during the last 25 years. Or havewe
gone back to the era of brinkmanship resorted to by the
late John Foster Dulles? Or again, I must frankly askthe
representativesof both the Soviet Union and the United
States,have they struck a secretdeal-whilst we were left in
the dark-to serve their national interests? The super.
Powersmay inadvertently be prolonging the suffering and
misery of the people of the Middle East, whether Jew or
gentile, in order to salvagetheir dktente. Time will tell. We
will be patient while peopleare lost.

183. In conclusion, I would like also to point out that the
basic Yugoslav position was always that the over-all
solution of the Middle East crisis, and particularly the
implementation of resolution 242 (1967) in all its parts,
should not only be based on the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, but also should be firmly in the hands
of the United Nations and its main organ, the Security
Council. In this spirit, we understand the resolution just
adopted, particularly paragraph 3.

188. And now, a few remarksto the representativesof the
host country, meaningthe United States of America. Again
I must say we did nothing to hurt you-we, the Arabs in
their totality. Do you want your interests in our part of the
world to go with the wind? You do not care. You are 6 per
cent of the popuIation of the world and you want to police
the whole world, including ourselves.You will not succeed.
We have not hurt you. We appealto you to come to your
sensesand not sendPhantomsto kill our people there. Ah,
the Soviet Union has sent arms. But who started not only
sendingarmsbut being committed to the Zionist State? WC
warned you time and again and you did not heed our
warning. But becauseyou are 210 million and wield world
power, we should be submissive.What did Tom Pairle
say-you remember, do you not-about liberty and death?
He said that if he could not have liberty, he would take
death. And that ishow we feel in the Arab world about the
United States. Otherwise do you think a gentleman 67
years old, none other than His Majesty King Faisal, who
wasalways called a friend of the United States, would have
stopped the inflow of the oil? And to the great honour of
Libya, of Algeria, of Kuwait, of Qatar, of Bahrain-there
were eight of them-you treat them wantonly asif they did
not exist. What have they done to you? You are
committed to the preservation of Israel in contravention of
the mutual interest between you and the Arab worId. All

184. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representative of
Saudi Arabia.
- _ ,.
--.
[ 18:. MT. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabiaj] I did not use
insulting words filled with venom against the Jews, to
paraphrase what Mr. Tekoah said in exercise of his right of
reply. Nor did I at any time interrupt Mr. Tekoah whenever
he took the floor in this Council. But it seems that the
truth of what I said must have so cut him to the quick as to
elicit what almost amounted to a vitriolic verbal barrage. I
am used to Mr. Tekoah’s effusions. I feel sorry for him for
having developed the Zionist psychosis as to the right of the
Jews, wherever they come from, to flock to Palestine in
accordance with the Zionist ideology. Does he claim that all
Jews living in the world, and especially those of the Soviet
Union and the United States, should settle in ,Palestine?
What if five or 10 million Jews emigrated to Israel within
the next decade or two? The Soviet Union has been under
great pressure from the United States Congress and the
Senate to allow Soviet citizens of the Jewish faith to
emigrate to Israel. Thirty-three thousand emigrated from
the Soviet Union in one year to Israel. If the United States
had failed to admit Jews in 1945 and 1946, as I well
16

right, if you want to have it that way. This is only a round
in the conflict. Your journalists always say: “It is the only
democratic State in the Middle East.” Let me ask you, my
good friend Mr. Scali-you are a noted journalist-who are
the masters of the mass media in your country. When I first
came to this country in 1933 ther6 were five major
newspapers in this city: The New York Times, which had
been bought by Ochs, who had one of his daughters
married to Sulzberger, and they are still the owners; there
was The Herald Tribune owned by Whitney-they would
not advertise in it any more so it had to fold up; there was
The Sun-you remember The Surf; leave aside the Brooklyn
Eagle; these were independent newspapers; there was the
f-karst Journal American--do you remember it; and there
Was the Daz@ News, which had to support the Zionists
because if it did not, they would not advertise in it. Those
were the principal newspapers in New York City, Who now
owns the mass medium of the press here? The New York
Tillzes and ?%e New York Post, and they are both Zionist.

have persecuted the indigenous people of Palestine. Henry
Jackson, more Jew than the Jews, more Zionist than the
Zionists, plus royaliste que le roi.
196. And then the array of senators. Seventy-eight of
them. Are they bringing pressure on you-not you, my
good friend, but your Government-to give most-favourednation status? We are sold down the river and you here
namby-pamby, vote for a resolution. Another round will
come.
197 Baroody is telling you that because1pma man of the
area. Those people from Shanghaiand South Africa know
nothing of the situation, And aIsothe membershereknow
nothing of the situation, with the exceptionof our colleague
from China, who insteadof vetoing perhapssawbestnot to
participate in the debate becausehis veto might have been
misinterpreted. The only one who stood, China-800
million-kept in the dark like us about the dealwhich was
struck b:tween Mr , Kissinger and Mr. BrezhnevMr. Kissinger, the Nobel Prize winner. Since when he
negotiated thousands were killed ancl millions became
destitute.

189. Freedom of the press? All right, who arc the masters
of the mass media in another field, television? You would
like to know them, would you not? Who is the President of
ABC? Leonard Goldenson? He is a gentile from New
England is he not-Vermont?
Then there is Mr. Martin
Rubenstein. At CBS the top man, there since 1948, is
William S. Palcy. And Robert Sarnoff, the son of Robert
Sarnoff Sr., controls NBC. I could go on and on.

198. Let us see why all this trouble with our Jewish
brethren, because after all we are brothers in humanity,
although we are having wars. Now let Mr. Tckoah refute
and say I am fabricating histary. He hashis prefabricated
speeches.I seethem handedto him; I amwell located here;
they hand them to him, typewritten before he readsthem
out word for word. Whom doeshe think he isfooling?

190. Have you forgotten the $72 million with which the
Zionists bought many provincia] newspapers in the United
States? That was a few years ago.

199. I do not have a prefabricated statement,but I have
these statistics so that my memory will not falter, And 1
challengethe Zionists to refute what I amgoingto say.

191. I challenge Mr. Tekoah, or whoever now sits in his
chair-Mr. Tekoah is gone; he probably got SO irritated
tonight; I feel sorry for him; let him go and have some
rest-to refute what I said. Those are the facts.

200. Since the days of the ancient EgyptianswhenMoses
led the Israelitesto Palestine,RomeexpelledthoseZionists
amongst them who set themselvesapart, and the poor
innocent Jew suffered That wasin the year 70 A.D

192. Why do I raise my voice? You want me to pursue
the orthodox way, the game of saying what I do not mean
and meaning what I do not say. What a game. It foundered
before the Congress of Vienna when Talleyrand and
Metternich divided Europe into spheres of influence.

20 1. And England, Where is Sir DonaldMaitland? Hashe
becometired? Go to the EncyclopaediaBritannica,which,
Incidentally, is now publishedin Chicago.Yes, put on a
bold face, my good young friend from the United King
dotn. You will find that Englandexpelledthem in 1290.

193. Let us do something else, let us probe a little more.
You, the United States-whom we befriended and which
befriended us allegedly-out of 30 foreign grants voted by
your legislators in Washington 12 were for Israeli schools
and hospitals. Total: $5,620,000. That grant was voted at a
time when schools all over this country, the United States,
were closing up or cutting down the school year for lack of
funds. Poor American taxpayers; what they do not know.

202. Germany did soin 1298.And of courseHitler carried
out a lot of persecution, and we all deplore those who
perished at his hands. But now a volte-face.WestGermany
wants to do businesswith internationalbankers,asthey call
them. They have to be in the good gracesof Mrs. Meir to
wash away the sinsof the Nazi era. But Germanyexpelled
them in 1298.

194. Where is the television now? Has the United States
shut it oft? Let tllem hear. Perhaps they will set the
legislators on the right path.

203. I seeMr. Lecompt ishere. Ambassador
de Guiringaud
has gone to sleep too. France expelled them in 1306,
Austria in 1421, Spain in 1492, Portugalin 1496. Oh, the
racists-Portugal-they shouldneverhave donethat.

19.5. And that Mr. Henry Jackson from the State of
Washington, which is almost 3,000 trilcs from here. I know
the State of Washington; it produces luscious apples. He
woLl]d llavc done better to be a farmer there than, at 6,000
Imiles from our homeland, to raise the banner of those ~110

204. These were Zionists, the leaders-not the poor Jews,
who were living at peacewhereverthey went. Thesewere
Zionists. Mr. Tekoah talked of zionism, of the glory and
greatnessit enfolclccl in its ideology. Now more and more
17

jets are promised for Israel, cease-fire or no cease-fire, and if
the cease-fire one day ceases to be, will there be an outflow
of diabolic arms sent by the United States on credit-which
means pay later or perhaps not at all? What do you think
the United States Congress, which is forcing the hand of the
United States President, is doing to us? It is killing the
Palestinians and usurping their homes. Here again I want to
use that American term “namby pamby”. These are the
poor Jews. Some of the Jews are poor. Some of them are
taxi drivers. Some of them want to identify themselves, and
have done so, with their countries of birth or adoption. But
the Zionists do not leave them alone. They want them all
ingathered in Palestine-10 million, 20 million, as many as
they can. Will they succeed? This is the big question.

about those who do not believe in God or do not belong to
a monotheistic religion? Should they be sent to hell or
what? All this is fiction that God gave them Palestine.
208. I thank you, Sir, for your indulgence and for having
kindly at last given me the floor.
209. The PRESIDENT: It is exceedingly late and we have
done what we came here to do, but I hope members of the
Council wil1 bear with me for not more than one minute
longer before I adjourn the meeting.
210 I believe that we members of the Council both
individually and collectively should have reason to feel
satisfaction at the outcome of our meeting this Sunday
night and Monday morning.

205. Those are the facts, which are not fabricated. Every
word of them will be found in the record. If I have made
one or two mistakes unwittingly,
I stand to be corrected,
but I challenge anyone to refute those historical facts.

211. The fighting in the Middle East which broke out two
weeks ago on Saturday, which has raged unchecked since
then and which we have considered at four meetings has
been, I think we can all agree, a source of grave concern to
the world community at large and no less to us as members
of the Council, charged as we are under the Charter of the
United Nations with grave responsibility
for the maintenanceof international peaceand security. It was our duty
in this Council to work with all the power at our command
to bring an end to this most tragic war and to co-operatein
building henceforward a lasting peace in the Middle East.
As membersof the Council we must unite now in calling
upon the parties to accept this resolution and to work
urgently, diligently and faithfully to implement it. The
resolution can succeedonly if the parties determinc to
make it succed.For our part, we must stressthat we expect
them to do so, without at all underestimating the difficulties that lie before them. We must also sendto themon
our collective behalf the clearestpossiblemessagethat WC
stand ready at all times to render them all the assistance
they may need to attain the objective of the resolution,
which ultimately must surely be a peace in which all men,
women and children in that troubled region of the world
canlive in conditions free from fear and want.

206. NOW, looking at the resolution-the
last inspirationparagraph 3 states: “‘Decides that, immediately and concurrently with the cease-fire, negotiations shall start between
the parties concerned under appropriate auspices”. What
will prevent Israel from saying that the negotiations to start
between the parties concerned should be at the same table?
Who is going to say what “under appropriate auspices”
means? The vagueness reminds me of “occupied territories”-whether
they are “occupied territories”
or “the
occupied territories”.
For six years Israel, has debated this
definite article “the” and the way it wants the phrase to be
interpreted. Who is going to be the arbiter in these
matters? Of course the Soviet Union and the United States
can put an end to it and prevail on Israel to withdraw from
the occupied territories and to grant the Palestinian people
their right of self-determination,
They fought the mighty
Hitler. Can they not prevail on Israel? Or do they have
some interest with Israel? Let them come out with it if
they have and not hide it.

207. I am getting personal and unorthodox
in my
approach to the subject. What is the use of not speaking the
212. Speakingnow asthe representative of AUSTRALIA,
truth and giving vent to our suspicions? We hope our
I wish only to associatemyself fully with what I have just
suspicion is unfounded, because we Iike Jews-we
do not
said as President of the Council. The adoption of this
have anything against the Jews. We have to defend ourselves
from Zionist aggression in our midst. Let Zionism, political
resolution will be received with great satisfaction and reiicf
by the Australian Government and people. As a nation WC
Zionism, disappear and no Jew, I can guarantee, will be
welcome it whole-heartedly, and we shall offer our full
molested. In our tradition we will defend the Jews if
anyone tries to molest them. Israel’s ideology is European
support and sympathy to the crucial work of implemcntation.
and alien to our area. If it wants peace, let it bring down
,-.--“~-.
the flag and let there be a common flag. This is what I have
213. AS PRESIDENT, I now propose to adjourn this
said time and again to the usurpers, who, it seems, have got
meeting. The Council will, of course, continue to watch
drunk with the euphoria of victory, as others have. The
Arabs ha‘d four empires. When their leaders got drunk they
developmentswith the closestattention and will be ready
tottered and fell, and rightly so. I hope we have learnt from
to meet again at any time if it can assist the parties
concernedto carry out as speedily as possiblethe termsof
history, But the Zionists, like the Bourbons, forget nothing
and learn nothing. They are the aristocracy of the world,
this resolution.
They are the chosen people of God. All the others are
second. We were put in a second mould by God. What
The meetingroseon Monday, 22 Ocd~c~., at 1.30 cr.m,

18
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

1X8:16-May

1979-2,200
