RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMIITEE

CONTENTS

Page

610 (VII). Korea: reports of the United Nations Commission for the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea ( 3 December 1952) ( item 16 (a) ) . . . . . . .

3

611 (VII).

The Tunisian question ( 17 December 1952) ( item 60) ......... .

5

612 (VII).

The question of Morocco (19 December 1952) (item 65)

5

613 (VII). Question of an appeal to the Powers signatories to the Moscow
Declaration of 1 November 1943 for the early fulfilment of their pledges
towards Austria (20 December 1952) (item 63) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

lished principles and practice of international law and
the relevant provisions of the draft armistice agreement;
2. Affirms that force shall not be used against prisoners of war to prevent or effect their return to their
homelands, and that they shall at all time be treated
humanely in accordance with the specific provisions of
the Geneva Convention and with the general spirit of
the Convention ;
3. Accordingly requests the President of the General Assembly to communicate the following proposals
to the Central People's Government of the People's
Republic of China and to the North Korean authorities
as forming a just and reasonable basis for an agreement so that an immediate cease-fire would result and
be effected; to invite their acceptance of these propo~ls 8:nd to make a ~eport to the General Assembly
during its present session and as sooi, as appropriate :

610 (VII). Korea: reports of the United Nations
Commission £or the Unification and Rehabilitation of Korea
The General ,:lssembly,
Having received the special report 1 of the United
Nations Command of 18 October 1952 oq "the present status of the military action and the armistice negotiations in ~ore~" and other relevant reports relating
to Korea,
Noting with appro•al the considerable progress towards an armistice inade by negotiation at Panmunjom
and the tentative agreements to end the fighting in
Korea and to reach a settlement of the Korean question,
Noting further that disagreement between the parties on one remaining issue, alone, prevents the conclusion of an armistice and that a considerable measure of agreement already exists on the principles on
which this remaining issue can be resolved,
Mindful of the continuing and vast loss of life, devastation and suffering resulting from and accompanying the continuance of the fighting,
Deeply conscious of the need to bring hostilities to
a speedy end and of the need for a peaceful settlement
of the Korean question,
Anxious to expedite and facilitate the convening of
the political conference as provided in article 60 of the
draft armistice agreement, 2
1. Affirms that the release and repatriation of prisoners of war shall be effected in accordance with the
Geneva Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of War,• dated 12 August 1949, the well-estab-

PROPOSALS
I. In order to facilitate the return to their homelands of all prisoners of war, there shall be established
a_ Repatriation Com~ission consisting of representatives of Czechoslovakia, Poland, Sweden and Switzerland, that is, the four States agreed to for the constitution of the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission
and referred to in paragraph 37 of the draft armistice
agreement, or constituted, alternatively, of representatives of four States not participating in hostilities two
nominated by each side, but excluding represent~tives
of States that are permanent members of the Security
Council.
II. The release and repatriation of prisoners of
war shall be effected in accordance with the Geneva
Convention relative to the Treatment of Prisoners of
War, dated 12 August 1949, the well-established principles and practice of International Law and the relevant provisions of the draft armistice agreement.

1 See

document A/2228.
Ibid., annex A.
8 See Treat'J} Series, Treaties and lnttntational aprtnnml1
registered or filed and recorded with the Stcrtlanat of lh•
United Nations, Volume 75, 1950, No. 972, p. 135.
2

3

General Assembly-Seventh Seuion
Ill. Force shall not be used against the prisoners
of war to prevent or effect their return to their homelands and no violence to their persons or affront to
their dignity or self-respect shall be permitted in any
manner or for any purpose whatsoever. This duty is
enjoined on and entrusted to the Repatriation Commission and each of its members. Prisoners of war
shall at all times be treated humanely in accordance
with the specific provisions of the Geneva Convention
and with the general spirit of that Convention.
IV. All prisoners of war shall be released to the
Repatriation Commission from military control and
from the custody of the detaining side in agreed numbers and at agreed exchange points in agreed demilitarized zones.
V. Classification of prisoners of war according to
nationality and domicile as proposed in the letter • of
16 October 1952 from General Kim Il Sung, Supreme
Commander of the Korean People's Army, and General Peng Teh-huai, Commander of the Chinese People'.s Volunteers, to General Mark W. Clark, Commander-in-Chief, United Nations Command, shall then
be ~arried out immediately.
VI. After classification, prisoners of war shall be
free to return to their homelands forthwith, and their
speedy return shall be facilitated by all parties concerned.
VII. In accordance with arrangements prescribed
for the purpose by the Repatriation Commission, each
party to the conflict shall have freedom and facilities
to explain to the p.risoners of war "depending upon
them" their rights and to inform the prisoners of war
on any matter relating to their return to their homelands and particularly their full freedom to return.
VIII. Red Cross teams o'f both sides shall assist
the Repatriation Commission in its work and shall
have access, in accordance with the terms of the draft
armistice agreement, to prisoners of war while they
are under the temporary jurisdiction of the Repatriation Commission.
IX. Prisoners of war shall have freedom and facilities to make representations and communications to
the Repatriation Commission and to bodies and agencies working under the Repatriation Commission, and
to inform any or all such bodies of their desires on any
matter concerning themselves, in accordance with arrangements made for the purpose by the Commission.
. X. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph
III above, ncthing in this Repatriation Agreement shall
be construed as derogating from the authority of the
Repatriation Commission ( or its authorized representatives) to exercise its legitimate functions and responsibilities for the control of the prisoners under its
temporary jurisdiction.
XI. The terms of this Repatriation Agreement and
the arrangements arising therefrom shall be made
known to all prisoners of war.
XII. The Repatriation Commission is entitled to
·1

See document A/ZlJO, annex 3.

call upon parties to the conflict, its own member governments, or the Member States of the United Nations
for such legitimate assistance as it may require in the
carrying out of its duties and tasks and in accordance
with the decisions of the Commission in this respect.
XIII. When the two sides have made an agreement for repatriation based on these proposals, the interpretation of that agreement shall rest with the Repatriation Commission. In the event of disagreement in
the Commission. majority decisions shall prevail. \Vhen
no majority decision is possible, au umpire agreed upon
in arcor<lancC' with the succeeding paragraph an<l with
article 132 o i the Geneva Con vent ion of 1949 shall
have the deciding vote.
XIV. The Repatriation Commission shall at its
first meeting and prior to an armistice proceed to agree
upon and appoint the umpire who shall at all times
be available to the Commission and shall act as its
Chairman unless otherwise agreed. If agreement on
the appointment of the umpire cannot be reached by
the Commission within the period of three weeks after
the date of the first metting this matter should be re·
ferred to the General Assembly.
XV. The Repatriation Commission shall also arrange after the armistice for officials to function as
umpires with inspecting teams or other bodies to which
functions are delegated or assigned by the Commission
or under the provisions of the draft armistice agreement, so that the completion of the ~eturn of prisoners
of war to their homelands shall he expedited.
XVI. When the Repatriation Agreement is acceded
to by the parties concerned and when an umpire has
been appointed under paragraph 14 above, the draft
armistice agreement, unless otherwise altered by agreement between the parties. shall be deemed to have been
accepted by them. The provisions of the draft armistice agreement shall apply except in so far as they are
modified by the Repatriation Agreement. Arrangements for repatriation under this agreement will begin
when the armistice agreement is thus concluded.
XVII. At the end of ninety days. after the Armistice Agreement has been signed, the disposition of any
prisoners of war whose return to their homelands may
not have been effected in accordance with lhe procedure
set out in these proposals or as otherwise agreed, shall
be referred with recommendations for their disposition, including a target date for the termination of
their detention to the political conference to be called
as provided under article 60 of the draft armistice
agreement. If at the end of a further thirty days there
are any prisoners of war whose return to their homelands has not been effected under the above procedures
or whose future has not been provided for by the political conference, the responsibility for their care and
maintenance and for their subsequent disposition shall
be transferred to the United Nations, which in all matters relating to them shall act strictly in accordance
with international law.

399th plenary meeting,
3 December 1952.
