S/2005/220

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 April 2005
Original: English

Letter dated 31 March 2005 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council have
decided to send a mission to Haiti from 13 to 16 April 2005, which I will lead as
head of mission. The members of the Council have agreed on the terms of reference
of the mission, a copy of which is enclosed herewith (see annex).
The composition of the mission will be forwarded to you shortly.
The mission will be held in conjunction with the mission of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and Social Council.
I would be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex circulated
as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg
President of the Security Council

05-29485 (E) 040405

*0529485*

S/2005/220

Annex
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to Haiti,
13-16 April 2005
1.
The Security Council has decided to organize a mission to Haiti led by Brazil,
in conjunction with the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and
Social Council. The visit will take place from 13 to 16 April 2005.
2.

The mission has the following objectives:
(a)

To convey the following message to local actors:

(i) To express its full support for the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) and for the United Nations presence in Haiti as long as
necessary;
(ii) To underscore the long-term commitment of the international community
to stabilization and development in Haiti, and the need for continuing support
of international and regional organizations to that end;
(iii) To underline the leading role and the responsibilities of the Transitional
Government in its efforts to attain those objectives;
(iv) To stress the need for improved coordination between the Transitional
Government and MINUSTAH to ensure security. To reaffirm and commend the
continuing support of MINUSTAH for the efforts of the Transitional
Government;
(v) To reiterate the need to reject violence, to respect human rights and to
fight against impunity;
(vi) To call upon all parties to engage fully in the electoral process according
to the calendar proposed by the Provisional Electoral Council and to support
the holding of free and fair elections, at both the local and national levels,
during 2005 and the subsequent transfer of power to the elected authorities;
(vii) To stress the utmost importance of the immediate launch of an inclusive
national dialogue based on the ownership of the Haitian people;
(viii) To convey the determination of the Security Council to see that all
pledged funds are promptly disbursed;
(b) To assess the level of coordination of MINUSTAH in each aspect of its
mandate, and between the capital and the outlying regions of Haiti;
(c) To review the progress achieved so far and to assess the needs and
requirements in the following areas:

2

(i)

Security:

a.

Police. To assess the current situation of the Haitian National Police and
mechanisms for its reform and the creation of a credible, accountable and
respected police force;

b.

MINUSTAH. To assess the implementation of the MINUSTAH security
mandate and the way ahead, taking into account the current capacity of

S/2005/220

the Haitian National Police and enhancing its coordination with
MINUSTAH;
c.

Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. To evaluate steps
towards the implementation of a disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme that addresses all illegal armed groups in a
comprehensive manner, including its legal basis, actions to be taken by
the Transitional Government and measures requiring immediate
implementation, including by MINUSTAH;

(ii)

Political transition:

a.

Reconciliation. To assess the status of the national dialogue and the steps
to be taken by the Transitional Government, with assistance from
MINUSTAH, in this regard;

b.

Elections. To assess the state of planning and implementation of the
electoral process and to ensure that the elections are held as scheduled;

(iii) Human rights. To assess the human rights situation, including the
activities of the Haitian National Police, cases of unlawful detention and the
special needs of women and children;
(iv) Development:
a.

To assess and encourage the implementation of quick-impact projects
that have a direct impact on the well-being of Haitians, in particular
those living in the poor urban areas;

b.

To explore ways, in coordination with the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on
Haiti of the Economic and Social Council, to assist the Transitional
Government in the preparation and implementation of development
projects in Haiti, as outlined in the Interim Cooperation Framework, and
in the establishment of a long-term development strategy;

(v) Institution building. To analyse the evolution of projects and programmes
in Haiti concerning the rule of law and security sector reform, including that of
the judiciary and of correctional institutions, as well as to assess current needs
and challenges in those areas;
(vi) Humanitarian situation. To evaluate the humanitarian situation.

3
