RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITTEE
The situation in Hungary

3. Affirms the right of the Hungarian people to a
government responsive to its national aspirations and
dedicated to its independence and well-being;
4. R.equests the Secretary-General to investigate the
situation caused by foreign intervention in Hungary,
to observe the situation directly through representatives named hy him, and to report thereon to the General
Assemhly at the earliest moment, and as soon as possible to suggest methods to bring an end to the foreign
intervention in Hungary in accordance with the principles of the Charter of the United Nations;
S. Cails upon the Government of Hungary and the
Govemment of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
to permit observers dcsignated by the SecretaryGeneral to enter the territory of Hungary, to travel
freely therein, and to report their findings to the
Secretary-General ;
6. Calls upon al! Members of the United Nations
to co-operate with the Secretary-General and his representatives in the execution of his fonctions ;
7. Requests the Secretary-General in consultation
with the heads of appropriate specialized agencies to
inquire, on an urgent basis, into the needs of the
Hungarian people for food, medicine and other similar
supplies, and to report to the General Assembly as soon
as possible;
8. Requests al! Members of the United Nations, and
invites national and international humanitarian organizations to co-operate in making available such supplies
as may be required by the Hungarian people.
564th plenary meeting,
4 November 1956.

Resolution 1004 (ES-Il)
The General Assembly,
Considering that the United Nations is based on the
principle of the sovereign equality of all its Members,
Recalling that the enjoyment of human rights and of
fondamental freedom in Hungary was specifically guaranteed by the Peace Treaty between Hungary and the
Allied and Associated Powers signed at Paris on 10
February 1947, and that the 6 eneral principle of these
rights and this freedom is ,Jfirmcd for all peoples in
the Charter of the United Nations,
Convinced that recent events in Hungary manifest
clearly the desire of the Hungarian people to exercise
and to enjoy fully their fondamental rights, freedom
and independence,
Condemning the use of Soviet military forces to
suppress the efforts of the Hungarian people to reassert
their rights,
N oting moreover the declaration of 30 October 1956
by the Govemment of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics of its avowed policy of non-intervention in
the internal affairs of other States,
Noting the communication of 1 November 19564 of
the Government of Hungary to the Secretary--General
regarding demands made by that Government to the
Govemment of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
for the instant and immediate withdrawal of Soviet
forces,
N oting further the communication of 2 N ovember
19565 from the Government of Hungary to the Secretary-General asking the Security Council to instruct
the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Government of Hungary to start negotiations immediately on the withdrawal of Soviet forces,
N oting that the intervention of Soviet military forces
in Hungary has resulted in grave loss of life and widespread bloodshed among the Hungarian people,
Taking note of the radio appeal of Prime Minister
Imre Nagy of 4 November 1956,
1. Calls upon the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics to desist forthwith from all armed
attack on the people of Hungary and from any form
of intervention, in particular armed intervention, in the
intemal affairs of Hungary;
2. Calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to cease the introduction of additional armed forces
into Hungary and to withdraw all oi its forces without
delay from Hungarian terri tory;

Resolution 1005 (ES-Il)
The General Assembly,
N oting with deep concern that the provisions of its
resolution 1004 (ES-II) of 4 November 1956 have not
yet been carried out and that the violent repression by
the Soviet forces of the efforts of the Hungarian people
to achieve freedom and independence continues,
Convinced that the recent events in Hungary manifest clearly the desire of the Hungarian people to exercise and to enjoy fully their fundamental rights, freedom
and independence,
Considering that foreign intervention in Hungary is
an intolerable attempt to deny to the H ungarian people
the exercise and the enjoyment of such rights, freedom
and independence, and in particular to deny to the
Hungarian people the right to a government freely
elected and representing their national aspirations,
C?nsidering that the repression undertaken by the
Soviet forces in Hungary constitutes a violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and of the Peace Treaty
between Hungary and the Allied and Associated
Powers,

. 4 lbid., Second Emergency Special Session, Annexes, agenda
item 5, document .A./3251.
5 Official Records of the Security Council, Eleventh Year
Suppleme11t for October, N ovember and December 1956 docu:
ment S/3726.
'

2

3

General Assembly-Second Emer1ency Speclal Sesaion

C onsidering that the immediate withdrawal of the
Soviet forces from Hungarian territory is necessary,
l. Calls again upon the Government of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics to withdraw it, forces
from Hungary without any further delay:
2. Considers that free elections should be held in
Hungary under Lnite<l :--Jations auspices, as soon as
law and order have been restored, to enable the people
of Hungary to deterrnine ior thernselve, the form of
government they wish to estahlish in their country;
3. Reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to
continue to investigate, through representatives named
by him, the situation caused by foreign intervention in
Hungary and to report at the earliest possible mornent
to the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretary-Ceneral to report in the
shortest possible time to the General Assembly ori
compliance herewith.
571 st plenary meeting,
9 November 1956.

Resolution l 006 (ES-U)
The General Assembly,
I

Considering that the military authorities of the Union
of S~>Viet Socialist Republics are interfering with the
transportation and distribution of food and rnedical supplies urgently needed by the ci vilian population in
Hungary,
1. Calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to cease immediately actions against the Hungarian
population which are in violation of the accepted
standards and principles of international law, justice
and morality;
2. Calls upon the H ungarian authorities to facilita te,
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics not to
interfere with, the receipt and distribution of food and
medical supplies to the Hungarian people and to cooperate fully with the United Kations and its specialized agencies, as well as with other international
organizations such as the International Red Cross, to
provide humanitarian assistance to the people of
Hungary;
3. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and the Hungarian authorities to co-operate fully with
the S~cret';ry-General and bis duly appointed representat1ves m the carrying out of the tasks referred
to above.

II
. Consi~ering that, as a_ result of the harsh _and repress1ve action of the SoVJet armed forces, mcreasingly

large numl>ers of refugees are being obliged to leave
l{ungary and to seek asylum in neighbouring countries,
1. Hequests the Senetary-General to call upon the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
consult with other appropriate international agencies
ami interestecl Government~ with a Yiew to ma.king
speedy and effective arrangements for emcrgency
as,;istance to L'fugees from IT ungary,
.?. L'rges Member State, to makc special ,·n 11 trilmtions for this purpose.
571st plen!lry mceti115;,
9 N Oi'!'mbn 1956

Resolution 1007 (ES-II)
J'he Ceneral Assembly,
Considering the extreme suffering to "hich the
Hungarian people are subjected,
rrrge1tt!J 1,,ishi11g etiectiYrly to t:1~i1nin~1-~" ''.t:s ~::.1~-fering,
Corrl'inred that humanitarïan dut,rs ,·;rn ',e f11lfill1::d
must effectively thruugh the intrn,;1'·onal ,,. u;,,:r1tic,1:
stipulated in Article 1, paragra)Jh .3, of the L k«t r u:
the United ~ ations,
l. Resofrcs to undertake on a large :-.ca1e ;n1:11t'diat,·
aid for the affected territuries bv furnishin ,. medical
supplie", f(,od~tuffs and ciothes; •
,.
2. Calls upon ail Memll('r States t.n pa:-ticip:itc lLl t 1,t
gn·atest extent possible in this relief acti, m ·
3. Requests the Secret:.iry--Gencral to 1mtici-take
immediately the necessary measures;
4. Urgently appeals to all countries concer•wd to
give full assistance to the Secretarv-Grneral in t !te
implementation of this task.
571st j'!enary meeting,
9 Novi1mber 1956.

Resolution 1008 (ES-li)
The General Assembly,
l. Derides to place on the provisiunal agenda uf its
eleventh reg1ilar session, as a matter of prioritv, the
que~tion 011 the agenda nf ils ,;erond emerg-ency ipecial
SCSSlOll;

2. Refers to its eleventh regular session for consideration the records of the meetings and the docu111ents
of its second emergency ~pecial session ;
3. Decides that, notwithstan_ding paragrapb 1
above, the second emergency spec1al session mav continue to consider the question, if necessary, prior- to the
eleventh regular session of the Assemhly .
573rd plenary meeting,
10 November 1956.
