98

General Assembly-Twenty-first Session

Noting the comments submitted by Member States
pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 1967 (XVIII)
and paragraph 2 of resolution 2104 (XX) and the
views expressed during its twentieth and twenty-first
sessions,
Noting chapter VII of the report of the Special
Committee on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States, 11
established under General Assembly resolution 1966
(XVIII) of 16 December 1963,
Reaffirming its belief that an important contribution
to the peaceful settlement of disputes and to the prevention of such disputes could be made by providing for
impartial fact-finding within the framework of international organizations and in bilateral and multilateral
conventions,
Noting that, with regard to methods of fact-finding
in international relations, considerable documentation
has now been made available by the Secretary-General
in his reports on practice in relation to the settlement of
disputes and the execution of international agreements,
and by the views expressed and the proposals made by
Member States,
Recalling its belief that a study of the question
might include the feasibility and desirability of establishing a special international body for fact-finding or
of entrusting to an existing organization fact-finding
responsibilities complementary to existing arrangements
and without prejudice to the right of parties to any dispute to seek other peaceful means of settlement, of
their own choice,
Having been unable, owing to lack of time, to consider the substance of the question of methods of factfinding,
1. Inmtes Member States to submit in writing to
the Secretary-General, before 1 August 1967, any
views, or further views, they may have on this subject,
taking into account the reports of the Secretary-General,
the views expressed and the proposals made ;
2. Decides to include an item entitled ''Question of
methods of fact-finding" in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-second session, with a view to considering
what further action may be appropriate.
1489th plenary meeting,
12 December 1966.
2203 (XXI). Draft Declaration on the Right of
Asylum

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1839 (XVII) of 19 December 1962 and 2100 (XX) of 20 December 1965 relating
to the draft Declaration on the Right of Asylum,
1. Takes note of the report of the Sixth Committee,6
to which is annexed a draft Declaration on Territorial
Asylum, together with the amendments and proposals
considered in connexion with its elaboration;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to
Member States, for their further consideration, the text
of the above-mentioned draft Declaration, together with
the report of the Sixth Committee thereon ;
3. Decides to place an item entitled "Draft Declaration on Territorial Asylum" on the provisional agenda
Ii Ibid., Twentieth Session, Annexes, agenda items· 90 and 94,
document A/5746.
6 Ibid., Twenty-first Session, Anne.-res, agenda item 85, document A/6570.

of its twenty-second session, with a view to the final
adoption of a declaration on this subject.
1496th plenary meeting,
16 December 1966.

2204 (XXI). Technical assistance to promote the
teaching, study, dissemination and wider
appreciation of international law

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2099 (XX) of 20 December
1965 establishing a programme of ::.:~:.;;tance and exchange in the field of international law,
Noting -with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneraF on the implementation of resolution 2099
(XX) and the recommendations made to the SecretaryGeneral by the Advisory Committee on Technical Assistance to Promote the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Internationa! Law,
which are contained in that report,
1. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in
1967 the activities specified in his report, including the
following items of direct assistance:
(a) The holding of a regional training and refresher
course, in co-operation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
( b) The award of ten fellowships at the request of
Governments of developing countries ;
( c) The provision of a set of United Nations legal
publications to up to fifteen institutions in developing
countries;
( d) The provision of advisory services of experts,
if requested by developing countries, within the framework of existing technical assistance programmes;
2. Accepts -with satisfaction the offer of the United
Republic of Tanzania to provide facilities for the regional training and refresher course to be held in Africa
in 1967;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which have made voluntary contributions towards the financing of the programme and reiterates
its invitation to Member States, interested bodies and
individuals to make voluntary contributions for this
purpose;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the programme;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its activities in
the field of international law and expresses the hope
that it will continue and, if possible, expand these activities;
6. Decides that the programme established under
General Assembly resolution 2099 (XX) shall henceforth be known as the United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International Law, and that
accordingly the Advisory Committee set up under that
resolution shall be known as the Advisory Committee
on the United Nations Programme of Assistance in
the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-second session on the
7 Ibid.,

agenda hem 86, documents A/6492 and Add.1.
