A/76/668–S/2022/66

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
28 January 2022
Original: English

General Assembly
Seventy-sixth session
Agenda item 66
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Security Council
Seventy-seventh year

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the Secretary-General
Summary
The present report is submitted in support of the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly during the seventy-sixth session, focused on financing for
peacebuilding. In the report, the Secretary-General argues that current financing for
prevention and peacebuilding remains inadequate given the increase in violent
conflicts, their changing, protracted and complex nature and their dire consequences.
The costs of responding to crises have become unsustainable; prevention of conflicts
and investing in building and sustaining peace have the potential to reduce costs for
Member States on crisis response. The linkages among peacemaking, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, development and humanitarian action are integral and mutually
reinforcing, and there is a need for funding across the peac e continuum. As
highlighted in the 2020 review of United Nations integration, there is a need for the
United Nations to provide a strong ecosystem to make the “triple cross pillar nexus”
a reality, and promote the transformative, prevention-focused and conflict-sensitive
responses required to accelerate action to achieve the 2030 Agenda. An array of
financing mechanisms and sources are required for peacebuilding activities of
national Governments, civil society, women, youth and United Nations entities,
including through domestic resources, voluntary and assessed contributions from
Member States and innovative partnerships.

22-01138 (E)

150222

*2201138*

A/76/668
S/2022/66

I. Introduction
1.
At the conclusion of the 2020 review of the peacebuilding architecture, the
General Assembly and the Security Council adopted twin resolutions (Assembly
resolution 75/201 and Council resolution 2558 (2020)), in which they requested an
interim report in 2022 on continued implementation of the 2016 resolutions on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (Assembly resolution 70/262 and Council
resolution 2282 (2016)), with due attention to the impact of relevant reforms on the
performance of the United Nations system in advancing the implementation of the
resolutions, and with emphasis on the systematic impact made at the field level, for
the consideration of Member States.
2.
In calling for a renewed effort to agree on more effective collective responses
to address major risks, the Secretary-General, in his 2021 report, Our Common
Agenda, proposed the development of a new agenda for peace, with more investment
in prevention and peacebuilding. As the Secretary-General continues to stress,
peacebuilding financing remains a critical challenge. Recognizing this, t he General
Assembly decided to convene a high-level meeting at the seventy-sixth session to
advance, explore and consider options for ensuring adequate, predictable and sustained
financing for peacebuilding and affirmed a commitment to pursuing action -oriented
outcomes. The present report is intended to contribute to the high -level meeting.
3.
The prevention of violent conflict, peacebuilding and sustaining peace are
central to the work of the United Nations as derived from its Charter. Their financing
is one of the most critical enablers. However, the demand for peacebuilding outstrips
available resources and Member States have recognized that there is a “peacebuilding
financing gap”. 1 Approximately 2 billion people live in conflict-affected countries
and there were a record number of 56 State-based conflicts in 2020. The falling trend
of fatalities from armed conflict since the 2014 peak was reversed in 2020. 2 The
character of violent conflicts has also changed as most occur within prolonged,
complex and turbulent political transitions. 3 Violent conflicts, conflict-induced food
insecurity and hunger are major drivers of humanitarian needs. As many as 84 million
people have been forcibly displaced because of persecution, conflict, violence and
human rights violations. 4 Moreover, in 2022, 274 million people will need
humanitarian assistance – a 17 per cent increase from 2021, requiring $41 billion for
the 183 million people targeted. 5
4.
The world is seeing an increasing internationalization of intrastate conflicts,
which, together with the fragmentation and multiplication of non -State armed groups
with linkages to criminal and terrorist networks, makes finding solutions arduous. 6
Consequently, there are fewer political settlements to conflicts, making cas es like
Colombia important exceptions which created opportunities to build and sustain
peace. While the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire in March 2020 and
Security Council resolution 2532 (2020) on a general and immediate cessation of
__________________

Addis Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development (General Assembly resolution
69/313, para. 8).
2
See Uppsala Conflict Data Program (https://ucdp.uu.se/).
3
United Nations and World Bank, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing
Violent Conflict (Washington, D.C., 2018). Available at https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/28337.
4
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Mid-Year Trends
2021. Available at www.unhcr.org/mid-year-trends.
5
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Global Humanitarian Overview 2022
(https://gho.unocha.org).
6
See report of the Secretary-General on the state of global peace and security in line with the
central mandates contained in the Charter of the United Nations ( A/74/786).
1

2/19

22-01138

A/76/668
S/2022/66

hostilities because of the devastating impact of coronavirus disease (COVID -19),
especially in conflict-affected countries, resonated with several conflict parties, initial
gestures of support and unilateral ceasefires did not last or decisively transform
conflict dynamics on the ground.
5.
Today’s conflicts involve complex cross-border dynamics, notably, armed groups
and illicit trade of narcotics, terrorism, small arms, explosive ordnance (including
improvised explosive devices) and natural resources. Moreover, changing mobility
and displacement patterns, exacerbated by conflict and climate change, constrain the
social cohesion of borderland communities. Inadequate services and weak economic
integration of marginal spaces increase exclusion and conflict risks. Nevertheless, the
resilience of many borderland communities represents an opportunity for improved
investment in locally developed cross-border programmes to transform peace and
security. United Nations special political missions, peacekeeping operations and
country teams are collaborating in several regional contexts. Regional and other
organizations and the Peacebuilding Commission also play increasingly important
roles in such conflict situations, and the Peacebuilding Fund has prioritized crossborder and regional initiatives, including in the Sahel, Central America and Central
Asia. The African Union, the regional economic communities, the border
communities and the United Nations established the Africa Borderlands Centre in
2021 to support durable solutions to complex cross-border causes of conflict.
6.
Climate-related security risks have become a reality for millions of people who
are struggling to cope with resource scarcity, food insecurity and loss of livelihoods,
especially affecting women. A large share of people internally displaced by conflict
are in countries that are also vulnerable to climate change, and displacement is
expected to increase because of natural disasters related to climate change. 7 Climate
change can have a multiplier effect, exacerbating vulnerabilities, tensions and
inequalities and destabilizing social, political, economic and demographic dynamics
at the local, national and regional levels.
7.
The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated fragilities and inequalities, revealing
our shared vulnerability and interconnectedness. The global disruption to education
and skills building is unparalleled, deepening inequalities, grievances and the risk of
large losses in lifetime earnings. COVID-19 has weakened social contracts between
the State and populations, eroded social cohesion within and among communities and
significantly exacerbated gender inequalities and violence against women and girls.
While women were at the frontline of fighting the pandemic, they have often been
absent in COVID-19 decision-making and response mechanisms. Many protest
movements were driven by public frustration with unresponsive or ineffective State
institutions. Simultaneously, many countries reduced civic space, in particular the
freedoms of peaceful assembly and of expression. The pandemic has underscored the
need to address online civic space and for adequate legal and policy frameworks to
ensure that technology platforms are not used to spread misinforma tion,
disinformation and hate speech. In conflict-affected settings, the impacts of the virus
on health, livelihoods and decent work can fuel violent conflict. 8
8.
The pandemic added another layer of complexity to the negative impact that
conflict has on mental health, in particular on children, youth and women. Improving
__________________

International Military Council on Climate and Security, The world climate and security report
2021 (June 2021).
8
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs/Peacebuilding Support Office, World Health
Organization (WHO), International Labour Organization (ILO) and Interpeace: From Crisis to
Opportunity for Sustainable Peace: A Joint Perspective on Responding to the Health,
Employment and Peacebuilding Challenges in Times of COVID-19 (Geneva, 2020). Available at
www.ilo.org/global/topics/employment-promotion/recovery-and-reconstruction/WCMS_761809/
lang--en/index.htm.
7

22-01138

3/19

A/76/668
S/2022/66

psychosocial well-being and access to psychosocial support in conflict-affected
contexts are essential to help consolidate peace and prevent future violence. In his
2020 report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, the Secretary-General emphasized
the need to better integrate mental health and psychosocial support into peacebuilding.
In December 2021, the Peacebuilding Commission held its first meeting to exchange
views on the topic. Guidance is being developed to ensure a comprehensive,
operational and United Nations system-wide approach to integrate mental health and
psychosocial support and peacebuilding, and the Peacebuilding Fund has supported
several mental health and psychosocial support-focused projects.
9.
In “The highest aspiration: a call to action for human rights” (2020), the
Secretary-General highlighted the need for the United Nations system to work more
closely together to take early action, prevent conflict and protect rights in times of
crisis. He also reiterated the well-established correlation between the enjoyment of
human rights, including non-discrimination, and resilience to crisis. The forthcoming
agenda for protection sets out a framework for the United Nations to collaborate on
prevention and responses to human rights protection issues, including in conflict affected contexts.

II. The case for prevention and peacebuilding
10. Evidence shows that shifting investments towards the prevention of violent
conflicts saves lives and resources, is cost-effective and protects development gains. 9
It was recognized in the 2020 twin resolutions that progress towards ac hieving the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development requires the integration of peacebuilding
and sustaining peace into efforts to build back better. Inclusive and sustainable
development, anchored in human rights, gender equality and leaving no one behind ,
is the best defence against violent conflict. Structural prevention requires an
acceleration towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals and a
coherent focus on addressing conflict risks and drivers and enhancing social cohesion
through investments in equitable delivery of social services, inclusive institutions,
transparent management of natural resource revenues and equal economic
opportunities. The Peacebuilding Fund is well positioned to incentivize this as 97 per
cent of its investments contributed to the Goals in the period 2015–2020. However,
while peacebuilding needs have increased, adequate funds have not been forthcoming.
The extent to which international humanitarian and development responses are
conflict-sensitive and contribute to peacebuilding and sustaining peace, including in
response to the impacts of the pandemic and other compounded shocks and stresses,
will be critical in determining their effectiveness.
11. In Our Common Agenda, the Secretary-General called for a revitalized,
comprehensive and overarching prevention agenda and for every United Nations
presence to be made a centre of context-specific prevention expertise, with the
capacity to better link peace and security, human rights, gender equality, climate and
development, and focusing on factors that can give rise to grievances and cause
instability. COVID-19 has underscored the importance of switching from crisis
response to prevention and the need to better anticipate, prevent and prepare for major
risks by having stronger legal frameworks, better tools for managing risks, more
participatory, inclusive and gender- and age-responsive approaches, better data and
proper financing of prevention and preparedness.
__________________
9

4/19

Estimated expected annual savings ranging from $5 billion to $70 billion per year. See for example,
United Nations and World Bank, Pathways for Peace: Inclusive Approaches to Preventing
Violent Conflict (Washington, D.C., 2018), p. xix. Available at www.pathwaysforpeace.org/.
22-01138

A/76/668
S/2022/66

12. In his 2020 report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, the Secretary-General
highlighted that peacebuilding activities of special political missions, peacekeeping
operations and agencies, funds and programmes have generated significant results on
the ground (A/74/976-S/2020/773, para. 9 and box 1). Some 300 examples in more
than 35 countries had been documented, including increased trust in government,
improved social cohesion, lower levels of violence, increased capacity to peacefully
prevent and resolve conflict, the inclusion of peacebuilding in public policy and
durable political settlements. The Secretary-General reports every year to the General
Assembly on the results achieved through the Peacebuilding Fund ( see the most recent
report, A/76/687).
13. The United Nations system has demonstrated progress in implementing the 2016
twin resolutions, including through joint analysis and planning. Many United Nations
entities have integrated peacebuilding in their strategic plans, policies, guidance and
training. The Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department
of Peace Operations have contributed to common country analyses and United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Frameworks, which form the basis of
United Nations country teams’ holistic response, aligned with national priorities and
plans. The deployment of over 110 Peace and Development Advisers through the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)-Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs Joint Programme on Building National Capacities for Conflict
Prevention, has also contributed to these tools. The Côte d’Ivoire United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 2021–2025, in which peacebuilding
and sustaining peace are identified as a cross-cutting theme, with a focus on women
and youth, helped to enhance the coherence and complementarity of United Nations
efforts before, during and after the 2020 presidential election, to ease mounting
tensions and create the conditions for an inclusive political dialogue. In 2021, the
Government of Iraq and the United Nations signed an updated version of the United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework 2020 –2024 to include the
COVID-19 impact, the increased need for durable solutions to end displacement and
peacebuilding-related strategic priorities, such as social cohesion, protection and
inclusion.
14. Engagements in the field have confirmed the importance of applying regional
and cross-border approaches as COVID-19, non-State armed groups and climaterelated security issues transcend boundaries. The Special Envoy of the Secretary General for the Great Lakes region, in coordination with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO), supported regional efforts – including by the African Union,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community – to address root causes of instability and conflict through
extensive consultations among the chiefs of intelligence and security services of
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and the United
Republic of Tanzania. This resulted in the adoption of a plan for the establishment of
the contact and coordination group mandated to oversee the implementation of
non-military measures. They include: (a) support for disarmament, demo bilization,
repatriation, reintegration and resettlement programmes through an approach
involving local communities and civil society; and (b) reinforcement of cross -border
cooperation to generate economic opportunities for young people. The Dominican
Republic and Haiti, with Peacebuilding Fund investment and technical support from
the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and UNDP, are revitalizing a joint
bilateral commission to strengthen dialogue on security and migration and create
community-based cross-border dialogue spaces and technical and cultural
collaboration to promote social cohesion and prevent conflicts.

22-01138

5/19

A/76/668
S/2022/66

15. In the 2020 twin resolutions, the General Assembly and the Security Council
emphasized that inclusivity is key to advancing national peacebuilding processes and
objectives to ensure that the needs of all segments of society are considered. In Our
Common Agenda, the Secretary-General proposed mobilizing the United Nations to
assist countries in support of a renewed social contract, anchored in human rights and
based on trust, inclusion, protection and participation. Successful prevention and
peacebuilding require long-term intergenerational approaches, building on existing
infrastructures for peace and the efforts of stakeholders on the ground, including
women, adolescents and youth, religious leaders and workers’ and employers’
organizations, which are too often excluded from formal peace processes.
16. Increasing investments in the implementation of Security Council resolutions
on women and peace and security and youth and peace and security are important to
enhance inclusion in peacebuilding at the local and national levels. Collaboration and
resources should be leveraged to help countries transition out of conflict, address
inequalities and build resilience by transforming political, social and economic
systems to include women and youth. For example, in 2020, the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) invested $782.9 million in adolescent- and youth-focused
basic services in conflict-affected and fragile settings, including in education, health
and social protection. United Nations Volunteers have also played an important role
in engaging local actors in peacebuilding processes. National parliaments are
important spaces for dialogue and representation of diverse parts of society,
addressing root causes of conflict, mediating grievances, de-escalating violence and
providing public accountability. UNDP has supported the increased participation of
women in political processes in Kyrgyzstan, Montenegro, Nepal, Sierra Leone and
Sri Lanka. In Kyrgyzstan, in response to the surge in gender-based violence during
the COVID-19 crisis, the Council on Women’s Rights and Prevention of GenderBased Violence successfully advocated for speedy legislative amendments, which
improved access to justice for victims of domestic violence.
17. In Guinea-Bissau, a joint project of the World Food Programme (WFP), the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) brought together 80 rural
women leaders to debate issues of interest with regional governors, district
administrators and national members of parliament. More than 2,000 rural women
from 40 communities were trained in literacy, trade and leadership skills, enabling
them to increase their economic and political participation and advocate for their
needs to local authorities and legislative representatives. In Abyei, United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) police collaboration with the Abyei
Women Association resulted in the identification of gender-specific triggers that lead
to tensions and conflict, such as the exclusion of women from traditional justice
mechanisms and the community protection committees.
18. With support from the International Labour Organization (ILO), the Jordan
Chamber of Industry, the General Federation of Jordanian Trade Unions, the Ministry
of Labour and other State agencies, international donors and civil society organizations
have supported programmes in response to the Syrian refugee crisis. These
programmes have created more than 130,000 decent jobs while promoting social
cohesion and peaceful co-existence in agriculture, manufacturing and infrastructure. 10
19. The United Nations system has shown positive results in the inclusion of youth
in prevention and peacebuilding initiatives. In Madagascar, UNDP, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and UNICEF
__________________
10

6/19

ILO, Managing Conflicts and Disasters: Exploring Collaboration between Employers’ and
Workers’ Organizations (Geneva, 2020), p. 32. Available at www.ilo.org/global/publications/
books/WCMS_741421/lang--en/index.htm.
22-01138

A/76/668
S/2022/66

supported Radio Sifaka in promoting youth engagement and tackling misinformation
by providing training to young journalists and capacity-building to radio programmes
and youth organizations, and partnering with 28 radio stations, leading to the
establishment of youth reporters’ clubs, which broadcast peace messages. In
Cameroon, with Peacebuilding Fund support, the World Health Organization (WHO),
IOM and the Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions of the Department of
Peace Operations developed a project targeting youth at risk of recruitment by Boko
Haram in the far north, by providing alternative livelihoods in the health sector. In
the regions of Mopti and Ségou in Mali, WFP, the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations (FAO) and the Office of the United Nations High Commissi oner
for Refugees (UNHCR) supported laboratories for peace, bringing together women,
men, young people, municipalities and community and religious leaders to negotiate
ceasefire agreements that led to a significant decrease in intercommunity violence. In
Colombia, UNICEF supported over 32,000 community initiatives involving youth
that shaped territorial development plans in 170 municipalities most affected by
violence in support of the peace agreement implementation.
20. Linkages between corruption, conflict and fragility are becoming increasingly
apparent. Curbing corruption is vital in post-conflict environments to restore trust in
public institutions. The United Nations common position to address global corruption,
developed in the lead-up to the 2021 special session of the General Assembly on
corruption, sets forth a common framework for United Nations support to Member
States. Additionally, an essential element for sustaining peace is ensuring that
perpetrators of serious crimes that fuel conflict are br ought to justice. Since 2011,
MONUSCO prosecution support cells have assisted the military justice authorities in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo with exercising jurisdiction over war crimes,
serious human rights violations and natural resource traffi cking. Over 1,500 cases
have been processed with MONUSCO support, involving 2,680 accused persons and
leading to over 1,640 convictions and sentences.
21. Competition for natural resources compounded by climate change coupled with
exclusion have been major drivers of violent intercommunal conflicts. These risks are
set to increase further as, by mid-century, more than 4 billion people will be living in
water-stressed regions. 11 Peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
together with IOM, FAO, UNDP, UNICEF, UN-Women and WFP, supported by the
Peacebuilding Fund, contributed to conflict management mechanisms in farmer and
herder communities. In the Sahel, IOM and FAO promoted peaceful transhumance
through building institutional cross-border dialogue and conflict management capacity,
developing a transhumance tracking tool, rehabilitating community infrastructure and
providing livelihood support. In the Central African Republic, in a context of renewed
violence during the elections, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) supported local
committees for peace and reconciliation (including by increasing women’s
participation to 30 per cent), religious platforms and transhumance comm ittees in the
peaceful resolution of 39 community conflicts. Along the Chad -Niger border, a WFP
and FAO project contributed to reducing transhumance-related conflicts by more than
50 per cent. The project supported the marking of more than 100 km of transh umance
corridors to reduce the destruction of fields by livestock, a key conflict trigger.
22. The Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund have contributed
to the coherence of prevention and response systems, supporting in synergy
multidisciplinary and multistakeholder solutions. The Commission provides a forum
for responding to multidimensional threats to development, peace and security
through an inclusive approach. With emphasis on national ownership, the Commission
__________________
11

22-01138

UNICEF, Water scarcity. Available at www.unicef.org/wash/water-scarcity.
7/19

A/76/668
S/2022/66

has forged partnerships by creating space for non-United Nations partners, such as
national and local government officials, regional and subregional organizations,
international financial institutions, women and youth organizations and other civil
society organizations, to work together in support of local peacebuilding efforts. In
February 2021, the Commission adopted a gender strategy action plan and approved
a strategic action plan on youth and peacebuilding to help guide and monitor the
Commission’s efforts in support of gender and youth-responsive peacebuilding.
Women peacebuilders have increasingly briefed the Commission since 2016, with the
largest increase from 22 per cent of meetings in 2019 to 74 per cent in 2021. In 2021,
the Commission supported 13 country- and region-specific settings, including by
holding a meeting for the first time on the Gulf of Guinea, for a total of 23 countries
and regions since its inception. Current resource constraints, however, prevent the
Commission from meeting increasing demand to expand its advisory and bridging
role to more geographical and substantive settings.
Peacebuilding financing gaps
23. As stated in the 2020 report (A/74/976-S/2020/773), there has been too little
progress on adequate, predictable and sustained financing for peacebuilding. Demand
for Peacebuilding Fund support is outpacing available resources, according to
financial forecasting of country-driven needs, including support for transitions, crossborder initiatives, gender equality and women and youth empowerment. The
Peacebuilding Fund scaled back its approval targets in each of the past three years on
account of shortfalls in contributions, even as the original targets were set below
anticipated demand owing to income expectations.
24. Peacebuilding requires a broad set of financing instruments and a variety of
channels and sources. There are several global United Nations mechanisms, including
the Peacebuilding Fund, the Department of Political and Peacebui lding Affairs
multi-year appeal, the human security trust fund, the Joint Sustainable Development
Goals Fund, the Global Focal Point for the Rule of Law, the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund, the United Nations Democracy Fund and the Humanitarian Development-Peacebuilding and Partnership Facility. The Secretariat has developed
a peacebuilding funding dashboard, which includes several of these global funds, and
is committed to expanding the dashboard further, to provide senior management and
donors with an overview of different funding streams. Several country-specific trust
funds play a catalytic role in driving integration and finance peacebuilding activities
in United Nations transition settings. For example, following the withdrawal of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), a Sudan
financing platform multi-partner trust fund, including a peacebuilding and stabilization
window to support the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), was established to ensure integration
with the United Nations country team. While the reforms have contributed to a
substantial growth of these funds, more pooled funds supporting shared strategic
objectives and with greater capitalization are required to further enhance United
Nations coherence.
25. In his 2021 report on women and peace and security (S/2021/827), the
Secretary-General highlighted that the lack of adequate, predictable and sustain ed
funding continues to impede the implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda. More than a decade earlier, the then Secretary-General set an objective to
allocate a minimum of 15 per cent of all United Nations peacebuilding and recovery
funds to women’s empowerment and gender equality. 12 The Peacebuilding Fund has
__________________
12

8/19

See Seven-Point Action Plan on Gender-Responsive Peacebuilding. Available at www.un.org/
peacebuilding/sites/www.un.org.peacebuilding/files/documents/seven_point_action_plan.pdf .
22-01138

A/76/668
S/2022/66

achieved its 30 per cent target since 2015, reaching 40 per cent in the period 2018 –
2020 and 47 per cent in 2021. Local women’s organizations’ contributions to conflict
prevention, resolution and peacebuilding processes, fostering more inclusive
governance and strengthening the legitimacy of new institutions, have been widely
recognized as highly cost-effective but are hampered by persistent underinvestment. 13
Under the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs multi-year appeal, a
dedicated funding window supports women’s participation in peacemaking,
peacebuilding and sustaining peace efforts, which includes facilitating the
establishment of women’s advisory boards (e.g., in Iraq, the Syrian Arab Republic
and Yemen) and encouraging the participation of women in electoral processes. In the
“Thematic review on gender-responsive peacebuilding”, donors are recommended to
identify ways to make long-term, flexible funding available directly to women’s
peacebuilding organizations to respond to the diverse needs of women on the
ground, 14 in line with the call to action on women transforming peace and security
(2020). 15 The Peacebuilding Commission advised the Security Council in Octob er
2021, ahead of the Council’s open debate on women and peace and security, to
promote dedicated funding for efforts by women peacebuilders and women -led
organizations to promote their full, equal and meaningful participation in
peacebuilding. 16
26. The drawdown and withdrawal of a peacekeeping operation or special political
mission often coincides with an inadequate focus on financing strategies to support
predictable and longer-term funding priorities for host Governments and United
Nations country teams. The Security Council, in resolution 2594 (2021), underlined
that such transitions are understood as a strategic process which builds towards a
reconfiguration of the strategy, footprint and capacity of the United Nations in a way
that supports peacebuilding objectives and the development of a sustainable peace. It
is therefore important that United Nations missions, United Nations country teams
and national authorities jointly develop transition plans using the United Nations
Sustainable Development Cooperation Frameworks, the contribution made by
development investments to sustained peace, longer-term financing strategies and
targeted action plans in collaboration with international financial institut ions and
bilateral partners and ensure that the plans are gender-responsive. The United Nations
Transitions Project of the Development Coordination Office, the Department of Peace
Operations, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and UNDP i s a key
mechanism providing dedicated support to develop these plans and strategies in an
integrated and forward-looking manner. This was also emphasized during the
informal consultative meeting of the African Union Peace and Security Council and
the Peacebuilding Commission in November 2021.
27. One financing tool to strengthen the role of peacekeeping and facilitate
transitions is the implementation of mandated programmatic activities funded through
peacekeeping assessed budgets. These activities can engage United Nations country
teams, civil society organizations, including women and youth organizations, and
national counterparts to ensure continued support for shared priorities, strengthening
coherence among actors. They also enhance national capacities, ensuring continued
__________________

France Bognon and Sanam Naraghi Anderlini, “Funding women peacebuilders: dismantling
barriers to peace”, International Civil Society Action Network (2020), p. 13.
https://icanpeacework.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/ICAN_FundingWomenPeacebuilders.pdf .
14
Peacebuilding Fund, Federal Foreign Office of Germany and Stabilisation Platform, “Thematic
review on gender-responsive peacebuilding” (November 2021), p. 39. Available at www.un.org/
peacebuilding/content/gender-responsive-peacebuilding-2021.
15
https://peacekeeping.un.org/en/sg-wps-call-to-action.
16
Peacebuilding Commission, Advice to the Security Council on women, peace and security,
20 October 2021. Available at www.un.org/peacebuilding/sites/www.un.org.peacebuilding/files/
documents/pbc_advice_on_wps_.pdf.
13

22-01138

9/19

A/76/668
S/2022/66

sustainability and ownership of such initiatives. An increase in programmatic
assessed funding in peacekeeping budgets two years prior to withdrawal ( A/74/976S/2020/773, para. 46) and creating mechanisms to use these funds up to five years
after withdrawal, supplementing voluntary contributions, would be catalytic in
facilitating successful transitions.
28. Funding for programmatic activities amounted to $193.8 million in the 2021/22
peacekeeping budget 17 and an average of $200 million in the previous three
peacekeeping budget cycles 18 encompassing rule of law, human rights, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, community stabilization, community violence
reduction, electoral affairs and mine action activities – with the latter amounting to
approximately 70 per cent of the total funding (see table 1).
29. In recent years, the Peacebuilding Fund has allocated a high percentage of its
total investment to contexts where a peacekeeping or special political mission is
deployed (see table 2). The Peacebuilding Fund significantly increased or started
investments when new peacekeeping operations or special political missions were
established, and has typically doubled its investments af ter drawdown. Support to
transition contexts is one of the three priority windows of the Peacebuilding Fund
strategy for 2020–2024 with a target of 35 per cent of total annual investments. In
2020, 25 per cent of Peacebuilding Fund investments were in tran sition settings,
including in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti and the
Sudan, contributing to continuity in addressing peacebuilding and development
challenges. These efforts are complemented by the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs multi-year appeal with critical funding to sustain peacebuilding
gains during the transition period.
Table 1
Programmatic funding in peacekeeping budgets, excluding mine action
(Millions of United States dollars)
2018–19

2019–20

2020–21

2021–22

MINUJUSTH

6.66

-

-

-

MINUSCA

13.96

14.677

16.198

14.184

MINUSMA

13.619

11.848.

13.731

15.794

MONUSCO

10.910

13.528

14.518

14.137

UNISFA
UNMIK

0.287
2.376

2.376

2.376

2.376

UNMISS

2.059

2.585

3.124

4.322

UNAMID

19.882 a

19.652

6.705

-

Total

67.8

64.8

56.6

51.1

Abbreviations: MINUJUSTH, United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti; MINUSCA,
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic; MINUSMA, United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali; MONUSCO, United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; UNISFA, United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei ; UNMIK,
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo; UNMISS, United Nations Mission
in South Sudan; UNAMID, African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
a
Revised budget for UNAMID for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019 ( A/73/488).
__________________

Report of the Secretary General, Overview of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations (A/75/786, annex VIII).
18
Reports of the Secretary General, Overview of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations (A/72/770, annex X; A/73/776, annex IX; and A/74/736, annex VIII).
17

10/19

22-01138

A/76/668
S/2022/66

30. The Peacebuilding Fund complements programmatic funding in peacekeeping
operation budgets, especially during transitions, by funding a much broader set of and
longer-term peacebuilding activities, requires government approval and does not fund
United Nations staff. If used strategically, programmatic funding and the
Peacebuilding Fund incentivize integration and can catalyse further investment
towards peacebuilding priorities. In UNAMID, programmat ic funding reached an
unprecedented scale to establish State liaison functions. They fostered cooperation
with the United Nations country team towards shared priorities to better sustain peace
following the departure of UNAMID. Approximately $45 million wa s transferred
from the UNAMID budget to 10 agencies, funds and programmes in the 2019/20
period to increase the United Nations country team’s geographical reach in Darfur
and programming for the rule of law, women and peace and security, durable
solutions, resilience, livelihoods and human rights. Since 2019, the Peacebuilding
Fund has invested $26.8 million for United Nations country team initiatives in Sudan.
At present, the UNITAMS programmatic framework for mandate implementation is
built off the successes of the State liaison functions. Such innovative results highlight
the importance of increasing programmatic activities for peacekeeping operations and
exploring ways to enable this in the context of special political missions, especially
in a transition from one to the other.
Table 2
Peacebuilding Fund investments in settings where peacekeeping operations and
special political missions operate
(Millions of United States dollars)
2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

Peacekeeping operation

19.0

9.4

52.6

31.8

52.0

37.5

39.8

Special political mission

13.8

32.6

38.3

27.4

31.4

18.9

23.4

Peacekeeping operation and
special political mission

–

–

3.0

3.0

25.5

7.7

14.5

As a percentage of total
Peacebuilding Fund

42.0%

59.3%

57.9%

32.3%

43.6%

32.5%

39.8%

31. The Peacebuilding Fund also complements programmatic funding in support of
special political missions. The Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
multi-year appeal funds the deployment of operational and political support to heads
of missions enhancing United Nations capacities on the ground. Agencies, funds and
programmes implement projects aimed at social cohesion, conflict resolution, or
support for the rule of law and justice sectors and collaborate with special political
missions through integrated planning frameworks. The Peacebuilding Fund supports
such projects as they are closely coordinated with special political missions (e.g., in
Colombia and the Sudan).

III. Financial flows to conflict-affected situations
32. Investing in prevention is both imperative and the most cost-effective approach
to addressing conflict and fragility risks and secure development gains to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. However, amid a pandemic with vast health and
socioeconomic needs, global military expenditure increased by 2.6 per cent (inflation adjusted) in 2020, totalling nearly $2 trillion, amounting to 2.4 per cent of global

22-01138

11/19

A/76/668
S/2022/66

income. 19 Some countries reallocated part of their planned military spending to the
pandemic response and several others spent less than their initial military budgets for
2020. 20 Reducing military expenditures and reallocating them to prevention and
peacebuilding was also highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2021/827, para. 113).
33. Financial flows, which include official development assistance (ODA), foreign
direct investment (FDI) and remittances, to conflict-affected countries 21 continue to
fluctuate considerably from year to year (see figure I). Remittances steadily increased
between 2009 and 2020 and have become the largest source of external finance for
conflict-affected countries. ODA also increased between 2009 and 2019, especially
for a few large recipients, but not continuously and not by as much as remittances –
by 55 per cent and 87 per cent, respectively. Moreover, for several conflict -affected
countries, ODA declined. Liberia, Colombia and Haiti saw the sharpest decreases
between 2015 and 2019. FDI showed large fluctuations and a steep decline between
2012 and 2018 by 53 per cent. While there was an increase in FDI in 2019, FDI in
conflict-affected countries decreased by 63 per cent in 2020, because of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
34. While total ODA to conflict-affected settings has increased in recent years, 22
reaching 31 per cent in 2019 of total ODA, only 13.5 per cent was directed towards
peacebuilding 23 (see figure II) and the share has declined from 19.9 per cent in 2012.
Peacebuilding expenditures varied significantly on a yearly basis and were unevenly
distributed among countries, with Afghanistan, Colombia and Iraq having received
the majority of the ODA-funded peacebuilding expenditures.
35. While data is limited, ODA tends to increase after the establishment of a special
political mission or peacekeeping operation and decreases after the drawdown of a
peacekeeping operation. There is insufficient data on how ODA is affected by the
termination of special political missions. For 11 assessable peacekeeping operations,
ODA increased on average by 3.5 times in the five years after their establishment, in
comparison with the five years prior to their establishment. For five specia l political
missions with available data, ODA increased almost six times over a similar period,
excluding Iraq, where the increase was much higher. In comparison, peacebuilding
ODA increased on average by 2.6 times following the establishment of a special
political mission, according to available data for three special political missions. Total
__________________

Stockholm International Peace Research Institute fact sheet, April 2021. Available at
https://sipri.org/sites/default/files/2021-04/fs_2104_milex_0.pdf.
20
See www.sipri.org/media/press-release/2021/world-military-spending-rises-almost-2-trillion-2020.
21
ODA is net ODA received. Data source: World Bank, World Dev elopment Indicators, accessed
22 July 2021. Conflict-affected settings are defined as: (a) agenda items of which the Security
Council is currently seized and which have been considered by the Council at a formal meeting
during the period from 1 January to 31 December 2020; (b) countries with a field-based or
country-specific peacekeeping or special political mission in 2020 comprising 10 or more staff
members; or (c) countries that received programmatic funds from the Peacebuilding Fund in 2020.
22
ODA in figures I and II is slightly different because figure I is in current United States dollars
and figure II is in constant United States dollars.
23
Peacebuilding includes a wide set of activities, covering (a) political processes; (b) safety and
security; (c) rule of law and human rights; (d) core government functions; (e) basic services,
such as education and health care; and (f) economic revitalization, which includes jobs and
livelihoods. Only the first four categories (using the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD)/Development Assistance Committee Credit Reporting System codes)
are assumed to be designed to yield peacebuilding outcomes and therefore are always included in
total peacebuilding investments. The last two categories (e) and (f) can contribute to
peacebuilding outcomes, but only if designed with that purpose in mind. (Ayham Al Maleh and
others, “Peacebuilding, Official Development Assistance and the Sustainable Development
Goals: the United Nations Peacebuilding Funding Dashboard,” Journal of Peacebuilding and
Development, vol. 16, No. 1, April 2021, pp. 112–120).
19

12/19

22-01138

A/76/668
S/2022/66

ODA decreased on average by 19 per cent in the five years after the drawdown of a
peacekeeping operation in four settings compared with the five years prior to their
drawdown (excluding Sierra Leone, where ODA increased, and a special political
mission followed a peacekeeping operation). Moreover, in the two peacekeeping
operation settings with available data (Haiti and Liberia), peacebuilding ODA declined
on average by 26 per cent one year after the peacekeeping operation drawdown.
Figure I
Financial flows to 52 conflict-affected settings
(Billions of current United States dollars)

Source: Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs/Peacebuilding Support Office, based on Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) data.
Abbreviations: bn, billion; FDI, foreign direct investment; ODA, official development assistance.

36. Although the percentage of bilateral aid dedicated to gender equality as a
principal objective climbed to 5.6 per cent ($2.7 billion) in 2019, the share received
by women’s rights organizations in conflict-affected contexts amounted to only
0.4 per cent ($179 million) and only $439 million was allocated towards gender-based
violence. 24 The Compact on Women, Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action,
launched in July 2021, is a clear expression of the need to realize women and peace
and security commitments through increased financing. More than 150 Member
States, regional organizations, United Nations entities, private sector actors, civil
society organizations and stakeholders from academic institutions signed the
Compact by investing in at least one of the proposed actions.

__________________
24

22-01138

Such aid is intended to support feminist, women-led and women’s rights organizations, movements
and institutions. The data have been collected and tracked as purpose code 15170 in the OECD
Creditor Reporting System. The data analysed excluded aid channelled through government
institutions. On gender-based violence, see OECD, Development finance towards the elimination
of gender-based violence, Gender Equality Perspectives Series, December 2021, p. 7. Available
at https://www.oecd.org/development/gender-development/development-finance-eliminationgender-based-violence.pdf?utm_source=Adestra&utm_medium=email&utm_content=Read%20
More&utm_campaign=OECD%20Development%20News%20-%20December%202021&utm_
term =dev.
13/19

A/76/668
S/2022/66

Figure II
Peacebuilding and other official development assistance in 51 countries
(Billions of constant United States dollars)

Source: Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs/Peacebuilding Support Office, based on OECD data.
Note: The data represents gross disbursements of ODA and reflects actual spending rather than commitments to
spend money, excluding debt repayments. Source: Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs Department of Peace Operations ODA Dashboard (see https://app.powerbi.com/view?r=eyJrIjoi
NmE3Mzc4NTQtYzE3ZS00YjIyLWI0YjQtZTM5ODc5ZWIwY2NiIiwidCI6IjBmOWUzNWRiLTU0NGYtNG
Y2MC1iZGNjLTVlYTQxNmU2ZGM3MCIsImMiOjh9&pageName=ReportSection00b1b8b63af2e7d2ebfc ),
which is based on the OECD Stat Credit Reporting System Database ( https://stats.oecd.org/). No data is
available on the ODA Dashboard for Cyprus and Western Sahara.

37. Donor commitment and support to dedicated financing mechanisms such as the
Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund have increased, channelling rapid and
flexible funding to local women peacebuilders and first responders to prevent conflict
and end sexual and gender-based violence, build back better from COVID-19 and
forge lasting peace in their communities. Since the launch of this United Nations -civil
society partnership in 2016, the Fund has mobilized $90 million (by end 2021) and
supported over 450 local organizations. In March 2021, the Fund launched a new
campaign to raise $112 million by the end of 2025, including from the private sector.
The Fund demonstrates the value added when women civil society leaders participate
in the allocation of financial resources, especially in crisis settings.
38. In 2021, the Peacebuilding Fund Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative
prioritized proposals on promotion and protection of civic spaces, notably regarding
land, indigenous peoples and environmental issues; and promotion and strengthening
of the mental health and psychosocial well-being of women and youth, as part of local
peacebuilding processes. Of 275 concept notes, a record of 38 Initiative projects
totalling $51.5 million in 23 countries were approved. Of these, 13 were submitted
by civil society organizations ($14.2 million), 4 are United Nations-civil society
organization proposals ($6 million) and 21 are United Nations projects ($31.3 million).
Two local civil society organizations will receive funding directly, and all proposals
are required to allocate at least 40 per cent to national or local civil society partners.
The Peacebuilding Fund strategy for 2020–2024 has committed to expand
partnerships with civil society organizations and explore new avenues to make
funding available for community-based organizations. The United Nations Alliance
of Civilizations Youth Solidarity Fund also focuses on funding a variety of youth-led
organizations directly. The Peacebuilding Commission complemented these efforts
by inviting civil society representatives to share their experiences and seek support
14/19

22-01138

A/76/668
S/2022/66

from the Commission. The share of Commission meetings that include civil society
briefers increased from 51 per cent in 2020 to 63 per cent in 2021.
39. Lack of systematic data collection makes it difficult to assess how much
financing is supporting youth-focused or youth-led peacebuilding programming, but
estimates indicate that only 11.6 per cent of ODA for peacebuilding between 2015
and 2020 focused on youth. Increasing the level and quality of funding for youth
organizations and networks in peacebuilding should be a key priority. Very few actors
can track these investments. Accessibility challenges, such as stringent eligibility
criteria, put funding sources beyond reach for most youth-led organizations. To
improve access to funding, actors need to place young people at the core of strategies
for financing peacebuilding; increase flexible, long-term and sustainable financing
for youth-focused and youth-led peacebuilding; make financing more accessible to
youth-led organizations; increase collaboration with young people in decision making over financing priorities; and develop data systems that can track investments
in young people similar to those on gender equality and women’s empowerment in
peacebuilding.
40. Climate finance is an important funding stream, requiring greater attention in
terms of their linkages with peace. A 2021 study by UNDP and the Climate Security
Mechanism (a Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, UNDP and United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) initiative established in 2018) shows that
access to climate finance by “extremely fragile and fragile States” is much smaller
compared with other States and there is a need to better mainstream peace and security
risks into climate finance. 25 Recognizing the gender-climate-security nexus offers an
opportunity for funds dedicated to climate change mitigation and adaptation, such as
through the Green Climate Fund and the Global Environment Facility, to also address
root causes of conflict and have a greater transformative impact.

IV. Options to increase financing for peacebuilding and
strengthen capacities for conflict prevention
and peacebuilding
41. Several options to ensure sufficient peacebuilding funding have been presented
as part of the 2018, 2019 and 2020 reports on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
Acknowledging that sustaining peace is a shared responsibility and peacebuilding a
long-term process, more efforts are required to ensure adequate, sustainable and
timely investments in prevention and peacebuilding.
Voluntary contributions
42. Some progress has been made on the options. First, the Secretary-General called
for a “quantum leap” in contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund ($500 million
annually) through unearmarked and multi-year commitments. Voluntary contributions
to the Peacebuilding Fund almost doubled to $370 million and approvals more than
doubled to $564 million in the period 2017–2019. The Peacebuilding Fund remains,
however, largely dependent on a few donors and demand for Peacebuilding Fund
funding outpaces its ability to respond.
43. Second, it was proposed that Member States voluntarily commit the equivalent
of 15 per cent of the final full-year budget of a closing peacekeeping mission to
peacebuilding activities each year for a period of two years following the end of a
__________________
25

22-01138

UNDP, “Climate finance for sustaining peace: making climate finance work for conflict -affected
and fragile contexts” (2021), p. 24 (www.undp.org/publications/climate-finance-sustainingpeace-making-climate-finance-work-conflict-affected-and).
15/19

A/76/668
S/2022/66

mission mandate, which is one way to address the financial cliff often seen after a
mission has ended. In the case of UNAMID, using the 2019/20 budget as the “final
full-year budget” ($514.5 million), 15 per cent is equal to $77.2 million per year for
two years. No Member State has implemented this recommendation yet.
44. Third, the Secretary-General asked donors to commit to spending at least 20 per
cent of ODA on peacebuilding priorities in conflict settings. Only 10 Development
Assistance Committee members meet this target (one third of all members). Finally,
limited progress has been made concerning the call for Member States to voluntarily
commit unspent peacekeeping budget funds to the Peacebuilding Fund.
Assessed contributions
45. The Secretary-General proposed (a) ensuring that missions have sufficient
programmatic funding to support mandated peacebuilding activities, with the
Peacebuilding Fund and missions working closely on operationalizing programmes
during mission transitions; and (b) assessed funding for the Peacebuilding Fund.
Assessed contributions provide higher predictability and sustainability of funding and
would send a powerful signal regarding the universal commitment of Member States
to peacebuilding and sustaining peace, as part of the organization’s core mandate.
Details of this proposal are contained in a separate report ( A/76/687).
Partnerships
46. The complexity of today’s conflicts requires comprehensive approaches that
should involve the entire United Nations system and strong partnerships with a range
of actors, including regional organizations, international financial institutions,
multilateral development banks, development finance institutions, civil society and
the private sector. The humanitarian-development-peace nexus is based on the
principle that comprehensive, complementary, coordinated and coherent approaches
among partners working across the nexus are required to tackle the multi -risk,
multi-dimensional challenges in conflict-affected settings. This yields better, more
sustainable results by working together to reduce risks and vulnerabilities, being
conflict-sensitive, reducing humanitarian needs by addressing root causes and
contributing to sustainable peace and development. As highlighted in the 2020
Review of United Nations Integration, there is a need for the United Nations to offer
a strong ecosystem to make the “triple cross pillar nexus” a reality, and promote the
transformative, prevention-focused and conflict-sensitive responses required to
accelerate action to achieve the 2030 Agenda.
47. This requires a rethinking of siloed funding streams to allow greater focus on
prevention and peacebuilding across the board, including as part of d evelopment and
humanitarian interventions. Working with partners across the nexus is also an
opportunity to ensure better use of the aid budget, leveraging other partners and
delivering sustainable results rather than short-term fixes focusing only on symptoms.
The humanitarian-development-peace nexus approach allows for concrete action on
the ground with peacebuilding initiatives integrated into the United Nations system
through the use of the United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Frameworks and should be strengthened. In terms of integrated, cross-government
approaches, there is a need to adopt and/or increase conflict-sensitive peacebuilding
approaches in all development programmes, and sufficient resources should be set
aside for this purpose. New funding sources should continue to be sought, including
by broadening the donor base. Multi-year and unearmarked contributions to existing
pooled funding mechanisms will foster greater synergies across funding instruments
and among partners.

16/19

22-01138

A/76/668
S/2022/66

48. The Secretary-General has encouraged Member States to explore innovative
means of financing peacebuilding activities, including through public -private
partnerships, which could include contributions by individuals, foundations and faith based organizations, social impact or peace bonds, micro-levies, tax-based revenue
generation, corporate partnership and blended finance. Some of these innovative
financing mechanisms are designed to benefit conflict-affected countries directly.
Exploring these options offers additional opportunities but is not a substitute for
voluntary or assessed contributions. Several Governments are supporting initiatives
to explore innovative ways to apply blended finance approaches in peacebuilding
contexts to generate impact, which requires deepening the understanding of the
potential risks and opportunities; leveraging national development plans, domestic
investors and domestic finance with public resources to support these initiatives; and
bringing these options to scale. This has to be in line with conflict-sensitive principles
in support of national ownership and involve local actors, including women and
youth. The United Nations is a facilitator, bringing expertise, contextual knowledge,
presence on the ground and financial structuring capabilities, leveraging greater
alignment and acceleration.
49. The role of private sector actors in peacebuilding can include financing,
partnerships, direct engagement in negotiation or peacebuilding, advocacy, respect
for labour rights, protection of civilians, private donations towards peacebuilding
from companies, foundations or individuals, corporate social responsibility initiatives
and stronger risk mitigation. By investing in conflict-affected areas and contributing
to economic growth, reconstruction and creating decent jobs, private sector actors can
directly address the drivers of conflict through enhanced social cohesion. The private
sector, through employers’ and business members’ organizations, with workers’
organizations, promotes respect for labour rights and social dialogue in conflictaffected situations and contributes to participatory democratic reconstruction
processes and good governance. 26 By conducting Enhanced Human Rights Due
Diligence in accordance with the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights,
companies can prevent their operations from fuelling conflict.
50. The Peacebuilding Fund funded a blended finance pilot project in Colombia,
where seven investments each received around $300,000 and mobilized an additional
$12.9 million from private sector actors, leveraging at a ratio of 1:6. Results included:
over 2,000 farmers and producers strengthened production; around 5,500 loans issued
to farmers and micro-entrepreneurs in the agricultural sector; and over 1,700 women
received direct benefits, including access to loans.
51. Peacebuilding requires integrated, cross-government approaches that are risk
tolerant, sustainable and predictable. The Good Peacebuilding Financing initiative
emphasizes the need to improve communication and develop coalitions, making the
case to those outside of the peacebuilding financing sphere that investment in
peacebuilding or conflict-sensitive approaches can deliver results for them too. This
initiative provides an opportunity for all donors, in cluding non-traditional,
non-Development Assistance Committee members, to increase time horizons, risk
tolerance, flexible funding for local peacebuilding efforts of women and youth,
coherence within Governments and across Humanitarian-DevelopmentPeacebuilding and Partnership financing mechanisms and integration of conflict sensitivity and peacebuilding approaches across all activities.
52. The United Nations and the World Bank have deepened their partnership in
crisis-affected situations in recent years, collaborating in nearly 50 settings, including
__________________
26

22-01138

ILO and Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs/Peacebuilding Support Office,
Sustaining peace through decent work and employment (Geneva, 2021), p. 13. Available at
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/documents/publication/wcms_771498.pdf.
17/19

A/76/668
S/2022/66

to operationalize the United Nations-World Bank Pathways for Peace report. 27 The
World Bank Group 2020–2025 Strategy for Fragility, Conflict and Violence underpins
a significant scaling up of its engagement in fragile and conflict-affected countries,
paired with more targeted efforts to address root causes and drivers of fragility,
conflict and violence with a focus on prevention and a people -centred approach. In
the nineteenth replenishment of the International Development Association, the
World Bank helped countries prevent conflict escalation, strengthen resilience and
address fragility over the long term and established new financing tools, including
the Prevention and Resilience Allocation and the Turn Around Allocation. The
$93 billion early replenishment of the International Development Association was
approved in December 2021 and the continuation of these new financing tools are
welcome. They provide opportunities for the World Bank, the United Nations a nd
other actors to better align respective support behind national strategies.
53. To advance United Nations-World Bank collaboration, the Department of
Political and Peacebuilding Affairs/Peacebuilding Support Office established the
Humanitarian-Development-Peacebuilding and Partnership Facility, which provides
small grants in support of data, analysis and assessments or surge or specialized
capacity, including in relevant contexts with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
The Facility shows the potential of the strategic use of a limited amount of funding
to support a more coherent United Nations dialogue with international financial
institutions and regional development banks based on shared priorities. Since 2020,
the Humanitarian-Development-Peacebuilding Facility provided 29 grants in crisisaffected settings for a total of $3.8 million. The Facility has, for example, provided
support for United Nations engagement in joint assessments such as the Central Asia
and Afghanistan border areas regional risk and resilience assessment and the recovery
and peacebuilding assessment in Mozambique, both completed in 2021. In the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations and the World Bank are
collaborating to ensure that the United Nations transition pr ocess is closely aligned
with the Bank’s support to the Government’s national conflict prevention strategy and
access to the Prevention and Resilience Allocation. In Burkina Faso, the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and Department of Peac e Operations have been
working closely with the United Nations country team and the World Bank to engage
in dialogue with national authorities. The United Nations has contributed to injecting
a conflict prevention lens in the national development plan in t he form of a dedicated
prevention/social cohesion pillar and the World Bank has integrated critical fragility
and conflict-sensitive benchmarks in its Prevention and Resilience Allocation Action
Plan, some of which are directly supported by complementary P eacebuilding Fund
investments, such as providing technical accompaniment to the national
reconciliation process.
54. IMF is also an increasingly valuable strategic partner in efforts to better address
fragility and conflict risks. The development by IMF of a fragile and conflict-affected
States strategy promises to provide a strong basis to improve our collective support
for inclusion and resilience in the face of compounded risks, which adversely affect
many countries and their peacebuilding gains.
55. Beyond financing, there is a need to mobilize broader capacities for prevention
and peacebuilding within the United Nations system and among partners. Financial
resources need to be accompanied by strengthened human resources at the local,
regional, national and international levels to work on prevention and peacebuilding.
They should be easily deployable and include a spectrum of expertise to provide
technical accompaniment to national and local actors managing conflict. Investments
need to be made in capacity-building and human resource development, such as the
__________________
27

18/19

See 2020 United Nations-World Bank partnership monitoring report, forthcoming.
22-01138

A/76/668
S/2022/66

recently established academy on prevention, nexus and stabilization initiated by
UNDP. There is also a need to allocate more resources for analysis, data gathering
and impact measurement to ensure that action is impactful and timely.
56. Domestic resources are critical for building national capacities for prevention
and peacebuilding. Development actors along with international financial institutions
and development finance institutions have a supporting role to play in this area. With
sufficient human resources and capacity, development actors could work more with
partners and government agencies, for example by supporting the mainstreaming of
conflict sensitivity and peacebuilding in government or othe r partners’ programmes,
impacting on peacebuilding priorities beyond their own programmes.

V. Conclusion
57. The General Assembly high-level meeting on financing for peacebuilding will
focus on a broad set of peacebuilding activities, including those undertaken by UN
missions and United Nations country teams, and funded by a range of mechanisms. A
parallel report will be submitted to the Fifth Committee on the proposal for assessed
contributions to the Peacebuilding Fund. Prevention and peacebuilding are central to
the work of the United Nations as derived from its Charter. However, the
Organization’s efforts have suffered from a lack of adequate, predictable and
sustained funding, despite the significant results achieved at regional, cr oss-border,
national and local levels. An urgent shift towards prevention and peacebuilding is
required, not only in words but in action and funding, grounded in multidimensional
conflict analysis. The high-level meeting provides a unique and long overdue
opportunity to take concrete actions and make significant commitments to ensure
peacebuilding saves more lives and resources. All Member States are encouraged to
agree collectively on a way forward and make specific announcements on
commitments at the high-level meeting, either as individual Member States or as
groups of Member States, to ensure adequate, predictable and sustained financing for
peacebuilding.

22-01138

19/19
