S/PV.8749

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8749th meeting

Tuesday, 14 July 2020, 10.35 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Heusgen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Yao Shaojun
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Michon
Mr. Djani
Mr. Abarry
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Kabtani
Mr. Roscoe
Mrs. Craft
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2020/603)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-18138 (E)
*2018138*

Colombia

S/PV.8749

The meeting was called to order at 10.35 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2020/603)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her
Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. Ms. Blum de Barberi
will be joining the meeting via video-teleconference
from Bogotá.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, and Ms. Clemencia Carabalí
Rodallega, Member of the Municipal Association of
Women and defender of Afro-Colombian territorial and
human rights.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Carabalí will be joining
the meeting via video-teleconference, from Bogotá and
Cauca, respectively.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2020/603, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to present the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on Colombia (S/2020/603). It is a pleasure to do
so in the company of Foreign Minister Claudia Blum. I
2/19

14/07/2020

am particularly pleased by the participation in today’s
meeting by Ms. Clemencia Carabalí, whose brave
leadership and defence of the rights of Afro-Colombian
communities and victims of the armed conflict in
Cauca department is an example of the inspiring work
of women social leaders around Colombia.
The Secretary-General’s report recognizes the
perseverance of both the Government and the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC), as
well as multiple other actors, in carrying on with
peacebuilding efforts despite the difficulties posed by
the pandemic. I commend the parties for their joint work
within the National Reintegration Council and within
the tripartite mechanism on the transition to legality,
whose work has allowed 131 more former combatants
to be accredited since the issuance of the SecretaryGeneral’s report. The fact that the Commission for
the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement has resumed
its sessions, with the participation of the guarantor
countries, is also encouraging.
I trust that the constructive dialogue between the
Government and FARC will soon lead to agreements on
issues related to the handover of assets of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP), including on the deadline to
finalize this process.
(spoke in Spanish)
The insecurity facing former FARC-EP combatants,
communities, human rights defenders and men and
women social leaders such as Ms. Carabalí, continues
to be our greatest concern, and, unfortunately, that
insecurity has continued during the pandemic. Despite
the commitments and measures implemented by the
Government and State authorities, the number of
ex-combatants killed since the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace is in excess of 200, reaching
210. Without a doubt, the violence committed against
those who laid down their arms under the agreement
and those who defend human rights and the rights of
the communities devastated by the conflict remains the
most serious threat to peacebuilding in Colombia.
(spoke in English)
In a positive development, authorities have captured
several individuals believed to be responsible for some
of these killings. This includes the arrest on 6 July of
20-18138

14/07/2020

Colombia

an individual accused of being the intellectual author
behind the killing of Alexander Parra, a former FARCEP combatant and leader of the former territorial area
for training and reintegration in Mesetas, Meta. The
arrest occurred as part of a joint effort by the Elite Corps
of the National Police and the Special Investigation
Unit of the Office of the Attorney General, two bodies
created by the final peace agreement.
These arrests are an example of the results that the
mechanisms in the peace agreement can deliver, and
a reminder of the need to provide them with all the
support required to effectively carry out their tasks.
All relevant actors must support the work of the Special
Investigation Unit, especially by executing pending
arrest warrants. Moreover, it should be a priority to give
the National Protection Unit the necessary financial,
technical and human resources so that no more former
combatants are killed while awaiting evaluation of
their protection requests. Since discussions are ongoing
regarding the rules of procedure of the National
Commission on Security Guarantees, I trust that it will
be consistent with the commitments established under
the final peace agreement and will soon approve and set
in motion the long-awaited public policy to dismantle
illegal armed groups and their support networks, which
are behind most of the reported violence in the former
conflict-affected areas.
After months of uncertainty and mounting security
risks from illegal armed groups, operations are under
way to transfer the former territorial area for training
and reintegration in Ituango, a municipality where
11 former FARC-EP members and 7 of their relatives
have been killed, to a new location in Mutatá, both in
Antioquia department. The hopes of dozens of former
FARC-EP combatants and their families, who were
forced to leave due to the escalating violence, are now
placed in this new site. It is essential to ensure that
these former combatants receive the protection and
support necessary to successfully carry on with their
reintegration into civilian life.
Authorities should also take all necessary
measures to ensure that surrounding communities and
former combatants who stay behind in Ituango will
not be forgotten as a result of this transfer. Since the
creation of the former territorial areas for training and
reintegration, local authorities have always highlighted
the fact that they represented an enhanced presence
of the State in these long-neglected areas across the

S/PV. 8749

country. Indeed, in these territories, the presence of the
State should not be weakened but, rather, strengthened.
As the Secretary-General has noted repeatedly,
the consolidated and integrated presence of State
institutions is the long-term solution to the violence
plaguing Colombia’s rural regions. It was with this belief
in mind that the peace agreement devised mechanisms
such as the development programmes with a territorial
focus and the comprehensive security and protection
programme for communities and organizations in
the territories. Progress in the implementation of
these mechanisms should proceed in an inclusive,
participatory and expedited manner.
The peace agreement also created the National
Comprehensive Programme for the Substitution of
Illicit Crops, which is aimed at freeing communities
from the violent grip of illegal armed groups and
criminal organizations by providing farmers and
communities with a voluntary path to legal livelihoods.
Its implementation should now focus on ensuring that
participating families receive timely assistance to
develop productive projects.
Regarding the reintegration process, I welcome the
fact that additional collective and individual productive
projects have been approved despite the pandemic. At
the same time, many former combatants’ productive
initiatives have been affected by the pandemic,
making it even more urgent to ensure support for their
sustainability, including through technical assistance,
the allocation of land and access to markets. It is also
important for both the Government and FARC to ensure
that the benefits of the reintegration process, including
access to productive projects, continue to reach all
former combatants in the reintegration process.
The pandemic has demonstrated once again the
vulnerable situation of roughly two-thirds of accredited
former combatants who currently reside outside the
former territorial areas for training and reintegration.
The efforts of all actors, including the National
Reintegration Council, to consider the needs of these
former combatants, including those conducting their
reintegration process collectively, are vital to ensure that
they can continue to carry on with their reintegration
process amid increased security challenges.
I also urge both the Government and FARC to
foster the leadership of women former combatants in
social, economic and political reintegration, and I trust
that the National Reintegration Council will prioritize

20-181383/19

S/PV.8749

Colombia

the recommendations of the Technical Working Group
on Gender. I also encourage the National Reintegration
Council to reactivate its working groups on children
and youth, and to consider the proposal of the Highlevel Forum of Ethnic Peoples to create a working
group to address the situation of former combatants of
indigenous and Afro-Colombian origin.
Colombia’s model of transitional justice is one
of the key innovations of this process. The three
components of the Comprehensive System for Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition have continued
their work during the pandemic to ensure that the rights
of victims are upheld. In April, the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace issued guidelines on the sanctions that it will
impose upon individuals under its jurisdiction and
on the tasks, works or activities with reparatory and
restorative content. The Truth Commission has resumed
its dialogue for non-continuity and non-repetition of
the armed conflict with several actors in Colombian
society in order to foster reconciliation and discuss the
causes of the continued violence in various regions, and
the Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed Missing is
helping to provide healing for the families of persons
forcibly disappeared during the conflict.
Support to the System by all actors remains
paramount, including by respecting their independence
and autonomy and ensuring adequate financial
resources for its operation. I also urge all parties to
the conflict to fully contribute to the work of the three
components. This will be important in order to fulfil
the expectations of Colombian society as a whole for
truth, justice and reparations.
In recent weeks, Colombians have been appalled
by incidents of sexual violence committed by members
of the public security forces. These cases, which have
been strongly condemned by the President and the
Minister of Defence and are under investigation, are
a painful reminder of the horrific acts of sexual and
gender-based violence committed by all parties to
the conflict. I am also concerned about the increased
reports of gender-based violence in the context of the
pandemic. I encourage all parties to redouble measures
to improve protections and security for women,
including women former combatants, social leaders
and human rights defenders. Such measures include
the prompt implementation of the action plan of the
Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for Women
Leaders and Human Rights Defenders, which has been
delayed due to the pandemic. Efforts to address cases of
4/19

14/07/2020

domestic and gender-based violence within the former
territorial areas for training and reintegration are also
of the essence.
The Security Council’s voice and its active
engagement have provided essential support to the
cause of peace in Colombia. I sincerely hope that its
resolution 2532 (2020), following on from the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a global ceasefire, can inspire efforts
by all concerned to halt violence and facilitate the
pandemic response.
There is no justification for continuing to inflict
violence upon vulnerable Colombians who are already
under tremendous hardship. We have already seen how
even the temporary cessation of violence can bring
relief to suffering communities on the ground. Indeed,
all efforts right now should focus on addressing the facts
of the pandemic, protecting the most vulnerable and
ensuring that peacebuilding efforts continue charging
forward in the midst of this difficult storm. I encourage
Colombians to remain united as they navigate this crisis
and to keep their sights and actions set on their common
objectives of security, development and genuine and
lasting peace.
The President: I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Carabalí Rodallega.
Ms. Carabalí Rodallega (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to extend a greeting full of peace and goodwill to the
diplomatic representatives of the various Governments
participating in today’s important gathering, to the
members of the United Nations system and to all
those who have made our participation in this meeting
possible, especially the Permanent Representative of
Germany, who is presiding over this meeting.
I am Clemencia Carabalí Rodallega, from Buenos
Aires municipality, in Cauca, Colombia. I am a survivor
of an attack carried out by armed actors on 4 May 2019,
which also threatened the lives of 25 other men and
women leaders, all of whom are activists working for
the defence of the ethnic and territorial rights of our
communities in Colombia.
Since the Spanish invasion over 500 years ago,
which led to the enslavement, dispossession and
death of the peoples of our America, the ethnocide in
Colombia, we must say, has not stopped. Every day we
wake up to the news that a black or indigenous person
has been killed, that a member of the Indigenous Guard
20-18138

14/07/2020

Colombia

or the Cimarrona Guard has been threatened, that
a woman — a girl or an adult — has been raped, or
that the deaths of leaders and human rights defenders
persist. These situations have increased exponentially
due to the coronavirus disease in Colombia.
Since the signing of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace between the Colombian State and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo (FARC-EP), 686 leaders and human rights
defenders have been murdered in Colombia, 120 of
them this year alone. These include the assassination,
on 1 September 2019, of Ms. Karina García, candidate
for mayor of Suárez municipality, and five other
people who supported her in her electoral campaign
and in the exercise of politics; the assassination, on
29 October 2019, of Cristina Bautista, Governor of
the Nasa indigenous community, and four members
of the Indigenous Guard who were with her; the
dismemberment, this past 5 July, of Paola del Carmen
Mena Ortiz, a member of the Renacer Afro-Colombian
Community Council from Cañón del Micay.
These examples are all proof of how communities,
and women in particular, are enduring a profound
violation of our right to life as a consequence of the
persistence of the armed conflict in our territories, the
absence of the civil presence of the State, and the national
Government’s militaristically focused intervention as a
response, which has increased the threats to our survival
in our territories, as it has put us in the middle of the
crossfire and provoked confinement, displacement and
acts of violence against women and girls.
In many territories around the country, illegal and
organized armed groups have reconfigured and entered
territories previously controlled by the former FARCEP. Added to this situation are tensions generated
by multiple other conflicts, such as the presence
of economic elites with extractive interests, illegal
economies, including crops for illicit use, corruption
and illegal mining. Despite the peace agreement signed
in 2016, there is still no genuine, stable and lasting
peace for our people in Colombia. Those who suffer
most from the consequences of armed confrontation
are the civilian population, the ethnic communities, our
youth, girls and women.
As women who are committed to peacebuilding
and who resist all acts of violence in our territories
and against our bodies, we value the support of the

S/PV. 8749

international community, United Nations agencies and
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
We are especially grateful to Sweden and Norway
as defenders of women’s alliances and to the United
Nations multi-partner trust fund for sustaining peace
in Colombia, which, through its support to civil
society, has contributed to creating conditions for the
participation and empowerment of Afro-descendent
and indigenous women for the implementation of the
peace agreement and the exercise of our rights.
Considering Colombia’s important constitutional,
legal and public policy framework, we demand the
following from President Iván Duque Márquez.
First, the normative frameworks, particularly
the Comprehensive Programme of Safeguards for
Women Leaders and Human Rights Defenders, and the
comprehensive programmes on security and protection
measures for communities and organizations in the
territories must be fully implemented.
Secondly, there must be compliance with
the implementation of the peace agreement in a
comprehensive manner, including the entirety of the
peace agreement’s chapter on ethnic issues and its
provisions on gender.
Thirdly, the material and intellectual authors of
violations of human rights and ethnic and territorial
rights that persist in the country must be effectively
investigated and prosecuted as a measure to prevent the
impunity that covers these crimes.
Fourthly, progress must be made in the
implementation of collective protection measures with
differential gender and ethnic approaches, as well as
cases 004 and 005 of 2009 and case 092 of 2008, inter
alia, to reduce the enormous risks generated by practices
of dispossession. The structural transformation of rural
Colombia should integrate the regions, contribute to
eradicating poverty, promote equality and ensure the
full enjoyment of the rights of all citizens.
Fifthly, we call on the national Government to
guarantee our rights, protect our lives and make peace
a priority in the country’s public agenda.
As women who want peace and as the winner of
the National Award for the Defence of Human Rights in
Colombia, we ask the international community, first, to
encourage the armed actors who operate in our territories
to agree on a humanitarian agreement that will make it
possible to promote measures to guarantee life, respect

20-181385/19

S/PV.8749

Colombia

for human rights and international humanitarian law,
as well as our territorial autonomy and forms of selfgovernance in our communities; secondly, to protect our
communities and visit our territories, as the Security
Council did last year in the municipality of Caldono;
and thirdly, to assist our peacebuilding initiatives, not
only through technical and economic support, but also
with political commitment as guarantors in order to
help move the implementation of the peace agreement
forward in a sustained and comprehensive manner.
We are grateful for the visits to our territories by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Colombia, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu. Similarly,
we cordially invite him to meet with us, the Afrodescendent and indigenous peoples of Colombia, as
members of the Ethnic Commission for Peace and the
Defence of Territorial Rights, together with the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide, Mr. Adama Dieng, to consider the critical
situation of the survival of our communities in the midst
of the ethnic cleansing and systematic atrocity crimes
that are being perpetrated against us. This is urgent.
We also call on the international community
to promote the implementation of the provisions
of resolution 1325 (2000) and its related national
action plan in Colombia, in order to strengthen the
participation, protection and leadership of women and
youth in building and maintaining peace and integrating
a focus on gender and the rights of children and women
in our territories.
I thank you very much, Mr. President, for allowing
our voice be heard here.
I am because we are.
The President: I thank Ms. Carabalí Rodallega for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those Council members
who wish to make statements.
Mr. Roscoe (United Kingdom): Before I begin my
intervention, may I join you in offering our sincere
thanks to the Secretariat, the interpreters and the
security personnel who have made our presence here
today possible. It is good to demonstrate that, when
required, meetings at our Headquarters can be delivered.
I would like to begin by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, for his briefing and for the continued hard work
6/19

14/07/2020

of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
despite the difficulties posed by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). I also thank Ms. Clemencia Carabalí
Rodallega, our civil society briefer, for her powerful
and clear testimony.
We note the potential challenge the pandemic poses
to the important advances made in the implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in the last
three and a half years. We also note the efforts of
the parties to mitigate the impact of the pandemic. I
would address Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi
in stating that the United Kingdom welcomes the
Colombian Government’s continued commitment to
comprehensively delivering on the agreement, and
in particular the confirmation that the Colombian
Government does not intend to modify it. Although
some key challenges remain, significant progress has
been achieved since 2016.
Colombia’s transitional justice institutions have
adapted to the pandemic admirably, quickly moving
their work to the virtual space. We believe that victims
must be at the heart of peacebuilding. We are encouraged
by the progress those bodies have made in such a short
time. We hope they will continue to receive the resources
they need to carry out their valuable work. We note the
aspiration of the parties for the United Nations Mission
to assume a role in verifying the sanctions imposed by
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We would welcome
the Mission taking that forward.
The
implementation
of
the
development
programmes with a territorial focus also continues
to advance, with all of Colombia’s municipalities
now including those programmes in their planning
instruments. The involvement of local communities is
vital for a sustainable and inclusive peace. We would
encourage the Government to continue to ensure their
active and effective participation.
It is encouraging to see the mechanisms of the
peace agreement being used to help prevent and
respond to local COVID-19 outbreaks in and around
former territorial areas for training and reintegration,
including reinforcing their health-care capacity and
delivering food. That is all the more important given
the economic impact of the pandemic on former
combatants’ entrepreneurial projects. We hope the
Colombian Government will continue to work with
20-18138

14/07/2020

Colombia

its partners to assist those communities so that
reintegration remains on track.
However, it is with great concern that we note yet
again the high number of killings and threats against
former combatants, social leaders, human rights
defenders, women leaders and those from indigenous
and Afro-Colombian communities. Indeed, it was
striking to hear the description of this situation by both
the Special Representative and Ms. Carabalí Rodallega
as the greatest threat to the peace process. Urgent action
needs to be taken on this issue.

S/PV. 8749

Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the three African States members of the Security
Council, namely, the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa,
as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (A3+1).
We extend warm greetings to Her Excellency
Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, and we thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Carlos Ruiz
Massieu, and Ms. Clemencia Carabalí Rodallega for
their briefings.

We urge the Colombian Government, first, to
devote additional resources to responding to protection
requests and carrying out those requests effectively.
There must also be a prompt and cross-Government
response to the Ombudsman’s Office’s early warnings.
Preventing such attacks from happening in the first
place is crucial. We note that the National Commission
on Security Guarantees has not met fully since January.
We would encourage the Government and civil society
organizations to make full use of that body to develop a
public policy to combat the serious threat posed by the
perpetrators of those attacks.

Today’s meeting is taking place six days prior
to the celebration of a significant day in Colombia’s
history — Independence Day — which is an auspicious
occasion when Colombians everywhere are filled with
unbridled elation, reflect on the past, acknowledge the
present and contemplate a prosperous future for their
country. In Colombia’s journey towards a prosperous
future, the 2016 Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace is very integral.
We believe it is the only viable, sustainable solution to
resolving the conflict, which must be nationally led and
in the interests of the Colombian people.

More work is also needed on bringing the
perpetrators of such attacks to justice. We are pleased
to see that three territories now have working groups
to follow up on threats and attacks at a local level. We
hope that initiative will soon be expanded across the
country. In line with the Secretary-General’s ceasefire
call, as endorsed by the Security Council, and with
grave concern for the humanitarian impact of armed
violence, we encourage all conflict parties in Colombia
to create the conditions necessary for a cessation of
hostilities in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
wreaks havoc across the globe, challenging our ideas
of the world as we know it and testing the resilience
and tenacity of Governments and peoples, countries
emerging from difficult conflicts, such as Colombia,
are faced with additional challenges. The A3+1 remains
in solidarity with the Government and the people of
Colombia and commends the efforts by Colombians
in responding to the pandemic. We also encourage the
international community, including the United Nations
and the Security Council, to continue providing support.

Finally, progress remains slow on former
combatants’ access to land, which also affects their
access to housing. At a time when they are facing
potential economic hardship due to COVID-19,
developments on that front would help ensure the
sustainability of the reintegration process.

Since the conclusion of Colombia’s final peace
agreement, there have been setbacks as well as
progress. The A3+1 urges all parties to continue
advancing with the comprehensive implementation of
the 2016 agreement. It remains key for the security and
prosperity of all Colombians and, by extension, of the
region of Latin America and the Caribbean. We are
mindful that there will be impediments along the way.
But Colombians must remain enterprising and prudent,
as the circumstances demand the same spirit that saw
them move forward on a path to sustained peace in
order to overcome encumbrances and new challenges
with the same tenacity.

Colombia has faced many challenges on its journey
to peace, and the COVID-19 pandemic makes this a
key moment. The United Kingdom remains committed
to doing everything it can to support the Colombian
Government at this difficult time in building a lasting
peace that can be enjoyed by all.

20-181387/19

S/PV.8749

Colombia

The A3+1 acknowledges the progress highlighted
in the Secretary-General’s recent report (S/2020/603),
including the inclusion of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) in processes to formulate regional and
local development plans. However, it is of concern that
the COVID-19 pandemic is delaying progress in the
implementation of the peace agreement. Therefore, the
A3+1 urges all parties to address more assuredly the
lingering challenges outlined in the report. We take this
opportunity to highlight the following.
First, we are pained by the senseless killings
of former combatants, human rights defenders
and indigenous and Afro-Colombian leaders. The
persistent violence against these most vulnerable
groups, including women and children, is particularly
troubling. We encourage the National Commission on
Security Guarantees to regularly convene meetings
to address security issues. It is also imperative that
the authorities redouble their efforts, strengthen
institutions and enhance coordination to robustly
tackle this scourge of violent killings and ensure that
perpetrators are held accountable. Security protection
mechanisms to guarantee the safety and protection
of former FARC combatants and their families must
also be efficaciously applied, as they remain crucial
for the proper reintegration of former combatants into
Colombian society. In addition, the protection of those
particularly vulnerable groups will be an important
yardstick for the effectiveness of the security measures
in general. In that regard, we echo the call by the
Secretary-General for strengthening efforts towards
longer-term reintegration with benefits for all former
combatants, which will ultimately determine the longterm sustainability of peace in Colombia.
Similarly, we continue to call for the cessation of
hostilities of armed groups and organizations, which
continue to exacerbate the suffering of Colombians
through violence. We regret that the unilateral ceasefire
ended and urge full compliance with the recently adopted
resolution 2532 (2020), which is especially necessary
during this time as the country battles the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic. We further encourage the
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
to engage in a constructive and inclusive dialogue to
that end.
Secondly, the implementation of the development
programmes with territorial focus are crucial to the
peace process. We therefore urge the Agency for
8/19

14/07/2020

Reintegration and Normalization and the National
Reintegration Council to address delays in the
implementation of productive projects of the national
comprehensive programme for illicit crop substitution.
We also call for the resolution of the situation pertaining
to the allocation of lands and for the situation concerning
former combatants residing outside of the territorial
areas for training and reintegration to be addressed
urgently. Those residual issues are indispensable for the
collective reintegration of former FARC combatants,
especially since economic and housing projects are
vital safeguards for lives and livelihoods that facilitate
successful reintegration. While we acknowledge that
the spread of COVID-19 is an additional obstacle, it is
all the more reason for redoubling efforts to promote
the livelihoods and development of former combatants
to ensure sustainable integration and overall peace.
Thirdly, we welcome the advances within the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition, especially within the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace, particularly to ensure that
communities and victims of the conflict are prioritized
in the peace process. The adjustment in the working
modalities to adapting to current realities is testament
to the decision by the Government to continue
implementing the agreement despite the pandemic.
We therefore encourage the Colombian Government to
continue in that vein, and we emphasize the fundamental
importance of the reconciliation process, as many of
our countries today have benefited from the positive
aspects of such processes. Equally, we commend the
efforts of the Special Investigation Unit of the Attorney
General’s Office in bringing peace to victims, and urge
the authorities to expedite remaining cases. Likewise,
we appreciate the progress within the tripartite
mechanism on transition to legality of former FARC
combatants. We encourage continued cooperation to
resolve outstanding issues.
We are cognizant that Colombia is tasked with
implementing the final agreement under extreme and
difficult circumstances, but we believe that the same
spirit that Colombians displayed through the fever
of its history will aid them in moving forward. We
are therefore confident that the resolve and tenacity
exhibited by Colombian forebears in laying the solid
foundation for the country through hard work and
sacrifice will be renewed and demonstrated during
these challenging times. The A3+1 reaffirms its
support to the Government and the people of Colombia
20-18138

14/07/2020

Colombia

S/PV. 8749

in their pursuit of lasting peace, as well as to the United
Nations verification mechanism and the country team,
whose work in Colombia continues to be invaluable in
supporting the comprehensive implementation of the
final peace agreement. Colombia must stay the course
for its sustainable development.

allowed me to see first-hand the heartening way in which
Colombia welcomes those in need, providing human
dignity to everyone, including refugees and displaced
persons in their country. I have carried that touching
experience back with me, and I am happy today that we
are able to gather together to speak about it.

We extend our sincerest congratulations to Minister
Blum de Barberi and all the people of Colombia as
they celebrate the 210th anniversary of independence
next Monday.

We must reiterate the urgency of protecting
Colombia’s human rights defenders, social leaders,
former combatants and their families. Ending this
violence and holding those responsible accountable
must be the highest priority.

Mrs. Craft (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Ruiz Massieu for his update and the work of his
team, and I thank Director Carabalí Rodallega for
her briefing and courageous efforts to defend human
rights. As always, we welcome the presence of Foreign
Minister Blum de Barberi with us today.
I really want to start out by thanking the President,
Mr. Heusgen, for his persistence in making this meeting
happen today. I especially thank the people we do not
see but who were here — I cannot even imagine at what
hours of the morning — to be able to set this meeting up
for us and provide a detailed plan and logistics so that
we can all be here together in safety and security. My
thanks again. May we all take a page from your book on
persistence, Mr. President. It is amazing.
I commend the Government and the people of
Colombia, as well as the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia, for their efforts to continue
implementing the peace accord against the backdrop
of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The pandemic
has worsened an already complex humanitarian
situation and has negatively impacted the security
situation of women and girls. It has strained health
care and social services for many of Colombia’s most
vulnerable communities, including the 1.8 million
Venezuelan refugees and migrants in Colombia. In the
face of those challenges, we recognize President Duque
Márquez’s resolve to ensure that the pandemic does not
deter Colombia from its path towards prosperity and
security. The Trump Administration continues to stand
with the people of Colombia. On 1 July, we announced
the delivery of 200 ventilators donated by the United
States Agency for International Development — a
continuation of our long-standing partnership and an
addition to the nearly $13.6 million we have provided to
help Colombia respond to the pandemic.
But as I have said before, this is also a personal
commitment for me. My travels to Colombia last fall

The Secretary-General’s report (S/2020/603)
highlights the impact of the ongoing conflict-related
violence on rural, Afro-Colombian and indigenous
communities. Let me be clear: there can be zero
tolerance for human rights abuses, and reprisals and
attacks against civil society actors should be vigorously
investigated and prosecuted.
We must also condemn the activities of illegal
armed groups and criminal organizations, which have
used the pandemic to impose social control measures
and illegal checkpoints and to expand their territorial
control during this pandemic.
We welcome Colombia’s continued progress in
counter-narcotics efforts and reiterate our commitment
to continued partnership with the Duque Administration
to combat the destructive illegal drug trade. The United
States remains fully engaged with the Government
of Colombia to reduce coca cultivation and cocaine
production. By extending its State presence, Colombia
will foster integrated rural development and legitimate
economic activities.
As we have said before, it is vital to ensure
meaningful justice for victims and accountability for
the crimes committed over decades of conflict, whether
by the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia,
paramilitaries or State agents, including the military in
Colombia. A victim-centred transitional justice system
that promotes peace and the pursuit of truth and justice
is essential to Colombia’s peace process. Accountability
should be for all.
Colombia’s peace accord is a remarkable
achievement, but we are all conscious of the urgent
needs that must still be addressed. It is essential
to protect the lives of social leaders, human rights
defenders and former combatants, to sustain the

20-181389/19

S/PV.8749

Colombia

reintegration process and to address the need of the
conflict-affected communities.
The Trump Administration stands firmly with the
Government and the people of Colombia as we work
together to build a more prosperous future.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, I would like
to thank the Secretariat for making it possible for us
to return to this august building. As you suggested,
Mr. President, I will be brief.
First, I join other speakers in extending a warm
welcome to Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia. It is an honour to have
her here at this briefing. I would also like to thank
Ms. Clemencia Carabalí Rodallega for sharing her
inspiring contribution in supporting the implementation
of the Final Agreement to End the Armed Conflict and
Build a Stable and Lasting Peace on the ground. I would
also like to express Indonesia’s appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz
Massieu Aguirre and his team for today’s briefing and
for the work of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia.
While the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has
created an additional challenge and clearly affects
the implementation of the peace agreement, we are
encouraged by the commitment and efforts made by
all stakeholders in Colombia to adapt and to ensure
its continued implementation. Having said that, let me
make three brief points.
First, with regard to the progress and challenges
during the reporting period, we acknowledge several
positive steps that have been achieved, including by
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace in the area of legal
guarantees, as well as in the various programmes for
social and economic integration. However, it is also
crucially important to continue to focus on areas
where progress is still limited, such as the illicit crop
substitution programme, access to housing and the
allocation of land to former combatants. Indonesia
continues to call on all the relevant parties to redouble
their efforts in ensuring the effective implementation,
sustainability and success of those programmes.
Reintegration is key. We look forward to further progress
despite these unprecedented and difficult times.
Secondly, we remain deeply concerned about
the continuing violence against, and killings of,
human rights defenders, social leaders and former
10/19

14/07/2020

combatants. We therefore call for more progress in
the operationalization and implementation of related
programmes, such as the action plan of the Intersectoral
Commission on Security, Women Leaders and Human
Rights Defenders and the reintegration road map, so as
to enhance their safety. In that regard, we would like to
join the Secretary-General in welcoming the progress
made by the Special Investigations Unit of the Office of
the Attorney General in investigating those responsible
for crimes against social leaders, human rights
defenders and former combatants. However, we are also
concerned about the increasing presence and activities
of illegal armed groups and criminal organizations in
various regions. That must be stopped. We therefore
urge them to refrain from violence so as to enable relief
to be provided to communities already affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Lastly, we once again join the Secretary-General
in urging all actors to avoid reopening discussions on
possible modifications to the final peace agreement. We
believe that this is not the time for modification, which
could lead to renewed polarization and division among
Colombians. Instead, let us continue to build on the
positive momentum to ensure that the implementation
of the final peace agreement moves forward.
Like in many other place, the COVID-19 outbreak
will pose many challenges for Colombia in the coming
months. However, we are confident that the resilience
and courage of the people of Colombia to achieve peace,
security and development in their country will continue
to inspire the world. To that end, the Security Council
owes them its continuing support.
Mr. Michon (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Carlos Ruiz Massieu Aguirre, and
the civil society representative, Clemencia Carabalí
Rodallega, for their briefings. I would also like to
welcome the participation in this meeting of the
Colombian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. Claudia
Blum de Barberi.
I wish first to express France’s solidarity with
the Colombian Government and people in the fight
against the coronavirus disease. Unsurprisingly, the
pandemic also weighs heavily on the implementation
of the peace agreement, especially on the most
vulnerable communities. In that context, the Colombian
Government and the various stakeholders have made
serious efforts to ensure that the gains made in the
20-18138

14/07/2020

Colombia

implementation of the peace agreement are preserved.
They have our full support in that effort. As we well
know, the long-term success of the peace agreement
depends on the coherent implementation of all its parts.
We note that the reintegration efforts have continued
in recent months despite the pandemic and the impact
of the lockdown on productive projects. Efforts to
reintegrate ex-combatants into the health system are
particularly important in that context.
Unfortunately, however, killings of former
combatants, social leaders and human rights defenders
have also continued in recent months, as Ms. Carabalí
Rodallega poignantly described in her personal
testimony. Not only has the pandemic not decreased
the pace of the killings, but illegal armed groups and
criminal organizations have taken advantage of the
situation to expand their territorial control. We believe
that it is more necessary than ever to strengthen the
response in that regard, including in the areas of
protection and the prosecution of perpetrators of
such acts. In that regard, progress by the National
Commission on Security Guarantees is expected.
The Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Non-Repetition is a cornerstone of
the peace agreement, as we have regularly stressed in
the Security Council. We have noted with interest the
desire of the parties in Colombia to entrust the United
Nations with a role in verifying compliance with the
sanctions of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which
are one of the most innovative aspects of the peace
agreement and should therefore be strengthened and
legitimized to the maximum extent possible. We share
the hope that the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia will contribute to the legitimacy of this
transitional justice process.
The peace agreement has also provided original
solutions on many other points to address the root
causes of the conflict in Colombia, in particular
through the illicit crop substitution programme, which
should be strengthened, the principle of rural reform,
greater political participation and responses to ethnic
issues, including the situation of persons belonging to
the Afro-Colombian minority, and the issue of gender
equality. We support the efforts of the Government and
of all peace stakeholders to strengthen their work in
those areas.
We are also aware that the pandemic is not the only
challenge facing Colombia. The presence of internally

S/PV. 8749

displaced persons and refugees, particularly from
Venezuela, is a burden on Colombian society and its
economy. Those people must not be sidelined, especially
in terms of access to health services in the context of the
pandemic. We would like to pay tribute to Colombia’s
generosity in welcoming the migrants and refugees. We
also recall the support of the European Union, notably
as demonstrated at the Brussels conference of 26 May.
Finally, we hope that the Secretary-General’s call
for a global ceasefire, which the Council endorsed on
1 July in resolution 2532 (2020), will contribute to the
further entrenchment of peace in Colombia, wherever
armed groups continue to use violence. The peace
process in Colombia might be facing challenges, of
whose significance we are well aware, but France, in
its national capacity and as a member of the Security
Council and of the European Union, will continue to
lend its support to all those in Colombia who strive to
overcome those challenges every day.
Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I thank you, Mr. President, for gathering
us here today. I also thank all those who made this
meeting possible. I would also like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for his briefing, and Ms. Carabalí Rodallega
for her inspiring account of her efforts to defend the
human rights of the Afro-Colombian community in
Cauca. I welcome the participation at this meeting of
Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi.
We recognize the response of the Colombian
authorities to the coronavirus disease pandemic and are
encouraged by the assurances of the parties that they
will continue to implement the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace despite the current situation.
We remain very concerned by the persistent high
level of violence against human rights defenders,
social leaders and former combatants, including from
the indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities,
as Ms. Carabalí Rodallega described. By providing
support to local non-governmental organizations,
Belgium is contributing to the protection of human
rights defenders, including in Cauca, who are calling
for collective protection measures rather than a purely
individual approach. Additional tangible actions are
needed to end that violence, and we urge the National
Commission on Security Guarantees to convene on
a regular basis in order to dismantle illegal armed

20-1813811/19

S/PV.8749

Colombia

groups, in partnership with civil society. We await with
interest the roll-out of the comprehensive programme
for women social leaders and human rights defenders,
which is particularly urgent in the context of a marked
increase in sexual and gender-based violence resulting
from the lockdown measures.
We welcome the efforts to reintegrate former
combatants — for instance, through the approval
of productive projects and their coordination with
territorial development programmes. Comprehensive
rural reform, in particular with regard to access to land,
remains a major challenge for the sustainability of the
reintegration process.
The precarious situation of children in the conflict
is another source of concern for Belgium, which is
currently facilitating the Council’s findings on that
topic in response to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2020/603). The recruitment and use of children
by illegal armed groups and criminal organizations
remain a serious concern. We encourage the National
Reintegration Council to reactivate its working group
on children. In addition, we are alarmed at recent reports
of sexual abuse of minors by members of the Colombian
armed forces. We expect in-depth investigations into
those cases.
Belgium is paying particular attention to the
transitional justice process in Colombia and welcomes
the progress achieved by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, the Truth Commission and the Unit for the
Search for Persons deemed Missing in the Context of
and Due to the Armed Conflict. We underscore how
important it is for those institutions to be able to work
independently. We are in favour of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia playing a part in
monitoring adherence to the sanctions imposed by the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
In conclusion, the Council has endorsed the
Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire. We hope
that his call will also be heeded in Colombia. We urge
the armed groups there to refrain from engaging in any
form of violence and encourage all the parties to take
this opportunity to move towards peace.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the President and
the Secretariat for making this meeting at United
Nations Headquarters possible. I join others in warmly
welcoming Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Her Excellency Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, and
the Permanent Representative of Colombia to today’s
12/19

14/07/2020

meeting. I also thank Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu
and Ms. Clemencia Carabalí Rodallega for their
informative briefings. My delegation wishes to make
the following points.
First, we share the concern, as noted in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2020/603), about the
difficulties during the reporting period in implementing
the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and peace-related
programmes in Colombia, especially owing to the
adverse effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. We highly commend the efforts of the
Government, as well as the valuable assistance of the
United Nations and the international community, to
address the pandemic and overcome the difficult times.
We believe in, and look forward to, the continued efforts
by the Government of Colombia, the national political
parties and other stakeholders, the United Nations and
regional and international organizations to implement
all the necessary measures to combat the COVID-19
pandemic for the benefit of the population, especially
those living in the conflict-affected areas.
Secondly, we support the efforts of the Government
of Colombia and the Congress to discuss draft bills and
constitutional reform. The Government, Parliament and
all political parties bear the primary responsibility of
serving the people of the country. In that regard, we call
on the parties in Colombia to engage in constructive
dialogue on issues relating to the implementation of the
final peace agreement with a view to bringing about
reconciliation, solidarity and progress for all. While
efforts aimed at reintegration are highly appreciated, it is
also important to note that the process will be long-term
and will require patience, political will and practical
steps. We commend the efforts of the Government and
its partners to consider the specific needs and roles of
women, children, youth and ethnic groups.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the violence,
clashes and continued killing of social leaders, former
combatants and human rights defenders. We call on the
relevant parties to heed the call of the Secretary-General
for a global ceasefire. We hope that the Government
of Colombia and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
will continue to take the necessary measures and make
full use of the security guarantees mechanism provided
for in the final peace agreement to protect civilians in
conflict-affected areas, especially women and children.
In that regard, it is also important to redouble efforts to
ensure security and bring about development in conflict20-18138

14/07/2020

Colombia

affected communities through practical measures. It is
through the well-being of those communities that the
values of peace will be proven and maintained.
Fourthly, we take note of the progress on
reintegrating former combatants through individual and
collective socioeconomic development programmes and
projects, especially during the COVID-19 pandemic.
We look forward to the role to be played by the National
Reintegration Council, together with the United
Nations and regional and international organizations,
in actively supporting the financial mechanisms and
recommending appropriate initiatives to assist former
combatants in stabilizing their lives.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our support
to the Colombian people in their pursuit of peace and
stability. We are committed to working constructively
with the United Nations, regional and international
organizations and relevant stakeholders in contributing
to the peace process in the country.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): First of all, I would like to welcome
Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi and extend our good
wishes to the Colombian people. We thank Mr. Ruiz
Massieu for his presentation and Ms. Carabalí Rodallega
for sharing her experiences with us.
Regarding the impact of coronavirus disease in the
sister country of Colombia, we see in a positive light
the prevention measures adopted by the Government
and the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común
and encourage them to continue to move forward with
the implementation of the peace agreement despite the
challenges arising from the pandemic. We reiterate
the support of the Dominican Republic for the peace
process in Colombia and encourage all parties to
continue to cooperate in a constructive spirit until the
peace and national reconciliation to which Colombians
aspire are achieved.
The support and protection of women human rights
defenders and social leaders must remain a priority as
a path towards national reconciliation. Many of them
continue to be murdered or, like Ms. Carabalí Rodallega,
threatened. We remain concerned about violence against
former combatants and community leaders. We support
any action to ensure that human rights violations are
properly investigated and that perpetrators are brought
to justice. Therefore, we encourage the Government
to take advantage of existing bodies, mechanisms and
institutions, such as the Comprehensive Programme

S/PV. 8749

of Safeguards for Women Leaders and Human Rights
Defenders, to guarantee the security of those individuals
and their communities, particularly given the effects of
the pandemic on their security. We hope that efforts
will be made to implement the programme.
We believe that it is important that more resources
be allocated to protection services and justice for
the victims of gender-based violence, primarily for
Afro-descendent and indigenous communities, in
line with the peace agreement and resolution 2366
(2017). That includes promoting the meaningful
participation of those communities’ officials and of
women’s organizations. To meet the expectations of
the victims, it is important that all actors contribute
fully to the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Non-Repetition. The Dominican
Republic welcomes the progress made in the cases
initiated by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. We also
see as positive the possibility of adding the monitoring
of transitional justice sanctions to the mandate of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to be
renewed in September. It is important that all efforts be
victim-centred.
In addition, we would like to congratulate
the Government of Colombia, whose illicit crop
substitution programme has enabled approximately
99,000 families, of which 35,304 are led by women, to
move towards legal livelihoods. The fact that 96 per
cent of the families enrolled in the programme have
fulfilled their commitment to substitute the coca leaf
and move into the legal economy speaks to the success
of the Government’s initiative.
The Dominican Republic condemns all serious
violations against children, in particular sexual violence
and the recruitment and use of children, including
Venezuelan children. We commend Government for
its efforts to address that situation and ensure that the
release and reintegration of children be conducted in
line with international standards and with a community
and family approach, while always ensuring the best
interests of the child.
Finally, we are concerned that, since the short
ceasefire declared by the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional (ELN) expired, violence and clashes have
resumed in areas where the ELN and other illegal
armed groups have a presence. We stress that the ELN
must release all kidnapped persons and end all illegal
activities as a gesture of goodwill and a demonstration

20-1813813/19

S/PV.8749

Colombia

14/07/2020

of its determination for peace. We reiterate our strong
support for the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia and its efforts to build lasting peace.

that there can be no sustainable peace without the
participation of all key forces, including the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Like other Security Council members, we also
wish to thank the Secretariat and all those involved in
organizing this meeting. We thank Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, for his presentation of the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the Mission (S/2020/603) and for
his briefing on the implementation of the obligations
under the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace and the situation
in the country, which, like others, could not escape the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. We also
welcome the traditional participation in this meeting
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia,
Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi. We also listened with
great interest to the compelling assessments of
Ms. Clemencia Carabalí Rodallega.

We call on Bogotá to promptly engage in a
constructive dialogue with Havana and Oslo in order
to settle the issue of the status of negotiators currently
on the island. At the same time, it is imperative that the
existing guarantee protocols be observed. I recall that
Cuba hosts those individuals on its territory as part of
its international mediator obligations.

We expect that, as the epidemiological situation in
Colombia improves, Colombians will be catching up in
all the areas where progress either faltered or slowed
during the fight against COVID-19. As the SecretaryGeneral’s report rightly mentions, the country needs
to make immediate progress on all tracks — from
agricultural reforms to the political and socioeconomic
reintegration of former combatants and ensuring their
safety and security. The peace process in Colombia
should not be put on hold. It is important to revitalize
the dialogue among the various political parties
as quickly as possible in order to facilitate mutual
understanding on key issues relating to the country’s
future development and the reform process.
We welcome the Colombian Government’s
declared commitment to the obligations under the
peace agreement and fully share the SecretaryGeneral’s call to observe them. The Secretary-General
and the Security Council see the peace agreement in
the form in which it was signed over three years ago as
the basis for a settlement. It has made possible broad
international support for the Colombian peace process.
We hope that all political forces in the country will
demonstrate the necessary national ownership and
focus on its implementation.
We regret that the authorities of the country did not
observe the unilateral ceasefire initiatives proposed,
in line with the Secretary-General’s call. We recall
14/19

In conclusion, I would like to repeat that in
the Council we have frequently called Colombia a
showcase for effective international support. Today it
needs to justify to that trust by becoming a showcase of
national ownership.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia stands ready to continue to support the
Colombian peace process provided that the Government
is committed to fully implementing the final peace
agreement. We trust that the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia will continue to play a significant
role in ensuring the reintegration of former members of
armed groups into peaceful life and political activities.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): We would like to thank
the briefers and to welcome Ms. Claudia Blum de
Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Colombia, to this meeting.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has
highlighted the systemic vulnerabilities and inequalities
in implementing the Final Peace Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
We stress the importance of ensuring that the people of
Colombia have equal access to basic services, including
education and health care. We welcome the efforts
undertaken by the Government of Colombia to combat
the pandemic and to establish, together with the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común, a COVID-19
working group within the National Reintegration
Council. It is important that all armed groups cease
hostilities in Colombia during this critical period in
accordance with the resolution adopted regarding
COVID-19 (resolution 2532 (2020)).
Lasting peace cannot be achieved without justice.
The killings of former combatants, social leaders and
human rights defenders have continued during the
pandemic, underlining the urgency of immediate and
concrete action to address this problem. We welcome
20-18138

14/07/2020

Colombia

the progress made by the Special Investigation Unit
of the Office of the Attorney General in investigating
these crimes.
We are also deeply worried that the pandemic
has triggered an increase in sexual and genderbased violence, with an even worse effect on female
activists and social leaders. Violence against ethnic and
indigenous groups has also remained high during the
pandemic and continues to be a serious concern.
We encourage the Government of Colombia to make
a continuous and consistent effort to prevent attacks on
people defending fundamental rights. It is important
to investigate and prosecute those responsible for the
violations. The vicious cycle of violence and impunity
must stop. Victims and their families have a right to
justice, truth and reparations.
The special protection needs of witnesses and
victims, especially children, must be fully addressed
in the framework of transitional justice. In that regard,
the work of the Comprehensive System of Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition is essential. It
is important to guarantee the independent functioning
of all transitional justice mechanisms.
We condemn the continued recruitment and use
of children by illegal armed groups and criminal
organizations. The recruitment and use of children
must end.
We urge the Government of Colombia to regularly
convene the National Commission on Security
Guarantees. There is also a need for a more effective
response to the early warnings of the Ombudsman’s
Office through the intersectoral commission.
We reiterate the urgent need to move forward with
the implementation of the final peace agreement to
ensure progress despite the challenging circumstances.
Finally, we encourage all parties to continue
cooperation in a constructive spirit in order to achieve
lasting peace. We would like to express Estonia’s strong
support for the comprehensive implementation of the
final peace agreement.
Mr. Yao Shaojun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, like previous speakers, I would like to thank all
those at the Secretariat for providing services for this
meeting at a risk to themselves. China welcomes the
presence of Foreign Minister Claudia Blum de Barberi.
We thank Special Representative of the Secretary-

S/PV. 8749

General Carlos Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Clemencia
Carabalí Rodallega for their briefings.
The Colombian peace process established a standard
for resolving disputes through negotiated solutions
based on dialogue. In recent months, the Colombian
Government and other stakeholders have worked together
to overcome the difficulties posed by the coronavirus
disease and to continue promoting rural reform, poverty
reduction through development, the reintegration of
former combatants and institution-building, as well as
strengthening the judiciary. The follow-up mechanisms
to the peace agreement are functioning effectively and
peacebuilding is moving forward. China commends
and supports the positive efforts of the Colombian
Government in that regard.
As mentioned in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/603) and in the briefing by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Massieu, the
Final Peace Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace is facing challenges
in its implementation. China is of the view that, in order
to fully, effectively and sustainably implement the peace
agreement, the focus should be on the proper balance
and synergy between the two interdependent and
inseparable pillars, namely, development and security.
Security without the support of development is like a
river without a spring. Conversely, development without
the safeguard of security is like a castle in the air. The
development perspective should be stressed to promote
peace through development. Rural reform, development
programmes and poverty relief and eradication feature
prominently in the Colombian peace agreement. They
also represent a conclusive approach to tackling the
root causes of the conflict.
China encourages the Colombian Government
to overcome the difficulties, continue to implement
development programmes with a territorial focus, and
ramp up its efforts to promote balanced, inclusive and
sustainable development, especially by helping those
who have no land or insufficient land to gain access
to it.
China supports the efforts of the Colombian
Government to strengthen infrastructure development
in the territories most affected by the conflict,
including transport, irrigation and electricity, and to
provide essential public services, including education,
health care and housing, in order to narrow urban-rural
disparities and those between territories.

20-1813815/19

S/PV.8749

Colombia

Capacity-building is needed to ensure lasting
peace. In its preamble, the peace agreement states:
“Emphasizing that peace has come to be
universally described as a superior human right
and as a prerequisite for the exercising of all other
rights and duties incumbent upon individuals
and citizens”.
The Secretary-General’s report notes that the recent
fragile security situation in some parts of the country
and the ongoing activities of illegal armed groups and
criminal organizations have caused displacements.
There have been sporadic killings of former combatants
and community workers and the recruitment of child
soldiers continues.
China encourages all parties to the Colombian
issue to step up their efforts to combat such criminal
activities by making the best use of the mechanisms
established under the peace agreement, including
the National Commission on Security Guarantees, to
support the Government in further promoting illicit
crop substitution programmes and to curb the breeding
ground for crime.
China has been supporting the Colombian peace
process with concrete actions. The two countries have
had productive cooperation in areas such as agriculture,
poverty reduction, energy and mining. A number
of joint infrastructure projects, such as highways
and coal-fired power stations, are contributing to
Colombia’s accelerated development.
In order to ease the impact of the coronavirus
disease, the Chinese Government, from among its
provinces, cities and partner businesses, have donated
personal protective equipment and medical supplies,
including testing kits, face masks, goggles, gowns,
infrared thermometers and ventilators, to various
communities in Colombia.
China will continue to support Colombia in
achieving sustainable development and building lasting
peace. Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Massieu and the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia have been providing valuable assistance
to the country in implementing the peace agreement.
China commends its efforts. We look forward to the
Mission playing a greater role in Colombia’s peace and
stability, while respecting the country’s sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity. We hope
that, for their part, the Colombian Government and
16/19

14/07/2020

other stakeholders will genuinely shoulder their own
responsibilities and obligations, work for the greater
good of the country and its people and support the
good offices of the United Nations and its Verification
Mission so that the Colombian peace process can go
from strength to strength with a greater amount of
tangible deliverables.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Germany.
Let me first thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his
statement and, through him, the United Nations
team in Colombia for their work under very difficult
circumstances. I would also like to thank Ms. Carabalí
Rodallega for her very powerful statement and for
her courageous work as a defender of human rights
in her country. I very much appreciate the presence
of Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia, as she is of German descent. But,
more important, her participation is a powerful sign of
Colombia’s commitment to the peace process and to the
support of the Security Council, so I thank her again
for attending this meeting. I will make six brief points.
First, as many who spoke before have said, we are
deeply concerned about the death toll among human
rights defenders. We see that social leaders and human
rights defenders who support the Final Peace Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, indigenous and Afro-Colombian groups
and women human rights defenders continue to be at
particular risk. I was struck by the figure mentioned
by Ms. Carabalí Rodallega in her statement with regard
to the fact that since the beginning of this year, 160
social leaders and human rights defenders have been
murdered in Colombia — 160 individual fates. I just
want to repeat the names of some of those whom she
mentioned: Karina García, Cristina Bautista and Paola
del Carmen Mena Ortiz.
Secondly, we commend the Comprehensive System
of Truth, Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition for
continuing its honourable work. Let me recall that last
year, as the Council, we met with the representatives
of the Comprehensive System, and they are doing
laudable work. We look forward to a possible role of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia in
verifying compliance with the sanctions of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace.
20-18138

14/07/2020

Colombia

Thirdly, we welcome the renewed commitment of
Cuba to maintaining its status as a guarantor of the peace
agreement with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia,
Fourthly, the coronavirus disease has had a
particular impact on Colombia, as in other countries.
The security situation of women and girls has been
especially affected. We also see a marked increase in
sexual and gender-based violence and ongoing violence
against women leaders and female former combatants.
We are also appalled that the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2020/603) notes an increase of 150 per cent
in domestic violence.
My last point, which many have already raised but
which is key — and we saw that last year when we were
there — is the fact that it is crucial that the presence of
State institutions be extended to remote and conflictaffected areas and that there be a State presence to end
impunity and to create a secure and stable environment
for all Colombians.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia.
Ms. Blum de Barberi (Colombia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for all
the remarks and support of the members of the Security
Council. I thank Secretary-General António Guterres
and his Special Representative, Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
for the report presented (S/2020/603) and for the
commitment of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia. I also note the statement delivered by
Ms. Clemencia Carabalí Rodallega at this meeting.
Like all other countries, Colombia is facing
enormous challenges posed by the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. My Government has
implemented comprehensive measures to safeguard
public health, provide support for the most vulnerable,
preserve jobs and protect the welfare of our citizens.
Even in the context of this pandemic, we continue
to be firmly committed to implementing the terms of
the 2016 Final Agreement to End the Armed Conflict
and Build a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia. We
have not held back any areas of work that make up the
“Peace with legality” policy. Its implementation is a
priority of President Duque’s Government.

S/PV. 8749

The framework put in place by the agreement
continues to function. The National Reintegration
Council, as well as the various tripartite working groups,
have met periodically. The Commission for the Followup, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement held six meetings during the
reporting period.
Measures for COVID-19 prevention and risk
mitigation have been adopted by all agencies that
are implementing the “Peace with legality” policy.
The beneficiaries of these measures include former
combatants, victims and farmers committed to the
national programme for illicit crop substitution. In the
former 24 territorial areas for training and reintegration,
protocols are in place to prevent contagion and to
ensure referrals to health centres when necessary, in
close coordination with local authorities.
We also continue to work hard on the approval and
implementation of projects in the 170 municipalities most
affected by poverty and violence where development
programmes with a territorial focus are being carried
out. Stabilization efforts are funded mainly by the
national budget, complemented by other public and
private funding, and international cooperation.
Confident of results being achieved, international
support remains committed, In the regions where those
development programmes are being implemented,
during President Duque’s Administration 186 projects,
worth $423 million, have been funded by royalties
from oil and mining exploitation. Government agencies
also continue to support 100,000 families that have
expressed their willingness to abandon coca cultivation
and transit to legality.
In addition to the challenges posed by the
implementation of the agreement and the response to
the pandemic, Colombia continues to devote significant
resources to assist 1.8 million Venezuelan citizens who
have been forced to leave their country.
The success and sustainability of the reintegration
of former combatants is decisive in order to prevent
new cycles of violence. We continue to work with
determination to support productive projects. The
number of beneficiaries of the projects put in place
in the first half of this year increased by 71 per cent
as compared with the same period in 2019. Former
territorial areas for training and reintegration are
operating normally at the administrative level, and
the Government has guaranteed the provision of the

20-1813817/19

S/PV.8749

Colombia

necessary goods, services and supplies. The food
supply has been expanded, despite the fact that the
legal status of those areas long ago expired. Monthly
allowances continue to be awarded to ex-combatants
residing inside and outside the territorial areas for
training and reintegration.
Digital connectivity has been strengthened to
give access to education and technical assistance for
productive projects. The Agency for Reintegration and
Normalization has adopted virtual mechanisms for
attending to ex-combatants. In addition, the Agency
for Territorial Renovation has held virtual meetings
to reinforce the relationship between the central and
regional authorities and to align the institutional offer
with local planning instruments.
The safety and protection of former combatants,
human rights defenders, social leaders and communities
remain our greatest challenge. The Government has
articulated actions by 15 different agencies to strengthen
prevention, individual and collective protection, and
support for investigation and prosecution, all this with
a comprehensive concept of security in the context of
reintegration and a zero-tolerance policy against any
irregular conduct by State agents.
During the reporting period, we analysed in detail
the security threats present in the municipalities
of Ituango and Caldono. Our recommendations to
establish safer locations for residents in those areas
took time to be followed. Through close coordination
between national and local authorities, with the support
of the Mission, former combatants were relocated from
Ituango to the municipality of Mutatá. The protection
measures requested by female ex-combatants were
also approved.
As of 8 July, the Office of the Attorney General had
advanced in the investigation of 146 of the 294 crimes
registered since the signing of the agreement against
ex-combatants and their familites. That represents
progress in 49.7 per cent of the cases. So far there have
been 198 arrest warrants issued for homicide, attempted
murder and forced disappearance, including 51 for the
identified instigators, as well as 27 convictions against
those responsible for those crimes.
From the results of the investigation, it is quite
clear that the attacks are related to the complexity of
the environment and the threat posed by organized
armed groups involved in drug trafficking and illegal
mining. Those criminal actors include non-reintegrated
18/19

14/07/2020

members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia, the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN) terrorist group and other groups engaged in
transnational organized crime. We must not forget that
the exponential growth in illicit crops occurred between
2013 and 2017. We are now facing the toll for the silence
kept during that period, in the face of a situation that
created new threats to the most vulnerable communities,
social leaders and human rights defenders.
President Duque’s Government is strongly
committed to reducing illicit crops and promoting
crop-substitution options for communities. According
to the most recent report by the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime monitoring system, in 2019
Colombia achieved a 9 per cent reduction in the area
planted with coca. It was the second year with an area
decline. Colombia will not achieve the desired peace
if the illegal economy remains profitable. International
cooperation and co-responsibility are essential to
address this problem.
The implementation of the agreement is a twoway process and requires the effective commitment
of both the State and the FARC political party. My
Government reiterates the need for UNVIC to demand
FARC compliance with the provision of information
regarding drug-trafficking groups, the location of
missing persons, the delivery of assets that contribute
to reparations for victims, the recruitment of children
by dissident groups and the location of landmines,
among other things.
Our Government continues to provide support to
the transitional justice system, including funding for all
of its mechanisms. I must underline that there has not
been, nor will there be, any reduction in the budget. The
success of transitional justice depends on satisfying the
rights of the victims, particularly in terms of justice,
truth and reparation.
Within the framework of the agreement, a
variety of sanctions and restorative actions have been
defined according to the degree of collaboration and
acknowledgement by those subject to the jurisdiction.
The agreement also foresaw that sanctions compliance
should be verified in order to safeguard victims’ rights.
Our Government has initiated an inter-institutional
coordination process in close cooperation with the
Mission in order to design a system that will properly
address this need once the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace begins to deliver its sanctions.
20-18138

14/07/2020

S/PV. 8749

Colombia

Lastly, I should like to refer to the active unilateral
ceasefire announced by the ELN terrorist group on
29 March and its recent request for a bilateral ceasefire.
The Government strongly reiterates that this alleged
willingness for peace must result in concrete action by
the ELN, such as the release of all persons kidnapped
and the cessation of any criminal activity.
Let us be clear: the ELN failed to deliver on its March
announcement, and there is no sign that it will deliver
on this new announcement. The Colombian authorities
will not cease carrying out their constitutional mission
to protect our citizens from the terrorist and criminal
threat that the group poses.

The Government of President Iván Duque is firmly
committed to building peace with legality. The support
of the United Nations is vital in order to continue
advancing in the stabilization and development of the
territories most affected by violence and poverty. In the
midst of the current global crisis, we will not slacken
our efforts and will continue to devote all possible
resources to convey the results that our citizens deserve.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

20-1813819/19
