ll9

Resolutions adopte,1 on the reports of the Sixth Committee

5. Invites States to become parties to the existing
international conventions which relate to various aspects
of the problem of international terrorism;
6. Invites States to take all appropriate measures at
the national level with a view to the speedy and final
elimination of the problem, bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3 above;
7. Invites States to consider the subject-matter
urgently and submit observations to the SecretaryGeneral by 10 April 1973, including concrete proposals
for finding an effective solution to the problem;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit an
analytical study of the observations of States submitted
under paragraph 7 above to the ad hoe committee to
be established under paragraph 9;
9. Decides to establish an Ad Hoe Committee on
International Terrorism consisting of thirty-five
members to be appointed by the President of the General Assembly bearing in mind the principle of equitable
geographical representation;
10. Requests the Ad Hoe Committee to consider
the observations of States under paragraph 7 above and
submit its report with recommendations for possible
co-operation for the speedy elimination of the problem,
bearing in mind the provisions of paragraph 3, to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Ad Hoe Committee with the necessary facilities and
services;
l 2. Decides to include the item in the provisional
agenda of its twenty-eighth session.
2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972

7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Report of
the Committee on Relations with the Host Country".

2114th plenary meeting
18 December 1972
3034 (XXVII). Measures to prevent international
terrorism which endangers or takes innocent
human lives or jeopardizes fundamental
freedoms, and study of the underlying causes of those forms of terrorism and acts of
violence which lie in misery, frustration,
grievance and despair and which cause some
people to sacrifice human lives, including
their own, in an attempt to effect radical
ch.anges

The General Assembly,
Deeply perturbed over acts of international terrorism which are occurring with increasing frequency and
which take a toll of innocent human lives,
Recognizing the importance of international cooperation in devising measures effectively to prevent
their occurrence and of studying their underlying causes
with a view to finding just and peaceful solutions as
quickly as possible,
Recalling the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, 24
1. Expresses deep concern over increasing acts of
violence which endanger or take innocent human lives
or jeopardize fundamental freedoms;
2. Urges States to devote their immediate attention
to finding just and peaceful solutions to the underlying
causes which give rise to such acts of violence;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right to self-determination and independence of all peoples under colonial
and racist regimes and other forms of alien domination
and upholds the legitimacy of their struggle, in particular the struggle of national liberation movements, in
accordance with the purposes and principles of the
Charter and the relevant resolutions of the organs of
the United Nations;
4. Condemns the continuation of repressive and
terrorist acts by colonial, racist and alien regimes in
denying peoples their legitimate right to selfdetermination and independence and other human
rights and fundamental freedoms;
24 See resolution 2625

•

•

•

The President of the General Assembly subsequently informed the Secretary-Genera/2 5 that, 'in pursuance of paragraph 9 of the above resolution, he had appointed the members
of the Ad Hoe Committee on International Terrorism.
As a result, the Ad Hoe Committee will be composed of the
following Member States: ALGERfA, AUSTRIA, BARBADOS,
CANADA,
CONGO,
CZECHOSLOVAKIA,
DEMOCRATIC YEMEN,
FRANCE, GREECE, GUINEA, HAITI, HUNGARY, INDIA, !RAN, ITALY,
JAPAN, MAURITANIA, NICARAGUA, NIGERIA, PANAMA, SWEDEN,
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, TuNISIA, TuRKEY, UKRAINIAN SoVIET
SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS,
UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,
UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA, UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
URUGUAY, VENEZUELA, YEMEN,
YUGOSLAVIA, ZAIRE and
ZAMBIA.
25 A/8993.

(XXV), annex.

*

*

*

Other decisions
Review of the role of the International Court of Justice

(Item 90)

At its 2114th plenary meeting, on 18 December 1972, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee, 26 decided to include in the
provisional agenda of its twenty-eighth session the item entitled "Review of the
role of the International Court of Justice".
26 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda
item 90, document A/8967, para. 14.
