A /73/PV.75

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

75th plenary meeting

Monday, 15 April 2019, 11.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly will now consider the reports of the Fifth
Committee on agenda items 142, 148, 136 and 135.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Hicham Oussihamou of Morocco, to introduce in
one intervention the reports of the Fifth Committee
before the Assembly today.
Mr. Oussihamou (Morocco), Rapporteur of the
Fifth Committee: I have the honour to introduce to the
General Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee
containing recommendations on issues considered
during the first part of the resumed seventy-third
session of the General Assembly. The Fifth Committee
met from 11 March to 5 April and held six plenary
meetings and numerous informal consultations.
Let me now present the reports of the Fifth
Committee containing recommendations on issues that
require action by the General Assembly.
Under agenda item 142, entitled “Joint Inspection
Unit”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/73/826, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution that was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
(spoke in French)
Under agenda item 148, entitled “Financing of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in

document A/73/670/Add.1, the Committee recommends
to the General Assembly the adoption of a draft
resolution that was adopted by the Committee without
a vote.
Under agenda item 136, entitled“Programme budget
for the biennium 2018-2019”, in paragraph 9 of its report
contained in document A/73/686/Add.1, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of
a draft resolution on special subjects relating to the
programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019, which
was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Finally, on agenda item 135, entitled “Review
of the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, in paragraph 8 of
its report contained in document A/73/687/Add.1, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of a draft resolution entitled “Progress
towards an accountability system in the United
Nations Secretariat”. In paragraph 9 of the same report,
Committee recommends to the General Assembly
the adoption of a draft decision entitled “Questions
deferred for future consideration”, which was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
(spoke in Arabic)
I thank delegations for their cooperation during
this session and for the spirit of compromise that
enabled the Committee to finish its work on time. I
would also like to thank the Chair of the Committee,
Ambassador Gillian Bird, for her support, guidance
and encouragement. I look forward to working with her
and my colleagues in the Bureau to ensure the success

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-11001 (E)

*1911001*

A/73/PV.75

of the second part of the resumed session, which will
take place in May, and whose agenda includes issues
relating to the financing of peacekeeping operations.
I would like to express my thanks to the secretariat
of the Fifth Committee and all the interpreters,
translators and technicians who helped us throughout
our work for their continuous support.
In conclusion, I would like to express my gratitude
to my own family for understanding the nature of our
work in the Fifth Committee, which requires us to work
beyond normal hours, particularly on weekends. I also
want to take this opportunity to reiterate my words
of appreciation and respect to my Ambassador, His
Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale, for his continuing support
to me and the confidence he has had in me since I joined
the Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Morocco.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee and acknowledge
the extraordinary efforts of the Chair and the Bureau of
the Committee. I would also like to publicly recognize
the generosity of their families, who miss out on time
with their beloved fathers or mothers because of the
weekends and long periods they spend outside normal
working hours doing the work of the Fifth Committee.
The results can be seen in the quality of the Committee’s
work. I offer my gratitude to all of them.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
If there is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules
of procedure, I shall take it that the General Assembly
decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth Committee
that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Statements will
therefore be limited to explanations of position. I would
like to remind members that, under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, i.e., either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in
the Committee.”
2/15

15/04/2019

It is good to keep that agreement in mind.
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the
Fifth Committee, I would like to advise delegations
that we are going to proceed to take decisions in the
same manner as was done in the Committee, unless
the Secretariat is notified to the contrary in advance. I
therefore hope that we may proceed to adopt without a
vote those recommendations that were adopted without
a vote in the Fifth Committee.
Agenda item 142
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/826)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Joint Inspection Unit”. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t io n 73/ 2 87 ).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 142.
Agenda item 148 (continued)
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/670/Add.1)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Assembly will now take a decision on the draft
resolution, entitled “Construction of a new facility for
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, Arusha branch”. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
19-11001

15/04/2019

The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t io n 73/ 2 8 8).

A/73/PV.75

was

adopted

decision recommended by the Committee in paragraph
9 of the same report.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 148.

We will now take a decision on the draft resolution
and the draft decision, one by one.

Agenda item 136 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/686/Add.1)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 9 of its report.
We will now take a decision on the draft resolution,
entitled “Special subjects relating to the programme
budget for the biennium 2018-2019”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t io n 73/ 279 B).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Awad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
wishes to express reservations about the allocation of
financial resources to the United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism for the Syrian Arab Republic, as set forth
in document A/73/686/Add.1, part V. My country’s
position is based on the fact that the Mechanism
flagrantly violates the Charter of the United Nations,
in particular the principles of respect for national
sovereignty and of non-interference in the internal
affairs of Member States.
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 136.

The General Assembly will first turn to the draft
resolution, entitled “Progress towards an accountability
system in the United Nations Secretariat”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The
draft
resolution
(r e s ol u t io n 73/ 2 89).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
decision is entitled “Questions deferred for future
consideration”. The Fifth Committee adopted it without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 73/547 B).
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 135.
The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it for this meeting.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(j) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of
la Francophonie
Draft resolution (A/73/L.81)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Armenia to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.81.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/73/687/Add.1)

Ms. Simonyan (Armenia) (spoke in French): As
the representative of the Armenian presidency of the
seventeenth Francophonie Summit and coordinator of
the draft resolution entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the International Organization of
la Francophonie”, I have the honour to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.81.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
has before it a draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report and a draft

The Heads of State and Government of the countries
sharing the French language met at the seventeenth
Francophonie Summit from 11 to 12 October 2018 in

Agenda item 135 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations

19-110013/15

A/73/PV.75

Armenia’s capital, Yerevan. For two days the Yerevan
Summit debated the major global issues and the
contribution made by La Francophonie in addressing
them, particularly with regard to the question of
living together. This theme, the common thread of
the Summit, responds to the current contexts of the
French-speaking and international spaces as a fact to
be cultivated and preserved.
Living together is a fundamental value for the
francophone family that the Summit expanded on.
It brought together representatives of 88 States and
Governments of La Francophonie to celebrate the
common values of solidarity and cooperation in which
diversity is a source of peace, democracy and human
rights. The timing of this major gathering was truly
symbolic, as it was held at a time when Armenia
was inspired by the values of the civic and peaceful
movement of its velvet revolution, led by the Armenian
people in their desire to live together in a social
environment that is free, fair and supportive.
In what the Secretary-General described as a
fantastic example of the peaceful transfer of power,
Armenia’s young people and women have been at the
forefront of a non-violent democratic process in the
full exercise of their human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Our velvet revolution and the subsequent
political changes in Armenia have demonstrated the
Armenian people’s determined commitment to adopting
policies of inclusion, equal rights and opportunities,
development and peace at the national, regional and
international levels. As our Prime Minister, Mr. Nikol
Pashinyan, declared at the Francophonie Summit, the
values of peace, solidarity and integral humanism that
define the ideology of living together in the Frenchspeaking world constitute a common good and wealth
that we must preserve at all costs.
The Summit was also somewhat sadly symbolic
value because it was held at a time when the Frenchspeaking world — indeed, the whole world — was
mourning the death of Charles Aznavour. A great
man of culture and a legendary artist who transcended
time, generations and borders, Charles Aznavour was
a wonderful ambassador of La Francophonie and a
truly extraordinary ambassador of Armenia. In paying
tribute to him, the seventeenth Francophonie Summit
reaffirmed its common commitment to the humanist
values of art, culture and linguistic diversity.
4/15

15/04/2019

Against the disturbing global backdrop of the
sharp decline in the international commitment to
multilateralism and respect for human rights, the
message of living together, chosen as the main theme
of the seventeenth Summit, is more significant than
ever before, particularly at a time when we need greater
international cooperation and strengthened capacities
in that regard. The draft resolution submitted to the
General Assembly for adoption today reflects the close
links between the United Nations and the International
Organization of la Francophonie and follows on from
the previous resolution adopted two years ago in this
Hall (resolution 71/289) and facilitated by the delegation
of Madagascar.
The draft resolution presented today provides
an overview of key commitments reaffirmed at the
seventeenth Francophonie Summit, as set out in the
Yerevan Declaration and other documents adopted at
the Summit. The draft resolution notes the willingness
of Member States to strengthen their cooperation in
the promotion of peace and international security,
the defence of human rights and gender equality, the
fight against terrorism, the prevention of genocide and
crimes against humanity, sustainable development,
the promotion of education and training with a view
to bridging the digital divide, as well as in other areas
of cooperation. It welcomes the establishment of two
new regional offices in Tunis and Beirut, pursuant
to the relevant decisions adopted at the seventeenth
Francophonie Summit.
I would like to conclude my statement by thanking
all delegations for their constructive engagement in the
consultation process on the draft resolution. We are
very grateful for its substantial and consensus outcome.
Armenia welcomes the next summit of Heads of
State and Government of La Francophonie, to be held in
Tunis in 2020, which will mark the fiftieth anniversary
of the International Organization of la Francophonie.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor to speakers in explanation of position before
action is taken on the draft resolution, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Azerbaijan.
19-11001

15/04/2019

Mrs. Baghirova (Azerbaijan): We recognize
that cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is essential to the promotion
of the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
As a strong advocate of enhancing dialogue between
civilizations and cultures, Azerbaijan supports
and shares the main objectives of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, which has become an
important multilateral cooperation framework.
It is notable that today, a day when the Assembly
is adopting draft resolution A/73/L.81, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the International
Organization of la Francophonie, coincides with the end
of the Francophonie weeks that have been taking place
between 30 March and 15 April in Baku, the capital
of Azerbaijan, to celebrate the cultural creativity and
diversity of francophone countries. Among a series
of events held within this framework, the French
Embassy in Azerbaijan, in close cooperation with other
diplomatic missions of member and observer States
of the International Organization of la Francophonie,
launched the second edition of the Salon Universitaire
Francophone, bringing together participants from
various countries and European universities.
The Governments of Azerbaijan and France have
also been working together to further promote French
language, education and culture in Azerbaijan. In 2011
President Ilham Heydar oglu Aliyev of Azerbaijan and
the then-President of France, Nicolas Sarkozy, took
part in the ceremony laying the foundation stone for
the French Lycée in Baku. The Lycée opened in 2014,
operating on the basis of the French national curriculum
and with an enrolment of more than 400 students at the
pre-, elementary- and middle-school levels. Another
successful education project, initiated by the Presidents
of Azerbaijan and France in 2014, is the FrenchAzerbaijani University, which is administrated by the
Azerbaijan State Oil and Industry University and the
University of Strasbourg.
The delegation of Azerbaijan participated actively
in the negotiation process on this draft resolution, and
we are pleased that some of the proposals we put forward
during the informal consultations were accommodated
in its final text. At the same time, we have reservations
about the outcomes of the seventeenth Summit of la
Francophonie, held in Yerevan on 11 and 12 October
2018, including the documents referred to in the ninth
preambular paragraph and paragraph 45 of the draft

A/73/PV.75

resolution. I want to make the following points in
that regard.
In its resolution 73/129 of 12 December 2018,
entitled “Promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation”, the General
Assembly noted but did not welcome the adoption of
the Yerevan Declaration of the seventeenth Summit of
la Francophonie. No compelling reasons have emerged
since then to encourage the General Assembly to
upgrade its assessment of the Declaration in the draft
resolution before us. Moreover, the outcome documents
of the Summit, first make ambiguous and out-of-context
historical assertions. Secondly, they contain a one-sided
approach to some commitments under international law,
including international humanitarian law. Thirdly, they
refer to some international instruments in an unbalanced
manner. Fourthly, in the same way, they cite some
criminal offences while remaining silent on others, and
fifthly, they purport to create new duties deriving from
political considerations rather than obligations and
commitments set forth under international law.
During the informal consultations on the draft
resolution, some provisions derived from the Yerevan
Declaration were amended or reformulated. The
very fact that those changes were made confirms the
validity of the disagreements on the outcome document
of the Summit, which precludes consensus on them
in a wider context. In addition, the draft resolution’s
welcoming of the adoption of the Yerevan Declaration
is also an inconsistency, as not all General Assembly
resolutions on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations contain that expression with
regard to outcome documents adopted by other regional
organizations, and we cannot accept such selectivity.
Despite the fact that the delegation of Azerbaijan
consistently expressed this position during the informal
consultations, it has only partly been taken into account.
It is also highly regrettable that Armenia has
attempted to abuse the privilege of hosting the
seventeenth Summit of la Francophonie by misleading
the organization’s member States about the causes
and consequences of the war it has waged against
Azerbaijan. The sole purpose of such futile attempts
is to distort the factual situation, deny Armenia’s
responsibility for aggression and atrocious crimes
against Azerbaijan and its people, prolong the unlawful
occupation of territories belonging to my country and
prevent forcibly displaced Azerbaijanis from returning
to their homes and properties in those areas. We should

19-110015/15

A/73/PV.75

15/04/2019

note in particular that while the Summit was held under
the theme “Living together through shared humanistic
values”, the relevant United Nations bodies and other
international organizations have repeatedly expressed
their serious concern about the spirit of intolerance
prevailing in Armenia and the discriminatory policies
and practices that it pursues.

The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of position before
the voting.

Indeed, as is well known, unlike other countries of
the region and the States members of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, Armenia is uniquely
monoethnic, a shameful situation that it has achieved by
expelling all non-Armenians, including Azerbaijanis.
The process of expelling the 250,000 Azerbaijanis
who remained there in the late 1980s was accompanied
by the brutal killings of hundreds of innocent people.
While Azerbaijani historical and cultural heritage
has been consistently and purposefully eradicated
in Armenia, no one in Armenia has been brought to
justice for those acts.

I give the
the Secretariat.

Yerevan has applied the same policy and
practices to creating ethnically homogeneous areas
to the Nagorno Karabakh region and other occupied
territories of Azerbaijan, where the most serious crimes
of concern to the international community, such as war
crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and ethnic
cleansing, have been committed by Armenian forces
in the course of their aggression. Armenia’s denial of
responsibility for its wrongdoing, including through
apparent falsifications and distortions of the past and
present and the glorification of war crimes and their
perpetrators in defiance of human rights, is a direct
obstacle to lasting peace and genuine reconciliation and
a threat to regional security and stability.
Azerbaijan expects that the friendly member States
of the International Organization of la Francophonie,
guided by international law and the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and General Assembly,
will prevent any future provocations and actions by
Armenia within La Francophonie that are hostile to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan.
For the reasons I have just outlined, Azerbaijan
dissociates itself from the consensus on the ninth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 45 of the
draft resolution in relation to the Yerevan Declaration
and the Yerevan Call for Living Together, adopted at
the seventeenth Summit of la Francophonie.
6/15

The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.81, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Organization
of la Francophonie”.
floor

to

the

representative

of

Ms. De Miranda (Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management): I should
like to announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/73/L.81, the following countries have
also become sponsors of draft resolution A/73/L.81:
Comoros, Croatia, Cyprus, Finland, Greece, Guinea,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malta, Mauritius, Morocco, Poland,
Portugal, Samoa, Senegal, Serbia, Sweden, Thailand
and Togo.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.81?
D r a f t r e s o l u t i o n A / 73/ L . 81 w a s a d o p t e d
(r e s ol u t io n 73/ 29 0).
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give
the floor to the representative of the United States,
who wishes to speak in explanation of position on
the resolution just adopted. I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Ngoyi (United States of America): Resolution
73/290 represents a notable example of ways in
which the United Nations system works with other
international and regional organizations to promote
multilateral cooperation in areas of common interest.
We thank Armenia for its leadership in bringing the
text to fruition.
The United States welcomes the objectives of
the International Organization of la Francophonie in
support of dialogue between cultures and civilizations
and the establishment of closer ties among peoples. For
that reason, we are pleased at today’s adoption of the
resolution on cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of la Francophonie.
However, throughout the negotiations, we raised
19-11001

15/04/2019

concerns about the draft text with regard to three
important issues, which, regrettably, the final draft
did not address. I would like to take the opportunity to
address them now.
The United States remains a leader in the fight
to end impunity and continues to support justice and
accountability for international crimes, including war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. We
respect the decisions of the nations that have chosen
to join the International Criminal Court (ICC) and,
in turn, we expect that our decision not to join or
place our citizens under ICC jurisdiction will also be
respected. The United States therefore dissociates itself
from paragraph 19 of this resolution, which includes
a reference to the International Criminal Court that
the United States cannot support, as such language
does not distinguish sufficiently between parties
and non-parties to the Rome Statute or is otherwise
contrary to the United States position on the ICC.
In particular, we reiterate our continuing and longstanding principled objection to any assertion of ICC
jurisdiction over nationals of States that are not party
to the Rome Statute, including the United States and
Israel, in the absence of a Security Council referral or
the consent of those States.
Turning to the references in paragraph 43 of the
resolution to the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration (resolution 73/195, annex) and the
New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants, both
of those documents contain goals and objectives that are
inconsistent and incompatible with United States law
and policy and the interests of the American people. The
United States maintains the sovereign right to facilitate
or restrict access to its territory in accordance with its
national laws and policies and subject to its existing
international obligations. With regard to the New York
Declaration, we reiterate the understandings expressed
in our explanation of position, available as document
number A/71/415. With regard to the Global Compact
on Migration, we refer the Assembly to our national
statement circulated to Member States’ missions on
7 December 2018.
Finally, with respect to the reference to the eleventh
preambular paragraph and paragraphs 35, 37 and 42,
on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,
we refer the Assembly to our national statement
delivered in the Second Committee on 8 November
2018, which addresses our concerns with respect to the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Addis

A/73/PV.75

Ababa Action Agenda, the Paris Agreement and the
characterizations of trade, technology transfer and
inclusive economic growth.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the only speaker in explanation of position. We will now
hear statements following the adoption of the resolution.
Ms. Victoria (France) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the Assembly’s adoption today
of the biennial resolution (resolution 73/290) on
cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie (IOF).
France fully supports strengthened cooperation
between those two organizations, which share the
foundational values and principles of promoting peace,
democracy, human rights, sustainable development,
solidarity, tolerance, cultural and linguistic diversity,
and living together. This last topic was a major theme
at the most recent Summit of La Francophonie, held in
Yerevan in October 2018, and represents an essential
value for the broad francophone family, which grows
with each Summit and now numbers 88 States or
Governments as members or observers, reflecting the
growing interest in uniting and taking action around
these values.
The challenges that the United Nations faces in the
areas of peacekeeping, development, human rights and
in combating terrorism and climate change demand
that we mobilize all relevant partners. The IOF has for
many years been strongly committed to overcoming
those challenges alongside the United Nations, and the
cooperation between us is aimed at enabling us to tackle
these issues together through a political and pragmatic
approach and to strengthen our actions in order to
respond effectively. In this way, the two organizations
represent our demanding and effective multilateral
system, which we actively promote. Resolution 73/290
therefore recognizes and welcomes the growing
cooperation between the United Nations and the IOF
and their joint action, especially in the areas of human
rights, international criminal justice, peacekeeping
and multilingualism, to mention just a few, while
maintaining the individual prerogatives of both.
France would especially like to thank the
Armenian delegation for facilitating the work on
the draft resolution, and to commend its efforts and
patience throughout a long process. The negotiations
provided ample opportunity for dialogue and enabled
all interested delegations to express their views and

19-110017/15

A/73/PV.75

15/04/2019

see them reflected in the text. In that regard, I want to
express the gratitude of France to all the delegations that
participated actively in developing the draft resolution
and whose spirit of solidarity and consensus enabled
us to achieve this positive outcome. France sincerely
hopes that such cooperation will continue to flourish in
the future to the benefit of all.

to address all the major international issues. In the
face of challenges and emergencies, La Francophonie
aims to be a force for proposals and action. We make
a significant contribution to the vitality of multilateral
organizations and to multilingualism within them, as
well as to sustainable development, international peace
and security, gender equality and youth employment.

Ms. Galarneau (Canada) (spoke in French): For
Canada, multilateralism represents the best way to
build a more peaceful, prosperous and inclusive world.
As an ardent defender of the rules-based world order,
Canada strongly supports multilateral forums such as
the United Nations and the International Organization
of la Francophonie (IOF). We therefore welcome the
adoption today of resolution 73/290, on cooperation
between the two organizations, of which we were a
sponsor. We welcome the closer relationship developed
in the past few years between the United Nations and
the IOF and the range of areas in which they cooperate.
We hope that the Secretaries-General of both
organizations can breathe new life into the relationship
between them. The countries of La Francophonie are
important partners for Canada, and we will continue to
ensure that the needs and concerns of our partners are
heard and to promote their know-how and capacities in
both organizations.

I would like to express our gratitude to you,
Madam President, and to Secretary-General António
Guterres, for the importance that you both attach to
cooperation between our institutions. The resolution
was facilitated by the persistent efforts of the Armenian
delegation, which I would also like to thank. It
welcomes the numerous recent positive developments
in the cooperation between the United Nations and the
IOF, as reflected at the most recent Summit of Heads
of State and of Government, held on 11 and 12 October
2018 in Yerevan. Beyond the political action of La
Francophonie, the Summit underscored the vitality of
its cultural and economic diplomacy. I would also like
to commend the dedication and solidarity of the group
of francophone Ambassadors, who make an incredible
contribution to promoting the values and ideals of La
Francophonie within the United Nations, as well to
achieving our common goals.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the observer of the International Organization
of la Francophonie.
Mrs. Saidane (International Organization of la
Francophonie) (spoke in French): On behalf of the
International Organization of la Francophonie (IOF),
I would like to thank the members of the General
Assembly for their adoption of resolution 73/290,
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie. I am
speaking on behalf of Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo,
Secretary General of the International Organization
of la Francophonie, and the entire organization, which
consists of 88 member States and Governments from
five continents, 80 of which are States Members of the
United Nations.
We commend the especially productive cooperation
between our two organizations and the joint activities
that are implemented on a daily basis on the ground.
The resolution just adopted reflects the values that we
share, our shared understanding of the major challenges
to be overcome, and the IOF’s unfailing willingness
8/15

The resolution that the Assembly has just adopted
reflects the efforts of the United Nations and the IOF
to improve the coordination of their actions, which
can provide increasingly concrete solutions and
outcomes for the populations we all serve. I reaffirm
the unwavering determination of the International
Organization of la Francophonie to continue working to
strengthen our cooperation as we prepare to celebrate
its fiftieth anniversary in 2020.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now call
on those representatives who wish to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. I would like to remind members that
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes for the first statement and five minutes
for the second, and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Grigoryan (Armenia): At the outset, I would
like to take this opportunity once again to extend our
deep appreciation and gratitude to all delegations that
engaged constructively in the consultation process and
offered their valuable input for this very important
resolution (resolution 73/290) on cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Organization
19-11001

15/04/2019

of la Francophonie (IOF). We also thank the sponsors
of the draft resolution as well as the membership of
the United Nations for their adoption of the resolution
by consensus.
Throughout the two-month process of consultations
on the resolution, the delegation of Armenia, in its
capacity as Chair of the International Organization of
la Francophonie, conducted more than a dozen rounds
of informal consultations, with a view to arriving at a
comprehensive text that would take stock of the main
results of the seventeenth Summit of la Francophonie
and reflect the close links between the United Nations
and the IOF. We listened carefully to all the concerns
voiced by interested parties during the consultations
and took on board many constructive proposals. In that
regard, the remarks we heard from the representative
of Azerbaijan a few minutes ago are especially
regrettable. With regard to her arguments about the
outcome document of the seventeenth Summit of the
Heads of State and of Government of the member
States of the IOF, I want to emphasize that the concept
of living together, chosen as the main theme of the
seventeenth Summit, is based on the universal values
of peace, democracy, respect for human rights and
cultural diversity. It reflects the commitment of the 81
member States of the IOF to multilateralism and respect
for human rights, which is a fundamental value of the
francophone family.
We listened carefully to the representative of
Azerbaijan’s far-fetched accusations, and we are
sorry to see that the misuse of every agenda item, the
dissemination of disinformation, distortions of the facts
and efforts to simply spread lies about Armenia have
become working habits of the Azerbaijani delegation
and its representatives. Today Azerbaijan has once
again repeatedly engaged in the art of fabricating facts.
I would like to emphasize that, unlike Azerbaijan,
which has developed a tradition of abusing various
international forums, especially those held in
Azerbaijan, Armenia has never misused any event or
manipulated any international gathering to turn it into
an instrument of propaganda. Blaming its neighbour
for its inability to deliver on its own commitments,
both domestically and internationally, has become
established practice for that oil-rich but inefficiently
governed country. According to international human
rights organizations, the repressive environment in
Azerbaijan has reached unprecedented levels. Recent
data from Reporters Without Borders indicates that

A/73/PV.75

Azerbaijan has been waging a relentless war on
freedom of speech since 2014. Independent journalists
and bloggers are thrown into prison if they do not first
yield to harassment, beatings, blackmail or bribes.
Independent representatives of the media have been
stifled economically or closed by force.
We would like to conclude by referring to the
forthright verdict from Human Rights Watch that
Azerbaijan’s Government has continued to conduct a
vicious crackdown on critics and dissenting voices.
The space for independent activism, critical journalism
and opposition political activity has been virtually
extinguished by the arrests and convictions of many
activists, human rights defenders and journalists,
as well as by laws and regulations restricting the
activities of independent groups and their ability to
secure funding. We urge the delegation of Azerbaijan
to remain focused on the agenda of the Assembly and to
refrain from further hijacking this meeting.
Mrs. Baghirova (Azerbaijan): I apologize for being
compelled to take the floor in reply to the statement
just made by the representative of Armenia. Although
it was not surprising, and we have already heard all its
arguments before, we must still respond.
Our explanation of position with regard to resolution
73/290, which the Assembly has just adopted, contained
concrete facts and arguments about acts that Armenia
has committed against my Government, specifically
with regard to occupation, the violation of our
territorial integrity and the inviolability of our borders.
Instead of responding to those concrete arguments
and facts, which have been repeatedly recognized by
the international community, including the Security
Council and the General Assembly, the representative
of Armenia decided to devalue them and engage in
fabrications and accusations, practices that are routine
for that delegation.
We would like once again to emphasize that while
many of the delegations that spoke after the adoption
discussed the importance of cooperation between the
United Nations and the International Organization of
la Francophonie and of shared values, Armenia is still
incapable of implementing or living up to the values
shared by the international community and the United
Nations, including those related to the inviolability
of borders and the non-use of force or threat of force
against any country. We once again reiterate that fact
and the importance of ensuring that Armenia replies

19-110019/15

A/73/PV.75

to the appeals and calls of the international community
to respond to and comply with what has been set out
in Security Council resolutions, withdraw its military
forces from the occupied territories of the Republic of
Azerbaijan and allow the Azerbaijani communities that
have been expelled from those territories to return to
their places of origin and to be able to exercise their
rights to freedom of movement and to own property and
live in their homeland.
In talking about human rights and dialogue among
cultures, it is really very interesting to hear such words
from the representative of Armenia, which is, I believe,
the lone monoethnic country. The current conflict
between Armenia and Azerbaijan is the only one where
all Azerbaijanis living in the areas in question have
been expelled. The occupying Power did not allow
any Azerbaijani living in those territories to remain
present there.
I therefore urge the representative of Armenia to
comply with the international community’s calls and
appeals and with its obligations under the Security
Council resolutions before trying to accuse some
neighbouring nations and other countries of not
fulfilling their own obligations, because I believe that it
should start with itself. Otherwise, it sounds ridiculous.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of sub-item (j) of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 25 (continued)
(b) South-South cooperation for development
Draft resolution (A/73/L.80)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly has before it the outcome document of the
second High-level United Nations Conference on
South-South Cooperation, contained in document
A/73/L.80, which was adopted at the second
United Nations High-level Conference on SouthSouth Cooperation (BAPA+40) in Buenos Aires, on
22 March. I reiterate my deep gratitude to the Republic
of Argentina for the impeccable organization of the
Conference. I also thank Member and observer States
for their active participation and strong commitment to
multilateralism, and all relevant stakeholders for their
contributions to the process and to the Conference. The
Conference highlighted the increasing role of South10/15

15/04/2019

South cooperation and triangular cooperation. It also
demonstrated the solidarity of the global South, while
reflecting the fact that partnerships are key to achieving
the eradication of poverty and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. I would like to make three
brief points.
First, South-South cooperation and triangular
cooperation are powerful tools. They are both processes
and partnerships. They unite us in working together, in
respect and in mutual learning.
Secondly, we all have a role to play in implementing
the 2030 Agenda, for which the means take various
forms. We must explore all possible options. SouthSouth cooperation and triangular cooperation can
clearly accelerate our implementation of the 2030
Agenda, and we must take advantage of that.
Thirdly, and lastly, BAPA+40 and its outcome
document give us hope and optimism. The spirit of
multilateralism continues and prevails. Consensus can
be reached on issues of importance to everyone. The
heart of multilateralism is clearly cooperation. The text
of the Buenos Aires outcome document of the second
High-level United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation is the result of intense intergovernmental
negotiations, which took place in New York as well as
regional and international consultations and workshops
held in various parts of the world, from Paris to
Johannesburg, Brasilia, Beijing, Bangkok and Cairo.
I particularly want to thank Ambassadors
Audra Plepytė and Adonia Ayebare, Permanent
Representatives of Lithuania and Uganda, who led
the negotiation process. In the outcome document we
have a road map that will be a milestone in achieving
sustainable development. It reflects current trends in
South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation
and brings together future-oriented elements that will
be strengthened by South-South cooperation over
the long term, including the mechanism of voluntary
reporting, which will help to assess the impact of the
South-South and triangular cooperation programmes,
the increase in the number of relevant stakeholders, the
fight against corruption and illicit financial flows, the
role of the United Nations regional commissions and
the strengthening of the United Nations development
system in support of the promotion of South-South
cooperation and triangular cooperation in implementing
the 2030 Agenda.
19-11001

15/04/2019

It is clearly a strong document. Our efforts after its
adoption should be aimed at implementing it in practice.
I encourage Member States to continue strengthening
multilateralism and ensuring that the United Nations is
relevant to everyone.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution A/73/L.80, entitled “Buenos Aires outcome
document of the second High-level United Nations
Conference on South-South Cooperation”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/73/L.80?
D r a f t r e s o l u t i o n A / 73/ L . 8 0 w a s a d o p t e d
(r e s ol u t io n 73/ 291).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor for explanations of position after adoption, I
would like to remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin by expressing how
honoured my country was to have hosted the second
High-level Conference on South-South Cooperation, or
BAPA+40, as it is known. It was a sign of the international
community’s confidence in my country. After we held
the eleventh Ministerial Conference of the World Trade
Organization in 2017 and presided over the Group
of 20 in 2018, the Conference was an affirmation of
Argentina’s commitment to multilateralism as a means
of promoting our interests and building consensus,
while at the same time realizing its desire to strengthen
the global governance of development.
The BAPA+40 conference represented a great
opportunity to move forward in implementing the 2030
Agenda. With the adoption of the outcome document
(resolution 73/291, annex), which is characterized by
being action-oriented and having a clear vision for
the future, progress has been made in identifying the
tools that can enhance South-South and triangular
cooperation among our countries. Argentina is a firm
believer in the importance of that collaboration, and
South-South and triangular cooperation are therefore an
integral part of our foreign policy and one of our main
ways of connecting to the larger world. On the basis
of the outcome document that we have just adopted,
Argentina would like to highlight certain points that
could be addressed in the coming years within the
High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation by

A/73/PV.75

way of following up on and implementing the consensus
reached in Buenos Aires.
First, it is important to enhance regional and
interregional platforms as facilitators of cooperation
partnerships, centres of expertise and as a means to
identify inclusive development strategies. It would also
be timely to consider the possibility of launching a
process that is promoted by the countries of the South
that respects the principles and characteristics of this
type of cooperation, capable of bringing together
major initiatives for collecting information and data
on South-South cooperation and thereby jointly
creating a common mechanism for dialogue whereby
we can exchange and report on our experiences,
projects, initiatives and lessons learned on SouthSouth cooperation. Awareness of this activity would
also help enhance triangular cooperation and other
forms of association. For Argentina, the added value of
triangular cooperation results from its ability to provide
a stronger, more cross-cutting basis for development
partnerships, guided by requests from partner countries
and in line with national priorities.
Another point to emphasize is our desire for
BAPA+40 to contribute to integrating South-South
cooperation into the development policies of every
country concerned, thereby creating and consolidating
the capacities of the governmental institutions that
manage South-South cooperation. It will also be
important to step up the support provided by the United
Nations development system to Member States, both
in terms of strengthening institutions and facilitating
partnerships that can lead to specific cooperation
projects in areas that the countries identify as key to
their development.
My delegation would like to especially thank
you, Madam President, for your cooperation and
commitment to the Conference from the beginning
of your presidency, and even before your assumption
of your post. In this regard, I would also like to
congratulate the facilitators whom you appointed,
Ms. Audra Plepytė and Mr. Adonia Ayebare, the
Permanent Representatives of Lithuania and Uganda,
whose excellent and tireless work has enabled us to adopt
by consensus today resolution 73/291, on the outcome
document of the Conference. I also want to thank the
Group of 77 and China, represented throughout the
process by its Chairs, Egypt and the State of Palestine, as
well as the development partners, for their constructive
involvement in the negotiations and their contributions

19-1100111/15

A/73/PV.75

to a successful outcome in Buenos Aires. We believe
that the BAPA+40 outcome document represents an
optimistic outlook that considers the opportunities and
challenges of South-South and triangular cooperation
within the current global context. It is the product of
the joint, dedicated and sincere work that our countries
have carried out over the last two years, especially
during the negotiating process.
I would also like to express my country’s gratitude
to the Secretary-General and the entire Secretariat team,
without whose support the success of the Conference
would not have been possible. Special mention should
also be made of the work of Ms. Catherine Pollard,
Under-Secretary-General for General Assembly and
Conference Management, who ensured that everything
went according to the expected standards at all times.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge and thank
the United Nations Development Programme in
general and the United Nations Office for South-South
Cooperation in particular. The Director of the Office,
Mr. Jorge Chediek, and his team have been working
side by side with my country since the end of 2016,
when the General Assembly decided to convene the
Conference. His work on substantive aspects of SouthSouth cooperation, as well as on logistical issues, was
invaluable to the success of the Conference.
Mr. Gad (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Thank you,
Madam President, for giving my delegation the floor
to explain our position on the second High-level United
Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation, held
in Argentina from 20 to 22 March.
Egypt affirms its belief in the principles of SouthSouth cooperation, based on respect for national
sovereignty, national ownership, independence,
equality, non-conditionality, non-interference in the
internal affairs of States and the strengthening of
mutual benefit. We would also like to stress that the
South-South cooperation mechanism is designed to
complement North-South cooperation, not supplant
it. Consequently, Egypt supports the importance of
the independent, flexible and unique nature of SouthSouth cooperation mechanism, which takes various
forms that cannot necessarily be measured through
quantitative assessments, indicators, monitoring or
evaluation. The independent nature of the South-South
cooperation mechanism should not be subject to such
rigid frameworks, which could affect its underlying
principles and its ability to achieve the desired
development and objectives, while preserving it as a
12/15

15/04/2019

complementary framework to North-South cooperation
and not an alternative to it.
In that regard, we want to emphasize that such
quantitative measuring, indicators, monitoring and
evaluation should be applied based on the national
ownership of each State and on respect for the
sovereignty of States, and should maintain the right
of developing countries to share with the international
community their voluntary activities within the SouthSouth cooperation mechanism while preserving and
respecting the principles on which the cooperation
mechanism was founded, nearly four decades ago.
Finally, my delegation wants to stress the
importance of promoting the role of all States in
intergovernmental negotiations conducted at the United
Nations, particularly on important issues, so as to
facilitate all efforts needed to achieve consensus.
In conclusion, I would like to express my sincere
gratitude to the Permanent Representatives of Uganda
and Lithuania for facilitating the intergovernmental
consultations that led to the outcome document of the
Conference (resolution 73/291, annex). I also thank the
Chair of the Group of 77 and China for his efforts in
leading the Group and negotiating on its behalf, and the
United Nations Office on South-South Cooperation for
supporting our work, particularly in the phase leading
to the conclusion of the intergovernmental negotiations.
Lastly, I thank the people and the Government of
Argentina for their outstanding organization of the
Conference as well as their sincere hospitality.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation welcomes the adoption of
resolution 73/291, by which the General Assembly
endorses the outcome document of the second
High-level United Nations Conference on SouthSouth Cooperation.
We express our sincere congratulations to the
Republic of Argentina on its successful convening
of the Conference and for hosting us in March in
the beautiful city of Buenos Aires with the utmost
professionalism and dedication. We thank you,
Madam President, for your leadership, as well as the
Permanent Representatives of Lithuania and Uganda,
who co-facilitated the negotiations of the outcome
document wisely, efficiently and transparently and with
great dedication, enabling us to adopt by consensus
today resolution 73/291, which not only reflects the
commitment of the countries of the South to working
together to promote sustainable development, but also
19-11001

15/04/2019

reinforces the commitment of all States Members of
the United Nations to strengthening multilateralism,
South-South and triangular cooperation, and joint
efforts to move forward with greater impetus
towards the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
On behalf of the member countries of the Central
American Integration System, which are Belize, Costa
Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Honduras,
Nicaragua, Panama, and my own country, Guatemala,
we reaffirm our common position, expressed during
the Conference, recognizing the important contribution
made by regional cooperation, South-South cooperation
and triangular cooperation to fulfilling the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. We therefore reiterate
our call to the Member States and development partners
present here to join us in promoting cooperation
initiatives that foster deeper regional integration and
development, establish new alliances and partnerships
that help to eradicate poverty, reduce structural gaps and
strengthen international cooperation for development,
promote comprehensive criteria that go beyond per
capita gross domestic product, and take into account
the multidimensional nature of development and the
necessary balance between the economic, social and
environmental areas.
In conclusion, I would like to urge all of us to
continue making progress together in implementing
the agreements in the resolution adopted today, which
will undoubtedly enable us to advance towards the
sustainable development of our peoples.
Mr. Konstantinopolskiy (Russian Federation)
(spoke in Russian): First and foremost, I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for presenting the
outcome document of the recent High-level United
Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation
for adoption as resolution 73/291, and to join you in
thanking the Argentine Republic for its holding of the
Conference in Argentina.
We had hoped to take the floor before the adoption of
the resolution to draw attention to a technical inaccuracy
in the Russian version of the text of the Buenos Aires
outcome document. Paragraph 6 of the agreed text of
the document mentions that South-South cooperation
and triangular cooperation help to implement the
comprehensive vision of development contained in the
17 Sustainable Development Goals. However, there
is a mistake in the Russian version of this paragraph
because it refers to just one Sustainable Development

A/73/PV.75

Goal, Goal 17. In that regard, I would like to ask for the
Russian text to be corrected so that it accords with the
text adopted at the Buenos Aires conference.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We will certainly
review the translation into Russian of the outcome
document, and I would ask the Secretary to make sure
that is done.
Mr. Ayebare (Uganda): Thank you, Madam
President, for the trust you placed in us — in me and
my colleague Ambassador Audra Plepytė, who is not
here today — when you invited us to co-facilitate the
negotiations process. I also want to thank Argentina
for hosting the second High-level United Nations
Conference on South-South Cooperation (BAPA+40),
and for its hospitality and the facilities put at our disposal.
And I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
United Nations Office for South-South Cooperation for
its support in acting as the secretariat for the process.
I further thank all Member States for their cooperation
during the two months of negotiations. Had it not been
for their understanding and cooperation, we would not
have obtained the outcome document adopted today
(resolution 73/291, annex).
South-South and triangular cooperation are key
tools in the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, and we kept that in mind
as our guide during the negotiations. The outcome
document is very substantive and covers many areas
that will guide our work in South-South and triangular
cooperation in the coming years. I want to touch
on the principles of South-South cooperation that I
emphasized in the outcome document and that, together
with the future expansion of triangular cooperation, are
important for developing countries. The implementation
of the outcome document will be essential in the
coming weeks, months and years. As President of the
High-level Committee on South-South Cooperation,
I will play a key role in the implementation of the
outcome document, and I am counting on the support
of all Member States and the United Nations system
to that end. Uganda will host the third South-South
Conference next year, building on the momentum
of the BAPA+40 process to advance the South-South
cooperation agenda.
As we implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, we should make sure that the outcome
document is mainstreamed into the work of the United
Nations. In the outcome document Member States
made it very clear that the United Nations should act

19-1100113/15

A/73/PV.75

as one in its implementation, and clearly spelled out in
various paragraphs how each United Nations agency
and department will do that. In particular, the United
Nations Development Programme will play a key role
in hosting the Office for South-South Cooperation and
assuming the leadership of the implementation process.
The General Assembly will also have a role, as will
the Secretary-General and the Secretariat generally, in
implementing the document.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank the
Permanent Representative of Uganda and the Permanent
Representative of Lithuania for their outstanding work.
It is thanks to them that we are here now.
I now give the floor to the observer of the Observer
State of Palestine.
Mrs. Abushawesh (Palestine): I have the honour
to deliver this explanation of position on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China.
At the outset, Madam President, the Group would
like to express its appreciation for your continued
support and commitment to the development agenda,
particularly in the area of South-South cooperation,
and to commend the continued commitment of the
United Nations to strengthening that cooperation.
Forty years ago, the United Nations convened
the first United Nations Conference on Technical
Cooperation among Developing Countries, which led
to the adoption of the Buenos Aires Plan of Action for
Promoting and Implementing Technical Cooperation
among Developing Countries (BAPA), which in 2009
was followed by the first High-level United Nations
Conference on South-South Cooperation, convened in
Nairobi from 1 to 3 December of that year. Last month
a second Conference was convened in Buenos Aires to
mark BAPA’s fortieth anniversary with the adoption
of the Buenos Aires outcome document of the second
High-Level United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation (BAPA+40), now endorsed by the General
Assembly in resolution 73/291.
Our thanks also go to the two facilitators who
coordinated this important undertaking on behalf of the
President of the General Assembly. We are very grateful
to the Government and the people of Argentina for
hosting this important conference. We also acknowledge
the important role of the United Nations development
system, led by the Secretary-General, in further
supporting and promoting South-South cooperation in
line with its established principles. The Group believes
that BAPA+40 gives us the opportunity to reaffirm our
14/15

15/04/2019

strong support to the High-level Committee on SouthSouth Cooperation and to the United Nations Office
for South-South Cooperation, and we stress that the
Office is the articulator of South-South cooperation in
the United Nations system. The Group appreciates the
efforts of the countries of the South that have stepped
up their cooperation with the Office, which has also
enhanced its role and impact by scaling up through
increased financial, human and budgetary resources
with a view to helping to achieve the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
The Group engaged constructively in good faith
throughout the negotiation process on the outcome
document with a view to reaching a balanced and
substantive outcome document encompassing all the
relevant issues of South-South cooperation. In that
regard, the Group affirms that South-South cooperation
is a manifestation of solidarity among the peoples and
countries of the South and contributes to their national
well-being, national and collective self-reliance, and
attainment of the 2030 Agenda.
As laid out in the Nairobi outcome document
(resolution 64/222, annex) and reaffirmed in the Buenos
Aires outcome document, South-South cooperation and
its agenda must be set by the countries of the South
and must continue to be guided by the principles of
respect for national sovereignty, national ownership
and independence, equality, non-conditionality,
non-interference in domestic affairs and mutual benefit.
The Group emphasizes that South-South cooperation is
a complement to and not a substitute for North-South
cooperation, which remains the main channel for
international development cooperation.
South-South cooperation has evolved significantly
over the decades, and the South-South road map has
never been as important as it is today. The international
community is also well aware of the scale and impact
of South-South cooperation, as the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action
Agenda both welcome the increased contribution of
South-South cooperation to sustainable development
and the eradication of poverty in all its forms
and dimensions.
The Group would also like to emphasize the
importance of triangular cooperation. In recent years,
this component of cooperation has become more
relevant in the current architecture of international
cooperation, and it is called on to play an important
role in the 2030 Agenda. However, we should stress that
19-11001

15/04/2019

triangular cooperation must be undertaken at the request
of developing countries, in line with the principles of
South-South cooperation and led by the countries of
the South. We acknowledge the voluntary, participatory
and demand-driven nature of South-South cooperation,
born out of shared experiences and sympathies and
based on common objectives and solidarity. We further
recognize that South-South cooperation leads to more
diverse opportunities for development and should not
be equated with or measured or assessed as official
development assistance. We also emphasize that the
spread of South-South cooperation does not reduce the
commitment of developed countries to allocating 0.7 per
cent of their gross national income as their official
development assistance to developing countries.
The Group understands that the 2030 Agenda
represents a change in the development paradigm that
prevailed in previous decades, since it recognizes that
development is much more than economic growth. In
that sense, we recognize the multidimensional nature
of poverty, the social, economic and environmental
dimensions of domestic output, and the structural gaps
at all levels. We further recognize the importance of
ensuring that international development cooperation
includes a multidimensional perspective that transcends
the use of per capita income as the sole indicator
for measuring development, so that we can support
all developing countries in achieving sustainable
development while acknowledging both the serious
ongoing challenges and the new and emerging ones that
developing countries face.
The Group welcomes the Buenos Aires outcome
document of the second High-Level Conference on
South-South Cooperation as adopted in resolution
73/291, and looks forward to its effective implementation.
However, we regret that to some extent the text fell
below our expectations. Unfortunately, it singles out one
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) over the other 16,
despite the fact that they are equally important. In that
regard, we want to reiterate the importance of the full
and comprehensive implementation of the 2030 Agenda
and stress that this should not create a precedent for
future intergovernmental negotiation processes. We
also want to emphasize our regret about the inclusion
of certain references, particularly to development
effectiveness, which continues to be inapplicable
to South-South cooperation and is more related to
international development cooperation. While we agree
that knowledge, experience and success stories should
be shared among developing countries, we are concerned

A/73/PV.75

about and strongly oppose attempts to measure, monitor
or harmonize South-South cooperation with official
development assistance frameworks, which, rather than
creating more resources for development, will on the
contrary jeopardize the existing diversity of flows. We
stress that the South needs the international community
to maintain and increase its contributions with a focus
on achieving the 17 SDGs rather than demanding
measurements, monitoring and reporting.
With respect to trade, the Group presented
comprehensive and concrete proposals for strengthening
the language during the informal consultations.
Regrettably, they did not feature in the final version
of the outcome document. In that regard, the Group
recognizes the significant contribution of South-South
cooperation in the area of trade and its ability to promote
sustainable development among developing countries.
Accordingly, the relevant United Nations entities,
including the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, must continue to support developing
countries in deepening and enlarging South-South trade
integration, regional, subregional and interregional
economic integration and cooperation arrangements.
The Group remains deeply concerned about the increase
in unilateral and protectionist measures that will not
only undermine the multilateral trading system but will
also have a negative effect on the access of developing
countries’ exports to the global market.
In conclusion, in line with our constructive
approach and the need to ensure consensus in support of
this important Conference, the Group of 77 and China
agreed to the final version of the outcome document.
We look forward to working with all partners in a spirit
of mutual trust and good faith to implement the key
deliverables of the outcome document, bolster support
for the national and regional efforts being undertaken
by developing countries in the implementation of the
2030 Agenda, and achieve the overarching goal of the
eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 25?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

19-1100115/15
