S/PV.9075

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9075th meeting

Thursday, 23 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Ms. Saha

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2022/485)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-39857 (E)
*2239857*

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan
I now give the floor to Mr. Alakbarov.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Expression of sympathy in connection with the
earthquake in Afghanistan
The President: On behalf of the members of the
Security Council, I would like to convey my condolences
to the people of Afghanistan and to the families of the
victims following the powerful earthquake that struck
Afghanistan yesterday near the city of Khost. More
than 1,000 have been reported killed or injured, and
that tragic toll might continue to rise. We reiterate our
sympathy and solidarity and wish a speedy recovery to
those injured.
May I ask those present to now rise and observe a
minute of silence for those who have lost their lives?
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2022/485)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Pakistan and Uzbekistan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Ramiz Alakbarov, Deputy Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator for Afghanistan; Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator; Ms. Yalda Hakim,
journalist; and Ms. Yalda Royan, consultant for
VOICE Amplified.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/485, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
2/33

23/06/2022

Mr. Alakbarov: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to
address the Security Council today from Kabul as
Officer-in-Charge of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). As you noted just
now, yesterday a deadly earthquake struck Afghanistan
in the early hours of the morning as people were
sleeping. So far, as of the latest information we have
received, nearly 800 people have been confirmed killed
and more than 1,400 injured, many of them seriously,
with several thousand homes destroyed or damaged.
Search-and-rescue operations are ongoing, and it is
expected that the number of casualties will further
increase over the coming days, along with the number
of affected communities.
In the aftermath of the tremor, humanitarian actors
mobilized an immediate response alongside their
counterparts from the de facto authorities, where the
Ministry of Defense is leading efforts by dispatching
ambulances and providing medical equipment, trauma
kits, medicine, mobile health teams and emergency
supplies, including tents, blankets, plastic sheeting and
food assistance. Inter-agency assessment teams were
deployed within hours and remain in place helping to
coordinate and inform the humanitarian response.
In the next 48 hours, I will be visiting the affected
areas to meet with families and first-hand responders,
including women’s civil society groups that are working
to ensure that assistance reaches women and girls, and
to support overall relief efforts. I will be there with the
heads of United Nations agencies, delivering aid directly
to the communities and the people of Afghanistan,
working together on the ground with relief agencies
from civil society and the international community.
Their efforts are impressive and commendable, and I
appreciate their heroic efforts over the past two days.
I am sure everyone will agree that yesterday’s
earthquake was yet another tragic reminder of the
myriad dangers facing the Afghan people at this
time. My heartfelt condolences go out to the people of
Afghanistan, to the families and to loved ones of those
who have lost their lives, and we wish those injured a
speedy recovery.
My briefing today, however, will focus on other
emergencies the population in Afghanistan face today.
Wednesday’s earthquake is but one such emergency. I
will focus on four — the human rights situation, the
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

economic crisis, the ongoing humanitarian emergency
and the need for continued engagement with the de
facto authorities.
Let me begin with the human rights situation in
Afghanistan, which remains precarious. Despite the
adoption of a general amnesty and repeated assurances
by the de facto authorities that it is being respected,
UNAMA continues to receive credible allegations of
killings, ill-treatment and other violations targeting
individuals associated with the former Government
of Afghanistan. UNAMA also continues to receive
credible allegations of violations committed by the
de facto authorities against individuals accused of
affiliation with the armed opposition and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province (ISILKP). More needs to be done by the de facto authorities
to prevent such violations and demonstrate that, when
they are perpetrated, violators are held accountable.
The de facto authorities have increasingly restricted
the exercise of basic human rights, such as by restricting
the freedom of peaceful assembly and the freedom of
opinion and expression, quelling dissent and restricting
civic space in the country. Those restrictions continue
to be aimed particularly at the rights and freedoms of
Afghan women and girls, limiting their involvement in
social, political and economic life.
Those restrictions include, most prominently, the
ban on secondary schooling for girls and the decision
to impose a face covering on women, on which Council
members have been briefed in detail by former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Deborah
Lyons. The costs to the economy of those policies
are immense. The psychosocial costs of being denied
education, for example, are incalculable. And women
are collectively being written out of society in a way
that is unique in the world.
Nevertheless, let me assure the Security Council
that UNAMA will remain a vocal and visible voice
for safeguarding the human rights of the people of
Afghanistan, specifically those of women and girls.
The second issue I want to address is the ongoing
economic crisis, which is perhaps the single-most
important issue in Afghanistan as a potential driver
of conflict and misery. The Afghan economy has
contracted an estimated 30 to 40 per cent since August;
output and incomes have been reduced by 20 to 30 per
cent, while there has been a 50 per cent decline in
the number of households receiving remittances. It is

S/PV.9075

possible that unemployment could reach 40 per cent
this year — up from 13 per cent in 2021 — and some
projections indicate that poverty rates may climb as
high as 97 per cent by the end of 2022.
Even more alarming, 82 per cent of households are
now in debt, while the deteriorating economy offers
few chances to climb out of that debt. And the coping
resources that helped many families get through the
winter’s difficulties and the humanitarian emergency
that we experienced have unfortunately been depleted.
If the economy is not able to recover and grow
meaningfully and sustainably, then the Afghan people
will face repeated humanitarian crises, potentially
spurring mass migration and making the conditions
ripe for radicalization and renewed armed conflict.
At the same time, Afghanistan remains highly
vulnerable to future climate change and geopolitical
shocks. That comes on top of the extreme poverty
and backwardness of Afghanistan’s rural areas, where
productivity is low and education and health services
are often non-existent.
Let me be very clear: those problems are at the
root of all the socioeconomic and political dilemmas
that Afghanistan has faced in the past and is facing
now. They need to be addressed if different social and
economic outcomes are to be achieved in Afghanistan at
any given time. Currently, Afghanistan is experiencing
its second drought in successive years, while other
emerging threats — such as floods and disease
outbreaks, outbreaks of locusts and livestock diseases
that impact agrarian communities and households, and
natural disasters such as the recent earthquake — are
deepening and aggravating pre-existing vulnerabilities.
No matter what we do, Afghan rural areas must be
given priority attention, with a focus on agricultural and
food systems to prevent cycles of hunger. We must help
drive a grass-roots economic recovery that is anchored
in the creation of value chains and developing linkages
between farmers and food producers and local markets.
That in turn will reduce child labour, improve health
outcomes and create an enabling environment for social
development and change.
It will also pave the way for substitution agriculture
to replace poppy cultivation, allowing us to capitalize
on the de facto authority’s recent ban on poppy and
narcotic cultivation. While doing so, we need to
continue to provide adequate attention to the clearance
of the widely unexploded ordnance of war. That bottom-

22-398573/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

up approach to economic recovery is shared by the de
facto authorities and would help the most vulnerable.
Already, the United Nations country team is
implementing such approaches in rural areas through
an area-based approach that channels technical and
financial support directly to local communities and
small enterprises, restores local small infrastructure
and provides basic income support for some of the most
vulnerable in society. However, funding for those types
of economic recovery activities is minimal so far. We
need the Council’s support.
When I and other members of the United Nations
senior leadership team travel around the country
and meet with vulnerable affected communities, the
conversations leave a lasting impression. Let me share
some of them.
Afghan families are humbled and grateful for
the lifeline provided by the humanitarian response.
However, during the most recent episode of what
has been a 40-year-long crisis, they all have three
straightforward, simple and sincere requests. They want
jobs to generate more income, just so they can afford to
survive on their own. They want a longer-term response
to the economic crisis — one that provides them with a
dignified means of survival and an opportunity to look
to the future. They want safety, not only for themselves
but also for those they love, and that safety means
freedom of movement for all, including both men and
women on an equal basis. Achieving that, even in the
current operational environment, should be within
our reach.
With the generous support of donors, the
humanitarian community has coordinated a response
of unprecedented proportions to Afghanistan’s massive
humanitarian crisis. Between January and the end
of April, humanitarian partners reached 20 million
people with at least one form of assistance, including
19.3 million vulnerable people with humanitarian
needs and nearly 250,000 cross-border returnees,
75,000 refugees and 95,000 people affected by floods
and other weather-related events.
More than 19 million people were provided with
food; more than 5 million people were provided with
health care; 3 million children under 5 years of age and
pregnant and lactating women were treated for acute
malnutrition; 3.3 million people received access to
clean water, sanitation and hygiene; 374,000 children
were provided with education support; 1.2 million
4/33

23/06/2022

people were provided with shelter and household items;
and more than 2 million people were provided with
protection services — all thanks to the international
community’s generous assistance.
Despite those achievements, the humanitarian
crisis persists and will require sustained support over
the course of 2022 and 2023. The Council will receive
a more detailed briefing on the humanitarian needs
later this morning from Mr. Martin Griffiths, UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
Fourthly, despite all the difficulties I have
sincerely described, we continue to firmly believe
that a strategy of continued engagement and dialogue
remains the only way forward for the sake of the people
of Afghanistan, as well as for the sake of regional and
international security.
In that regard, let me welcome the appointment by
the Secretary-General of Ambassador Markus Potzel of
Germany as the new Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Political Affairs, who will be
responsible for leading the political engagement strategy.
A few elements are important to note.
The Taliban continues to hold power almost
exclusively. The emergence and persistence of an
armed opposition is in large part due to political
exclusion. The overall security environment is
becoming increasingly unpredictable. We are seeing
clashes between the forces of the de facto authorities
and the armed political opposition, specifically in
Panjshir and Baghlan provinces, as well as improvised
explosive device attacks and targeted assassinations
against de facto authority targets by both armed
political opposition and ISIL-KP. Armed opposition
attacks against the de facto authorities doubled in May
compared to April. The number of ISIL-KP attacks
has generally decreased over that same period, but
their geographic scope has widened to 11 provinces
where previously it was six. We cannot exclude the
possibility of increased instability if people’s rights are
denied and if they do not see themselves included in
the Government. Our strategy for the months ahead is
aimed at promoting political consultation and inclusion
in the longer term. In the meantime, we are engaging
with the de facto authorities to increase predictability
in our relationships.
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

Even as the international community and the Taliban
remain far apart on questions of human, women’s and
political rights, there are some areas in which we can
cooperate better to improve the lives of Afghans and
make progress on issues of common concern, such
as countering narcotics and taking action on mines.
Establishing an agenda of common interests will help to
build confidence and reduce misunderstandings. That
includes types of assistance that directly support basic
human needs while moving beyond pure humanitarian
delivery, where possible, into sustaining livelihoods for
ordinary Afghans, in accordance with the basic human
needs I described earlier in the briefing.
The challenges ahead are significant and will
require greater patience, but we must endure. It is the
least that the Afghan people deserve. We continue to
believe that it is the only way forward for their benefit
and that of the international community.
The President: I thank Mr. Alakbarov for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Griffiths.
Mr. Griffiths: Let me join the members of the
Council in expressing our condolences to the families
of those killed and otherwise affected by the terrible
earthquake yesterday.
I would like to start by firmly associating myself
with Mr. Alakbarov’s remarks throughout his useful
and unusually broad statement, in which he very clearly
outlined the problems that he and his team and the
people of Afghanistan are facing. Tellingly, I think, he
ended on the issue of the need to engage with the de
facto authorities on behalf of the people of Afghanistan,
as increasingly difficult as that is becoming. Hats off to
Mr. Alakbarov.
As Council members may know, I myself have
visited Afghanistan twice — unlike Mr. Alakbarov,
who lives there — to engage with the Taliban, who
are the de facto authorities, and to see somewhat firsthand what Afghans must contend with every day. We
shall no doubt hear more on that from our civil-society
briefers. During my most recent visit, in March, I was
reminded of how desperate the situation remains. I had
the terrible experience, like many others, of visiting a
hospital in Kabul — not even beyond the city — and
seeing malnourished babies there, a sight I will not
easily forget, despite a lifetime of those experiences. It
was truly shocking.

S/PV.9075

As Mr. Alakbarov said, Afghanistan’s worst
drought in almost 30 years has affected three quarters
of its provinces, in addition to everything else the
country is enduring, meaning that crop production
is expected to be below average this harvest. Most
rural households, as we have said on other occasions,
will use up their food stocks dangerously early this
lean season. The economy — again as we heard from
Mr. Alakbarov — continues to be the primary driver of
humanitarian need across Afghanistan. There are now
25 million people living in poverty, which is more than
double the number in 2011. Poverty is the most common
reason people are leaving their homes in Afghanistan,
while a lack of money is the main barrier to accessing
basic services such as health care and electricity. Today,
the average household spends almost three quarters of
its income on food alone. Scaling up the humanitarian
response has allowed us to avoid a potential famine,
and Mr. Alakbarov provided figures on the people
who have been reached in the early months of this
year, throughout the winter. But we cannot afford to
be complacent. Today 19 million people, or nearly
half of the population, are food insecure, including
6.6 million — a staggering number — at emergency
levels. That is the highest number in any country in the
world at risk of famine-like conditions.
I am speaking here partly in the context of the
humanitarian exception approved by the Council
through its adoption of resolution 2615 (2021) in
December. Its swift implementation by Member
States has been critical to ensuring that humanitarian
partners continue to be able to receive funds and do
their work. Currently, there are more than 190 partners
in Afghanistan delivering essential aid to millions of
people every day. The scale-up in the humanitarian
response, as we have heard, has so far reached 20 million
people across all of the country’s 401 districts, although
clearly with varying impact depending on the district.
That operation spans all sectors, with food assistance
being the largest, but also including shelter, health,
nutrition and more.
A key component of the Council’s humanitarian
exception was enabling the transfer and payment of funds
and economic resources necessary for humanitarian
programming to public entities such as line ministries,
health facilities and the State-owned electrical
company. I can assure the Council that the humanitarian
groups delivering assistance in Afghanistan take the
monitoring of programming and financial transfers

22-398575/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

very seriously. A formal risk mitigation unit is being
established under the leadership of Mr. Alakbarov
himself, and a task force composed of organizations
working in the country has already been set up. Most
importantly, humanitarian organizations have doubled
up on their own systems to minimize the risk of funds
and economic resources being misappropriated or
diverted. Those measures include spot checks, data
reconciliation, photo verification, project completion
certificates and complaint mechanisms, procedures
that have been culled from experiences around the
world but are particularly relevant, important and
essential in Afghanistan today. Prior to transactions,
agencies ensure that partners and suppliers are first
checked against the Security Council consolidated
list. Despite the difficult circumstances, agencies
and partners try to ensure during distributions that
community representatives and department officials
are also present to monitor delivery. Of course, as
elsewhere, United Nations operations also involve postdistribution monitoring. But while we are reaching
record numbers of people, as Mr. Alakbarov reminded
us, we still have a large hill to climb. In that regard, I
would like to mention three areas where I believe there
are impediments.
First, the formal banking system continues to
block transfers due to excessive de-risking, which
affects payment channels and causes breakdowns in
supply chains. Around half of the organizations that
responded to the latest monitoring survey of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reported
difficulties in transferring funds into Afghanistan,
so while that does remain a problem, the number of
respondent organizations that said the same in October
last year was 87 per cent. The direction is therefore
positive, but the figures remain alarming. While the
situation has improved, challenges persist. Around
80 per cent of organizations are facing delays in
transferring funds, with two thirds reporting that their
international banks continue to deny transfers, which is
exactly what the exception was designed to avoid. More
than 60 per cent of organizations cite a lack of available
cash in-country as a programmatic impediment.
Despite efforts to create a temporary solution to
the failure of the banking system through a so-called
humanitarian exchange facility, we have seen limited
progress, owing to resistance, I should point out, by the
de facto authorities. That issue is not going to fix itself.
Under the leadership of the United Nations Assistance
6/33

23/06/2022

Mission in Afghanistan, the underlying causes of the
breakdown in the formal banking system will have to
be addressed, and I know the Mission is doing all it
can to do so. In the interim, we need that humanitarian
exchange facility to allow for transfers that we see are
still challenged.
The second impediment we face relates to
engagement between humanitarian organizations and
the Taliban de facto authorities. I am sorry to say that
national and local authorities increasingly seek to play a
role in the selection of beneficiaries and in channelling
assistance to people on their own priority lists, while
citing an almost universal level of need, exactly
contrary to the promises made to my colleagues and me
last September, as you, Mr. President, may remember.
We are also seeing more demands by the Taliban
for data and information on budget and staffing
contracts. That is a long-standing issue that has
plagued our relationship with the Taliban for decades.
Non-governmental organizations in particular face
continued difficulties as they try to hire Afghan women
in certain functions.
There are more instances of interference today than
in previous months, most of which are resolved through
engagement with the relevant de facto authorities.
However, for every issue that is resolved another one
emerges, sometimes in the same location with the
same departments. There is now a much more palpable
frustration felt by aid organizations, local communities
and local authorities. Interference cause delays in
programming and, of course, compromises access
to services.
The situation of women and girls remains as
concerning now as it has ever been — in fact, it is
worse than ever before. The de facto authorities’
announcement in March that secondary schools for
girls above sixth grade would not reopen affects
more than 1 million secondary schoolgirls. That
announcement was a major mistake at the time, and it
has not been rescinded. In no other country in the world
has a Government banned girls from secondary school.
That is once again contrary to the letter and spirit of the
promises made to the United Nations last year.
Other announcements, including the requirement
that women travel beyond certain distances with a
mahram, or chaperone, further constrain women’s
ability to access life-saving assistance and services.
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.9075

The third impediment is that we simply do not
have enough funding. Mr. Alakbarov was absolutely
right about the generosity of Member States; it has
been considerable. However, only one third of the
resources needed for this year’s humanitarian response
plan has been received. We have a response plan of
just over $4 billion. We have received just one third
of that amount, despite pledges made of approximately
$2.4 billion at our launch in March. Many of those
pledges have not yet turned into receipts.

personal and deep connection with the nation. It is the
country of my birth.

We face a $3 billion funding gap for the last six
months of this year. Afghanistan is perhaps in as
difficult a situation in terms of the gap between funding
and needs as any other place in the world. I would
like to associate myself again with the points made
by Mr. Alakbarov. Now is not the time for hesitancy.
Without intervention, funding, humanitarian assistance
and basic services, it will be another winter of discontent,
trouble and pain for the people of Afghanistan. Drought
will persist — we almost forget it — wreaking havoc
on crop yields and putting those 6.6 million people in
Afghanistan on the edge of a catastrophe.

The Taliban takeover of Afghanistan on 15 August
of last year has had a transformative impact on the
position of women and girls in Afghan society. Today
marks 279 days since the Taliban banned teenage girls
from school. As Mr. Griffiths said, Afghanistan is
now the only country in the world in which girls are
prevented from receiving an education. They are locked
out of their classrooms simply because of their gender.
Millions of Afghan girls across Afghanistan have been
forced to contemplate a life without formal education.

I think that the aid community in Afghanistan has
managed extraordinary achievements over the past
year, but much more needs to be done, and much more
can be done. We must address economic and banking
paralysis. We must expand and improve the footprint
around the country. We must continue advocacy for
rights but, more important, this is also where we,
including Mr. Alakbarov, need to engage. Now is not
the time to disengage and leave Afghanistan to a bleak
future. Now is the time to redouble our engagement.
The President: I thank Mr. Griffiths for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Hakim.
Ms. Hakim: My name is Yalda Hakim, and I am
an international correspondent and news presenter for
BBC News.
As mentioned, in the past 48 hours there have
been terrible developments in Afghanistan, with an
earthquake in the east of the country leaving more than
1,000 dead. Hundreds of families are now homeless,
and there are reports of people remaining trapped under
the rubble.
I come here today not as an activist or policymaker
but as a journalist and someone who has been reporting
from Afghanistan for the past 15 years. I also come
here today as a daughter of Afghanistan. I have a very

In my remarks today, I hope to share some of
my observations drawn from my years of reporting
on Afghanistan. I also hope I can convey to Security
Council members some of the questions that I am often
asked by Afghans, in particular the women and girls
in Afghanistan, whose voices are especially important
and should be heard at this time.

During my last trip to the country, in December
2021, I met 42-year-old Sheila Dost. Sheila held back
tears as she told me about the day she took her two young
children to demonstrate against Taliban restrictions on
girls’ education. She relayed to me how she explained
to her children that they were risking their lives for the
protest, but it was a price worth paying if it helped to
allow girls to return to school.
Before the Taliban seized control of Afghanistan,
the mother of three was a teacher at a secondary school.
However, like millions of other female Government
workers, Sheila was ordered to stop going to work. She
now sits at home alongside her 12-year-old daughter,
Mursal, who has been banned from attending school.
Sheila was a teenager when the Taliban first came
to power, in the 1990s. She told me she does not want
her daughter to be deprived of an education like she
was. Sheila had many hopes for her daughter’s future
and the future of her students. But now she feels that
she has betrayed them for telling them to have big
dreams. Like so many other brave and fearless Afghan
women, this mother of three refuses to be erased
from public life and told me that she will continue to
fight for the rights of Afghan girls and women. It is
that steely determination that gives Sheila and a small
band of women the courage to take to the streets in
protest — risking beatings, arrest or worse.

22-398577/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

Some of the female protesters to whom I spoke told
me they have had Taliban gunmen point weapons at
them, pepper spray them and shout insults. We have
also been hearing disturbing reports that the Taliban
abduct and detain some of those female protesters.
Those disappearances have sent a chill across Afghan
civil society. One activist, Marzia, told me that she
continues to receive threatening phone calls and now
has no choice but to move from safe house to safe house.
Just last month, on 9 May, the Taliban ordered
women and older girls to cover their faces when in public
and avoid being outside at all, if possible. Punishments
for violating the decree would be inflicted on their male
family members. On 21 May, the Taliban’s Ministry of
Vice and Virtue ordered all women television presenters
to cover their faces, stating that the decision was final
and there was no room for discussion.
In response, male presenters at several major news
channels in Afghanistan wore masks on air in solidarity.
Female news presenter Farida Sial of TOLOnews told
me that every day she feels a part of her is dying and
that the face covering makes it extremely difficult to
speak and breathe, especially for long periods of time
while broadcasting.
As a journalist, I have covered many war zones. I
have seen bloodshed and devastation caused by conflict.
However, what is happening in Afghanistan is unique.
To the best of my knowledge, it is the most sudden and
significant change in the position of women to take
place anywhere in the world in modern history. One
year ago, Afghan girls went to school. Afghan women
held positions of authority across Afghan society. All of
that has been overturned with exceptional speed.
I am also here in my capacity as a philanthropist.
In 2018 the Yalda Hakim Foundation was created,
and for three years it sponsored scholarships for
female students from the American University of
Afghanistan and supported them in obtaining highereducation placements at Georgetown University in
Qatar and Oxford University in the United Kingdom.
Today the Foundation is continuing its work to create
education opportunities for Afghans, especially girls
and women. The demand for education among young
Afghans is greater than ever, but the opportunities are
dramatically fewer. The questions that I hear most often
among young Afghans are whether the international
community can provide more scholarships and how
8/33

23/06/2022

technology can be leveraged to help Afghans who
cannot leave Afghanistan continue to learn.
I am grateful to the Government of Albania for
the invitation to speak to the Council today. However,
the question that Afghan women and girls repeatedly
ask me is if they have been forgotten. Does the outside
world care, and if so, what is it prepared to do? I would
ask Council members to ask themselves the answer
they would give to the women and girls of Afghanistan
when they ask that question.
The President: I thank Ms. Hakim for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Royan.
Ms. Royan: I am Yalda Royan from Afghanistan,
the worst country in the world for women and the only
country where girls are not allowed to attend school
beyond the sixth grade. I represent VOICE Amplified,
a feminist humanitarian organization, and I am a
founding member of the Afghan Women’s Advocacy
Group. My heart goes out to my people hit by the
earthquake. The pain of digging countless graves in a
single day is devastating, and we have experienced it
time and again.
Afghan women warned the Security Council that
the Taliban’s promises to respect women’s rights were
not true. We were ignored, and now we are paying the
price for the negligence of the international community,
including everyone sitting at this table. Under the
Taliban, we have witnessed vicious atrocities, severe
hunger and the suppression of our human rights.
Activists and journalists have stopped working out
of fear of retaliation. Since August, the Taliban has
announced more than 30 policies that are systematically
eliminating women from public life and only some of
which have made international headlines.
The Taliban is imposing these edicts through
intimidation and violence. For example, in April the
Taliban brutally tortured and killed a young midwife
in Mazar-e-Sharif. They amputated her legs, stabbed
her and then shot her 12 times, simply because she was
a woman and a Hazara. Yet Afghan women continue
to risk their lives by protesting against such violations
of their human rights by the Taliban. In addition,
hundreds of former officials, as well as anyone who
resists Taliban rule, have been targeted, tortured or
killed. Tajiks in Panjshir, Baghlan and Takhar provinces
continue to be arbitrarily arrested, killed, tortured or
forcibly displaced. On 10 June, the Taliban arrested
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

Zamanuddin, a Tajik student, along with his brother in
Panjshir. They asked him to reveal the location of the
National Resistance Front’s bases. When he said he did
not know, the Taliban cut off one of his ears, shot him in
the eye and threw him off a mountain. His brother was
also killed. That is the true face of the Taliban, which is
seeking the Council’s recognition and legitimacy.
According to local activists, since March the
Kuchis have attacked Hazaras in Behsud, Malistan,
Jaghori, and Shaikh Ali districts, killing and injuring
31 people, burning hundreds of houses and taking 21
people hostage, most of whom are still missing. Hazaras
were also targeted in eight explosions in April alone,
but the condemnation by the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) of those attacks did
not even mention the victims’ ethnicity. I want to ask
the Security Council how many more Hazaras must
be killed for such acts to be recognized as the crime
of genocide, committed with the intent to destroy a
national, ethnic, racial or religious group, in whole or
in part?
In March, the Council took an important step by
renewing UNAMA’s mandate and putting human
rights, including women’s rights, at the core of its
work. While UNAMA has failed us in the past, it now
has the potential to meaningfully serve the Afghan
people going forward. Despite the numerous shocking
violations such as those I just detailed, UNAMA had not
publicly reported those atrocities until now, and neither
has it published a regular report on the protection
of civilians since July 2021. In many instances, the
numbers reported by UNAMA have also been vastly
undercounted. For instance, UNAMA reported 10
extrajudicial killings of individuals accused of being
affiliated with the National Resistance Front in the past
five months, while local communities found 10 bodies
in the Panjshir river in the past two weeks alone. In
addition, many Afghans believe that UNAMA has
lacked neutrality when engaging with the Taliban and
has whitewashed their atrocities. UNAMA should
resume regular public reporting immediately, and all
its reports should provide accurate and unvarnished
information that reflects the realities on the ground.
The Taliban has not formed a representative
Government. We have so far seen no meaningful
efforts by UNAMA to facilitate inclusive dialogue
among Afghans, the Taliban, and the international
community in order to put Afghanistan on a path to
peace. In order to be credible in the eyes of Afghans,

S/PV.9075

UNAMA must prioritize the participation of diverse
Afghan women’s organizations and politicians in exile.
It cannot engage solely with Taliban leaders in any
future political process.
UNAMA is required to coordinate the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to all Afghans without
discrimination. Yet the Taliban continues to manipulate
aid distribution, making sure that its followers and
regions benefit from that assistance while households
headed by women and marginalized ethnic groups do
not, and demonstrating why respect for human rights
cannot be secondary to humanitarian concerns. If
UNAMA fails to ensure accountability for the diversion
of aid, the Taliban will continue its terrorist activities
using United Nations aid.
While the members of Afghan civil society are
deeply sceptical of the Council’s commitment, they
wanted me to tell Council members that condemning the
Taliban’s abuses will be successful only if it is backed
up by action. It is not just the security and stability of
Afghanistan that is at stake. Under the Taliban, our
country is once again fast becoming the shelter of
choice for terrorist groups whose activities will not stop
at our borders. I therefore call on the Council to take the
following action.
It should end all exemptions for sanctioned Taliban
leaders if there is no progress on women’s rights in
60 days. On Monday, the Council renewed travel
exemptions for 13 Taliban leaders. While removing
Said Ahmed Shahidkhel and Abdul Baqi Basir Awal
Shah and shortening the duration of the exemption
were positive steps, Afghan civil society was deeply
disappointed that the Security Council did not send a
stronger message to the Taliban that their utter disregard
for human rights closes the door on any further dialogue.
If Afghan women cannot move freely, why should the
Taliban be able to? Over the next 60 days, the Council
should closely monitor the Taliban’s policies on women’s
rights. If it fails to reverse its recent policies violating
women’s rights, including the ban on girls’ education
and restrictions on women’s movement, dress and right
to work, or enact any further restrictions, the Council
should not renew travel exemptions or lift asset freezes
for any Taliban leader. The Council should also end
exemptions for Abdul-Haq Wassiq, General Director
of Intelligence, and Fazl Mohammad Mazloom, Deputy
Minister of Defence, who are responsible for human
rights violations that include the arrest, detention and
repression of human rights defenders and journalists.

22-398579/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

The Council should call on UNAMA to prioritize
facilitating an inclusive intra-Afghan dialogue as soon
as the new Special Representative of the SecretaryGenera1 has been appointed. The Doha process, which
the Security Council endorsed, was deeply flawed
because it was negotiated without Afghans at the
table. But an inclusive, intra-Afghan dialogue, which
the Council has called for, is the only viable path to
peace. UNAMA must ensure the participation of all
Afghans, including women, and all ethnic groups.
Leaving Afghanistan in the hands of a dangerous and
incompetent dictatorship will only perpetuate poverty
and violence.
I also urge Council members to support all efforts
to hold the Taliban accountable for its past and ongoing
abuses. The Council should support and provide full
resources for the mandate of the Special Rapporteur on
Afghanistan and ensure he has full access to all parts
of the country. It should support the establishment of a
fact-finding mission or other investigative mechanism
to monitor, collect evidence and regularly report on
human rights violations and abuses committed by all
parties. If the Council wants the Taliban, or anyone
else, to take it seriously, its members must follow
through on their words of support for women’s rights.
The Council must hold UNAMA accountable for
implementing its mandate and impose costs on the
Taliban for its horrendous treatment of women. It
must stop patronizing Afghan women with awards and
empty words of praise. Together, and individually, the
members of the Security Council have incredible power
and resources. I urge them to use them to take real
action and restore the dignity and rights of all Afghans.
The President: I thank Ms. Royan for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): Allow me first to
express our condolences to those affected by the
devastating earthquake that struck eastern Afghanistan
yesterday. This catastrophe heaps even greater suffering
on civilians already hit hard by a humanitarian,
economic and human rights crisis, and safe and
unhindered humanitarian access must be ensured.
I would also like to thank Mr. Griffiths and
Mr. Alakbarov for their useful updates on the situation
in Afghanistan and the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in
accordance with its new mandate and the delivery of
10/33

23/06/2022

humanitarian assistance and support to basic human
needs. We also offer heartfelt thanks to Ms. Royan
for her strong message, including on the importance
of respect for the universal human rights of Afghan
women and girls, and to Ms. Hakim for sharing her
insights and perspectives.
Since the last regular meeting on Afghanistan in
March, the Council has convened two extraordinary
meetings to discuss the continued deterioration of the
human rights situation in Afghanistan, especially the
detrimental decisions taken by the Taliban to restrict
girls’ education and women’s participation in public
life. In a united voice, the Security Council called
on the Taliban to swiftly reverse these policies and
practices, including the restrictions that limit access
to education, employment and freedom of movement
for women and girls. These restrictions not only
demolish Afghanistan’s chances to respond to and
recover from a difficult humanitarian and economic
situation, but they also diminish hope for stability
and peace in Afghanistan. When the Security Council
today discusses how the international community can
ensure delivery of humanitarian assistance and support
to address basic human needs in Afghanistan, we must
again also urge the Taliban to do more to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis and do less to aggravate the human
rights crisis.
Norway welcomes the recent visit by the United
Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Afghanistan. We echo his concern with regard
to reported attacks, killings and disappearances of
former Governmental officials, members of the security
forces, prosecutors and judges, journalists and media
workers, and other reprisals against those who speak up
in a society ruled by fear, not law. It is the responsibility
of the de facto authorities to end all arbitrary arrests
and detentions, including incommunicado detentions,
as well as torture and extrajudicial executions. We also
urge the de facto authorities to initiate investigations of
disappearances, including that of Alia Azizi, the head
of Herat Women’s Prison, who disappeared in October.
The protection of civilians and human dignity is
a prerequisite for reconciliation and peace. Norway is
alarmed at the escalated violence in certain areas of
Afghanistan and the frequent terrorist attacks targeting
civilians and civilian infrastructure, often in ethnicor religious-minority communities. We also call on
all parties to end and prevent the recruitment and use
of children in armed conflict. And we underline the
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

importance of UNAMA’s mandate to monitor, report
and engage with parties to undertake commitments
and measures to end and prevent violations and abuses
against children. The Security Council has given
UNAMA a clear mandate to engage with all relevant
Afghan political actors and stakeholders, including the
Taliban, to facilitate inclusive dialogue and promote
representative governance.
The international community must continue
to support Afghanistan. This means that we must
also engage with the de facto authorities who bear
the main responsibility to respond to the needs of
the Afghan people and to deliver on their promises.
Otherwise, we will lose our most important avenues
for influencing the current worrying trajectory towards
Afghanistan’s future.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, I express our
deepest condolences to the victims and their families
and to all those affected by the devastating earthquake
in Afghanistan. India shares the grief of the people
of Afghanistan and is ready to provide assistance and
support in this hour of need.
I thank the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ramiz Alakbarov, and the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Under-SecretaryGeneral Martin Griffiths, for their briefings. I also
thank Ms. Yalda Hakim and Ms. Yalda Royan for
their briefings.
As a contiguous neighbour and long-standing
partner of Afghanistan, India has direct stakes in
ensuring the return of peace and stability to the country.
Therefore, given our strong historical and civilizational
linkages to the Afghan people, we are deeply concerned
about the recent developments in the country, especially
the deteriorating humanitarian situation.
India supported resolution 2615 (2021), which
provided for humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan,
while ensuring that the Security Council would
continue to exercise its oversight to guard against any
possible diversion of funds and misuse of exemptions
from sanctions. We note the briefing by the Emergency
Relief Coordinator on the working of the resolution
and the concerns he has expressed. We hope that the
humanitarian carveouts provided for in this resolution
are fully utilized by United Nations agencies and their
aid partners and that the aberrations are addressed. In
this context, we reiterate that humanitarian assistance
should be based on principles of neutrality, impartiality

S/PV.9075

and independence. The disbursement of humanitarian
aid should be non-discriminatory and accessible
to all, irrespective of ethnicity, religion or political
belief. In particular, the assistance should reach the
most vulnerable first, including women, children
and minorities.
In response to the humanitarian needs of the
Afghan people, India has dispatched several shipments
of humanitarian assistance consisting of 30,000 metric
tons of wheat, 13 tons of medicines, 500,000 doses of
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccine and winter
clothing. These humanitarian consignments were
transferred to the Indira Gandhi Children’s Hospital in
Kabul and to specialized agencies of the United Nations,
such as the World Health Organization and the World Food
Programme (WFP). To ensure fair and just distribution
of India’s wheat assistance, the Government of India
signed an agreement with the WFP for the distribution
of 50,000 metric tons of wheat within Afghanistan.
The dispatch of this wheat to Afghanistan has already
commenced. Moreover, to oversee the utilization of
India’s medical and food-grain assistance and to further
assess the humanitarian requirements of Afghan
people, an Indian team visited Kabul recently — on
2 and 3 June — and met with the representatives of the
international organizations involved in the distribution
of the humanitarian assistance. In addition, the team also
visited places where Indian programmes and projects
are being implemented, such as the Indira Gandhi
Children’s Hospital, Habibia High School, the Chimtala
subpower station and the World Food Programme
wheat distribution centre. We are now in the process
of shipping more medical assistance and food grains to
Afghanistan. We also gifted 1 million doses of India’s
Covaxin COVID-19 vaccines to Iran to administer to
Afghan refugees in Iran. In addition, we have assisted
UNICEF by supplying almost 60 million doses of polio
vaccines and two tons of essential medicines.
Our approach to Afghanistan, as always, will be
guided by our historical friendship and our special
relationship with the people of Afghanistan.
The expectations of the international community
on the way forward in Afghanistan have been clearly
set forth in resolution 2593 (2021) and reiterated
subsequently, including in resolution 2626 (2022). They
relate to ensuring that the territory of Afghanistan
is not used to launch terrorist attacks against other
countries; the formation of a truly inclusive and
representative Government; combating terrorism and

22-3985711/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

drug trafficking; and preserving the rights of women,
children and minorities.
India is closely monitoring the security situation
in Afghanistan and is actively engaging with the
international community to ensure a consensus on
the issues of security, peace and stability. We strongly
condemn the terrorist attack on Gurudwara Dashmesh
Pita Sahibji in Kabul on 18 June. The terrorist assault
on places of worship of minority communities and the
targeting of the innocent civilian population continues
to be a serious concern.
The recent findings contained in the report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011) indicate that the current
authorities need to take much stronger action to fulfil
their anti-terrorism commitments. There has been
a significant increase in the presence of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (ISIL-K) in
the country and its capacity to carry out attacks.
ISIL-K, with its base reportedly in Afghanistan,
continues to issue threats of terrorist attacks on other
countries. The report further noted that the Taliban
is yet to dissociate itself from other terrorist groups
such as Al-Qaida, which remains active. The linkages
between groups listed by the Security Council, such
as Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and Jaish-e-Mohammed, as well
as the provocative statements made by other terrorist
groups operating out of Afghanistan, pose a direct threat
to the region. There are therefore serious concerns that
need our immediate attention and unified action to
ensure that the Afghanistan does not become a haven
for other terrorist organizations, including ISIL-K,
Al-Qaida, Jaish-e-Mohammed and Lashkar-e-Tayyiba.
We need to see concrete progress in ensuring that such
proscribed terrorists, entities and their aliases do not
get any support, tacit or direct, either from Afghan soil
or from the terror sanctuaries based in the region.
On the political front, India continues to call for an
inclusive dispensation in Afghanistan that represents
all sections of Afghan society. A broad-based, inclusive
and representative formation is necessary for both
domestic and international engagement.
We are deeply concerned about recent
developments in Afghanistan, which directly impact
the women and girls of Afghanistan. There has been an
increasing attempt to remove women from public life
in Afghanistan. We join others in calling for ensuring
12/33

23/06/2022

the protection of the rights of women and children and
to ensure that the long-fought-for gains of the last two
decades are not reversed.
Peace and security in Afghanistan are critical
imperatives that all of us need to collectively strive for.
India will continue to play its role towards the pursuit of
that objective. The interests of the Afghan people will
continue to be at the heart of our efforts in Afghanistan.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): At the outset, I, too,
should like to express my deepest condolences to the
people of Afghanistan following yesterday’s devastating
earthquake. Our thoughts and prayers are with all those
affected, and Ireland is certainly joining in the urgent
humanitarian response.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths and Mr. Alakbarov for their briefings, which
were extremely informative if sobering. I want to
welcome to the table Yalda Hakim and Yalda Royan.
Their place is with us here at the table. We are very
grateful that they came, and we will not forget their
messages or the women and girls of Afghanistan.
The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/485)
could not be clearer on Afghanistan under the Taliban.
Afghanistan is not a more stable and secure country
under the Taliban. The last week alone has demonstrated
the reach and impact of armed organizations around
the country, with attacks perpetrated against a Sikh
temple in Kabul, at a crowded market in Nangahar and
against a mosque in Kunduz province. Afghanistan is
not more stable.
The stark reality is that there is no safety or
security for the millions who are members of minority
communities in Afghanistan. Nor is there safety
or security for the millions of women and girls in
Afghanistan, women and girls who have no freedom
of movement, forced behind closed doors and denied
their independence.
On 7 May, the Taliban issued another decree aimed
at the silencing and the erasure of Afghan women. That
was a decision that demonstrated that the Taliban believe
that women’s rights are a matter for their discretion.
Where are the universal human rights that Members of
the United Nations — including Afghanistan — have
recognized for decades? Ask the Taliban.
The reality is that the women of Afghanistan are
under siege, targeted, intimidated, abused, policed and
effectively eliminated from public life. We heard that in
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

graphic terms from Yalda Hakim and Yalda Royan here
today. I found that very hard to listen to.
The shameful toll of denied education for
Afghan girls continues to grow. Today marks 279
days of deprivation. We often hear how women are
still permitted to work in Afghanistan in certain
circumstances, for example, as doctors. But I would
ask, how many Afghan girls will have the chance to
work as doctors in future if they cannot even access
education today? We all know what the objective is, and
we cannot accept it.
Despite the Taliban’s efforts, women and girls
in Afghanistan continue to have a strong, powerful
and undeniable voice. Courageous women such as
Ms. Royan make sure of that. As Ms. Hakim told
us today, women with steely determination act and
protest, at real risk to themselves, their families and
communities. Ireland will continue to stand with the
women of Afghanistan. We will continue to raise their
voices and work to vindicate their rights.
The immense challenges facing Afghanistan simply
cannot be solved without Afghan women fully and
meaningfully participating in public life. The damage
being caused to Afghan society and its economy by that
ugly repression is already evident. Afghanistan cannot
succeed or develop with one half of its society locked
behind closed doors — one hand tied behind its back.
As we have heard, humanitarian needs in Afghanistan
are great and a scaled-up response clearly required.
Ireland remains deeply concerned at the catastrophic
food-insecurity situation in the country. The detection
of Integrated Phase Classification 5 conditions in Ghor
province calls out for our attention. We heard it today
from both Martin Griffiths and the Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General: people will
die of starvation, and malnutrition will undermine
the future of millions of Afghan children. Yesterday’s
earthquake will only magnify the level of need.
Against that backdrop, we condemn reports of
continuous humanitarian aid interference by the
Taliban. The humanitarian assistance being provided
by the United Nations country team and international
non-governmental organizations should not and cannot
be subject to political interference and diversion. Taking
food from the mouths of those in need is reprehensible.
It is an abuse.

S/PV.9075

For almost one year, we have sat here and heard
that this is a different Taliban, only an interim Taliban
Cabinet, that inclusive governance will happen, that
education for girls will come at a future time, that
decrees against women’s rights should not be of concern.
We said in August (see S/PV.8831 and S/PV.8848)
that we would judge the Taliban by their actions, not
by their words. Well, their words have been proven
hollow time and time again, and their actions speak
volumes. Human rights have been eroded, women have
been erased, minorities are under attack and journalists
are being targeted, with an economy in free fall,
humanitarian aid diverted and commitments broken.
That is the Taliban’s Afghanistan.
Here in the Chamber, it is not good enough to tell
ourselves that things are better than they might have
been, that we need to give the Taliban time. Already this
week, the Council recognized that we cannot pretend it
is business as usual. By amending the 1988 travel ban
exemptions, we showed that business as usual will not
stand. As Ms. Royan asked, if women cannot travel
freely, why should the Taliban be able to? The people of
Afghanistan are suffering now. Lives are being lost and
futures destroyed.
The international community and the Council have
a responsibility to respond on the basis of respect for
human rights, humanitarian principles and inclusive
and representative participation, with women in the
room and at the table, rather than accepting the status
quo. We just need to find the political will to do that.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by
expressing my delegation’s condolences to the people
of Afghanistan, especially the bereaved families, for
the loss of lives and the destruction of property and
economic livelihoods as a result of the earthquake that
took place in the eastern parts of the country yesterday.
Today’s meeting on the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2022/485)
and its implications for international peace and security
therefore provides yet another opportunity for the
Council to take stock of the important work being
undertaken by the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in order to help bring
lasting peace and stability for the benefit of the people
of the country. UNAMA remains a vital component of
our collective efforts towards ensuring the sustained
recovery and reconstruction of Afghanistan. We must
therefore continue to firmly convey, with a unified

22-3985713/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

voice, the Council’s unalloyed commitment and support
for the mandate of UNAMA.
In thanking Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths, Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and UNAMA Officer-in-Charge
Ramiz Alakbarov, journalist Yalda Hakim and Yalda
Royan of VOICE Amplified for their pertinent briefings,
we wish to take a moment to pay tribute to Deborah Lyons,
the previous Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of UNAMA, for her dedication. Her
work and appreciation of the competing geopolitics
in the region undoubtedly helped build international
consensus for the Afghan people over the past two
years. We commend her for her work and look forward
to working with her replacement. The appointment of
another competent woman will certainly be a clear and
undisputed message from the international community
to the Taliban that women — for that matter, Afghan
women and girls — are not a distraction, but legitimate
stakeholders in the political, social and economic
development of Afghanistan.
Against the backdrop of the worrisome
humanitarian, political and security situation prevailing
in Afghanistan, Ghana wishes to make the following
three points.
First, the latest calamity will undoubtedly
compound the situation of millions of Afghan citizens,
who are confronted by acute food shortages, are
internally displaced and lack basic services, including
access to drinking water, health care and education.
We therefore urge humanitarian agencies to scale-up
their interventions in order to bring much-needed relief
to the population, in particular women, children and
vulnerable groups, who are currently bearing the brunt
of the harsh living conditions. We equally appeal to the
donor community and partners to remain committed
to their pledges and to continue supporting relief
efforts in Afghanistan, since it is critical to averting a
humanitarian catastrophe.
Secondly, we are deeply concerned about the lack
of progress on the political front in terms of substantive
dialogue among the Afghan parties in the search for
national reconciliation and an inclusive Government. In
that regard, we deplore the unwarranted actions of the
de facto authorities, especially in the past few weeks,
which have been everything else but encouraging. The
imposition of draconian restrictions on sections of the
population, particularly the suppression of the rights
14/33

23/06/2022

of women and girls, including attempts to exclude
them from participating fully and meaningfully in
the governance process, is unacceptable. We urge the
Taliban to put a stop to all forms of discrimination and
immediately remove all restrictions in place in order to
give all Afghan citizens equal right to participate freely
in civil and civic life.
Ghana remains of the view that it is not the case
that the de facto authorities are being called upon to do
the extraordinary. To the contrary, the Taliban is simply
being asked to commit to upholding the fundamental
freedoms and liberties of every Afghan citizen, without
discrimination, and to provide them with equal access to
basic human services, as well as access to a fair judicial
system, employment, the freedom of expression and
movement and to guarantee girls full access to education.
That is the minimum standard expected of every
responsible member of the international community,
and it is what all Governments are enjoined to assure.
We continue to hope that the de facto authorities will
continue to act in good faith and support global efforts
to bring lasting relief to the Afghan people, many of
whom require urgent humanitarian assistance.
Lastly, the spectre of terrorist attacks targeting
civilians and religious sites have brought into sharp
focus the fragile security situation and the urgent need
to ensure that the population receive protection. We
urge the de facto authorities to prioritize maintaining
security and institute appropriate mechanisms to
hold accountable perpetrators of terrorist attacks and
crimes against civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Ghana firmly condemns terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and will continue to support multilateral
approaches to effectively counter radicalization, violent
extremism and terrorist acts.
In conclusion, we acknowledge that the interests
of the Afghan people must remain front and centre of
global efforts to stabilize the situation in the country.
The international community can be successful in that
endeavour only if we encourage enhanced and sustained
cooperation between UNAMA and the de facto
authorities. Ghana once again reiterates its commitment
to a stable, resurgent and secure Afghanistan living
peacefully with its neighbours.
Ms. Saha (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and Deputy Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Alakbarov for
their briefings. I also thank Ms. Royan and Ms. Hakim
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

for their valuable perspectives. We welcome the work
of civil society organizations to improve the lives of
Afghans in need, and of the journalists who shine a
light on the challenges they face.
Our hearts go out to the victims of yesterday’s
horrific earthquake in Paktika and Khost provinces.
This disaster is a devastating blow to a population that
is already suffering gravely, and we call for urgent
donor assistance to relief efforts.
This is a perilous moment for Afghanistan. As
Ms. Royan and Ms. Hakim indicated, space for members
of the media to do their work is shrinking, while threats
facing members of religious and ethnic minority
groups are on the rise. We have been alarmed by the
resumption of fighting and reports of abuses against
civilians in various parts of Afghanistan, including in
Panjshir. And the Council has had to meet twice since
our last public meeting (see S/PV.8997) on the situation
in Afghanistan in order to address the actions that the
Taliban has taken to restrict the rights and freedoms of
Afghan women and girls.
I thank Ms. Hakim for elevating the voices of
women like Sheila, Marzia and Farida. Afghans from
all walks of life, Islamic scholars and ordinary people
all over the world have decried the decrees the Taliban
has issued depriving women and girls of their dignity.
The United States joins those voices in its unequivocal
condemnation of the Taliban’s announcement on
23 March forbidding girls from returning to secondary
schools throughout most of the country, and of the
decree of 7 May imposing further restrictions on
women and girls.
When the Taliban takes steps to fulfil its
commitments, we will welcome those actions. For
example, we welcome the Taliban’s ban on narcotics
as a positive first step towards the establishment of a
lawful agricultural sector — recognizing, of course,
that follow-through will be key.
But the Security Council has been clear and
unanimous: if the Taliban wants to normalize its
relations with the international community, it needs to
reverse the steps it has taken to exclude women from
social, political and economic life — immediately.
Our expectations are simple and grounded in the
founding principles of the United Nations system. All
Afghans should be able to speak, practice their faith
and learn without fear. Each and every one of them is

S/PV.9075

entitled to equal access to education, employment and
participation in public life.
I thank Ms. Royan for sharing the stories of
those who could no longer share them and speak for
themselves. Allowing Afghans to enjoy their human
rights and fundamental freedoms is not only what the
Afghan people deserve and part of what the Taliban
needs to do to gain legitimacy and recognition from the
international community; it is also a prerequisite for a
stable, prosperous Afghanistan.
Afghan history has also made it clear, as the Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
mentioned, that ruling by decree in an exclusionary
fashion is a recipe for instability — and yet the Taliban
still has not embraced other Afghan constituencies in
its approach to leadership. It is no wonder then that
Afghans’ humanitarian needs remain severe, even if the
international community’s support has helped stave off
the worst of humanitarian disasters over the past year.
That is why the United States remains the world’s
leading humanitarian donor in Afghanistan and
source of funds for United Nations operations in
Afghanistan more broadly. As part of our commitment
to the humanitarian response in Afghanistan, we have
spearheaded a variety of additional steps to facilitate
the flow of humanitarian assistance to, and commercial
activity in, Afghanistan.
We are proud to have championed resolution 2615
(2021) last December, which established a humanitarian
carveout to facilitate the critical delivery of aid to support
the basic needs of the Afghan people. We have also
clarified that financial institutions, non-governmental
organizations, international organizations and private
sector companies can engage in wide-ranging financial
transactions and economic activities to benefit the
people of Afghanistan, while still complying with
United States sanctions.
But food insecurity in Afghanistan remains grave.
As Under-Secretary-General Griffiths noted, nearly
half the population remains food insecure. The United
Nations 2022 humanitarian response plan has been only
partially funded. Yesterday’s earthquake highlights the
vulnerability of the Afghan people and underscores the
dire need for continued humanitarian assistance. We
have announced more than $720 million in humanitarian
assistance for Afghanistan since August 2021, and we
urge others in the international community to do their

22-3985715/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

part in stepping up to provide the assistance needed to
meet the dire funding shortfall.
In concert with the international community, we
also urge the Taliban to follow through on its stated
commitments relating to counter-terrorism and safe
passage. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) continues to play a crucial
role, as always, in support of the Afghan people’s many
and varied needs. We thank the team at UNAMA for
its ongoing work and commitment to implementing its
mandate. And we would like to take the opportunity
to applaud and recognize the leadership and dedication
of Ambassador Deborah Lyons upon the conclusion of
her service as Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of UNAMA.
The United States remains ever-committed to
supporting the people of Afghanistan.
Ms. Bongo (Gabon) (spoke in French): Let me
begin by expressing my delegation’s condolences to
the people of Afghanistan, in particular the bereaved
families, following yesterday’s tragic earthquake. The
devastating material and, especially, the human toll
of that earthquake has exacerbated the fragility of
Afghanistan and increased the need for solidarity on
the part of the international community.
We thank Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ramiz Alakbarov and UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Martin
Griffiths for their clear briefings on the activities of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the situation in the country. I would
like to welcome the presence of Mr. Yalda Hakim and
Mr. Yalda Royan. We listened closely to their briefings.
Afghanistan is indeed facing a growing number
of challenges, particularly in terms of fundamental
rights and freedoms, but also in terms of security and
humanitarian issues.
The successive announcements of the dissolution
of several entities that were involved in building the
rule of law in Afghanistan, such as the Afghanistan
Independent Human Rights Commission, the
Independent Commission for Oversight of the
Implementation of the Constitution and the High
Council for National Reconciliation, attest to the
radicalization of the de facto authorities.
In the same vein, the elimination of the Department
of Political Parties, making the registration of political
16/33

23/06/2022

parties impossible, is another measure that runs counter
to the plurality and inclusiveness of the Afghan political
landscape, as called for by the international community.
We also note and condemn the fact that, despite
numerous calls from the international community, in
particular the Security Council, the Taliban continues
to restrict freedoms and violate the hard-won rights
of women and girls. The impact and positive role
of women in society is well established. Their
contribution to Afghan society is vital for the recovery
and restoration of peace and stability in the country. We
urge the de facto authorities to revoke their restrictions
and respect the assurances given to the international
community regarding the rights of women and girls.
Their commitment and credibility are at stake.
I recall that human rights are universal and cannot
be denied under any pretext. We call on the de facto
authorities to comply with international standards and
to ensure their respect.
The security situation in Afghanistan is volatile.
Increased attacks by armed groups opposed to the
Taliban; the proliferation of terrorist activity, including
by the Islamic State; and growing tensions with
neighbouring States are serious cause for concern.
Moreover, civilians continue to suffer the disastrous
consequences of the use of improvised explosive
devices. We condemn all such attacks and call on the
de facto authorities to step up their efforts to combat
terrorism and protect the population, for whom they
are responsible.
The increasing tensions along the Afghan border
with Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, as well
as along the border with Iran and Pakistan, have led to
clashes resulting in civilian casualties and are likely to
further destabilize the region. We call on all parties to
exercise the utmost restraint.
The briefings we just heard remind us that
Afghanistan is undergoing a humanitarian crisis of
rare violence. It is the result of the breakdown of its
economic, social and financial systems, as well as
years of conflict. Furthermore, drought has contributed
to increased poverty, hunger and the displacement
of people. The country is facing unprecedented
food insecurity.
We call on donors to continue their efforts in
support of humanitarian assistance. In that regard,
we welcome the World Bank’s resumption of work on
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

projects focusing on health care, agriculture and means
of subsistence.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call for dialogue
with the de facto authorities. The dialogue should
include the national stakeholders, the United Nations
and the international community in order to achieve
lasting peace for Afghanistan and the entire region.
Finally, I would like to reiterate our full support
to UNAMA and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs for their efforts on the ground.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to begin by expressing our
condolences for the loss of life and damage caused by
the earthquake in Afghanistan yesterday. We are also
grateful for the ongoing efforts of the United Nations
and the rest of the international community.
Regrettably, that tragic event is only one of the
many obstacles from which the country is already
suffering, including the humanitarian situation, an
economic collapse, an uptick in terrorist attacks and the
human rights crisis.
Bearing in mind what was said by Mr. Alakbarov
and Mr. Griffiths and recognizing the presence of
Ms. Hakim and Ms. Royan, whom I thank for their
valuable briefings and whose messages have been
heeded, I will focus my statement on the following
five points.
First, the fragile optimism of some members of
the international community about the possibility of
interacting on the basis of trust has eroded. In the past
10 months, there has been an effort to wipe women
off the map and to exclude minorities, while the fight
against terrorism has been weak, to say the least. While
it is frustrating to reiterate calls for promises to be
respected and fulfilled, the Security Council can and
must shine a light on certain issues and must therefore
insist on them.
Secondly, the willingness and ability of the
international community to support Afghanistan
also depend on who is in power and whether they
are committed to their people. The dismantling of
institutions, a dysfunctional justice delivery system,
restrictions on women in public life and a lack of
representation of other ethnic groups in key Government
positions simply do not correspond to the aspirations of
the Afghan people.

S/PV.9075

Thirdly, Mexico firmly believes that dialogue is the
best option to support the Afghan people. The Security
Council also expects to see concrete results. At a
minimum, there should be a substantial shift towards a
system of participation and inclusive governance within
a transparent political-legal framework that regulates
State activities and daily life in Afghanistan, as well as
access to justice mechanisms that reflect international
obligations and commitments.
Fourthly, my country has made its views clear
regarding the fact that humanitarian aid cannot be
subordinated or made conditional based on political
considerations. We said that when the Council decided
to create a humanitarian exemption in December
through resolution 2615 (2021), and we stand by that
today. However, with the increasing levels of food
insecurity, unrestricted and non-discriminatory
humanitarian access to Afghanistan is essential. In
the face of the withdrawal of international funding as
a result of the actions of the Taliban, it is more urgent
than ever to create sustainable sources of employment
and livelihoods. Here the question arises as to how
the Afghan economy will ever recover if half of its
workforce cannot work.
Fifthly, in March, we collectively decided that the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General would implement their mandate in
close consultation with all Afghan political actors and
stakeholders, as well as the relevant authorities. Such
interactions are a critical element, and we therefore
hope that UNAMA will be granted direct access to
those with decision-making power, especially regarding
the regrettable measures preventing girls’ access
to the classroom and establishing many restrictions
on women.
We advocate for creating synergies among the
sectors that should be involved in addressing the multiple
challenges facing Afghanistan. I would like to take this
opportunity to reiterate my Government’s support for
the work of the United Nations on the ground and to
thank Ms. Lyons for her years of service as Head of the
Mission. We trust that the messages from the Council,
from regional organizations such as the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and from those who have direct
dialogue with the Taliban will elicit the response we are
waiting for.

22-3985717/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank all of our briefers today for their
presentations. On behalf of France, I too would like
to join others in expressing our condolences to and
solidarity with the families of the victims of the violent
earthquake that struck south-eastern Afghanistan
yesterday and left hundreds dead or injured.
Once again, the situation as evoked by our briefers
is extremely bleak. We heard about the gravity of the
humanitarian situation, as described by Mr. Martin
Griffiths. Mr. Ramiz Alakbarov alerted us to the lack
of progress in almost all areas where the Taliban has
made commitments to the international community.
Its latest decisions, as well as the dramatic situation
described by Ms. Yalda Hakim and Ms. Yalda Royan,
show that the Taliban has not changed.
The international community has been mobilizing
since August to ensure the survival of the Afghan
population and the restoration of stability and
security in Afghanistan. I would first like to recall the
continued commitment of France and the European
Union to responding, without delay or conditions,
to the serious humanitarian crisis. The European
Union has contributed more than €335 million since
2021, in addition to facilitating the delivery of aid
with humanitarian airlifts. In its national capacity,
France has contributed more than €123 million in
humanitarian aid since September. We supported the
adoption of resolution 2615 (2021) in December with
a view to ensuring that nothing would stand in the
way of the delivery of aid needed by the thousands of
men, women and children who are suffering daily in
Afghanistan. Nonetheless, no effort must be spared, as
has been mentioned previously, in strengthening riskmanagement mechanisms to prevent the Taliban from
diverting that aid in any way. The Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) recently granted travel-ban exemptions for 13
members of the Taliban, enabling them to participate in
international discussions in order to bring Afghanistan
out of the isolation imposed by the Taliban itself.
The international community has been clear. There
are five conditions that the Taliban must respect for the
current isolation to be lifted. For the record, they are the
constitution of a representative Government; the safe
departure of Afghans who wish to leave the country;
respect for the fundamental rights of all, particularly
women; unhindered access for humanitarian aid;
and the complete and concrete severance of ties with
18/33

23/06/2022

terrorist groups. To date, none of those conditions have
been fully met. The recent decisions taken in violation
of the rights of women and girls are unacceptable,
including the decision on 23 March to exclude girls
from secondary school. Trust has been broken, and
those decisions show that the Taliban’s promises are
empty. For that reason, the 1988 Committee revoked
the travel-ban exemptions for the two education
ministers. We are also disappointed with regard to
the security commitments made by the Taliban. As
evidenced in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/485), its links with terrorist groups have not
been severed. The announcements on drug trafficking
may be encouraging, but at this stage they are nothing
but promises.
Finally, I want to recall that the increase in serious
human rights violations is unacceptable. Afghan women
are the primary victims. As Ms. Hakim and Ms. Royan
so eloquently described, their freedom has shrunk on
a daily basis as they have become prisoners in their
own country. However, Afghanistan can have no future
without its women, who have already contributed so
much to their country’s development in the past 20
years. Respect for human rights, in particular those of
women and girls, cannot be a variable in our discussions
or in the United Nations response to the crisis in
Afghanistan. It is a key principle enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations that we must all defend
and promote. The mandate that the Council has given
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) provides it with the means to do so, and we
expect the Mission to carry out its task in full.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate France’s full
support for the Afghan people, as well as our readiness
to participate in the necessary efforts to alleviate their
suffering and our full cooperation with the United
Nations, including UNAMA.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): At the outset,
let me join my colleagues in conveying our sincere
condolences to the people of Afghanistan in the wake
of the suffering caused by the devastating earthquake.
As my Ministers have said, the United Kingdom stands
ready to support them at this difficult time. The United
Kingdom is one of the largest donors of humanitarian
aid to Afghanistan and we are already working with
teams on the ground, including the United Nations,
non-governmental organizations and the International
Committee of the Red Cross, to get assistance to those
who most need it. Let me also thank Deputy Special
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

Representative Alakbarov and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings, and in particular
our civil-society briefers for their powerful and
moving testimonies.
The humanitarian and economic situation in
Afghanistan remains critical. More than 24 million
Afghans are in need of humanitarian support and nearly
20 million are facing acute food insecurity. Urgent
action is needed to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe and
economic collapse. Strong United Nations leadership
remains crucial in coordinating the international
community’s support and negotiating effectively with
the Taliban to ensure principled humanitarian access
across the country.
The United Kingdom remains committed to the
Afghan people. Our Foreign Secretary co-hosted the
United Nations humanitarian pledging conference on
31 March, raising $2.4 billion. Nationally, we have
committed $380 million in aid this financial year to
supporting humanitarian and basic human needs. We
strongly support the sanctions regime of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011) as a key tool for promoting peace and
security and stability in Afghanistan. The humanitarian
exception ensures that the regime poses no obstacle
to the provision of humanitarian assistance and other
activities that support basic human needs.
Economic stability and the delivery of basic services
are essential to ending the cycle of humanitarian need
and suffering. We support the leadership of the United
Nations in that respect and stress the need for the
Taliban to stand by its commitments to both the Afghan
people and the international community.
As we heard today from Ms. Hakim and Ms. Royan,
women and girls in Afghanistan are facing unacceptable
restrictions on their freedom of movement and dress, as
well as access to education, jobs and services. Educated
women and girls who are able to participate fully in
society will contribute to economic development,
peace and security. The United Kingdom is also deeply
concerned about serious allegations of extrajudicial
killings, detentions and disappearances of Afghans,
including civil society activists, former security forces
and Government officials. Reports of terror attacks
have increased. Terrorist and narcotic threats from
Afghanistan pose a great risk to regional security as
well as to Afghanistan itself.

S/PV.9075

The role of the United Nations remains more
important than ever. We pay tribute to the work of
Deborah Lyons and look forward to working with the
new leadership team. The international community must
continue to speak with one voice to press the Taliban on
its commitments and to advance shared objectives on
human rights, humanitarian access, counter-terrorism
and more inclusive Government.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths and Deputy
Special Representative Ramiz Alakbarov for their
briefings. I also listened closely to the remarks of the
civil-society representatives.
Afghanistan is at a critical stage of transition
from chaos to governance, and the Afghan people
have a historic opportunity to truly control their own
future and destiny. Since last August, the situation
in Afghanistan has generally remained stable, with
a marked decline in violent conflict, although there
are deeply daunting challenges on the humanitarian
and economic fronts. An earthquake struck eastern
Afghanistan only yesterday, killing at least 1,000 people
and injuring hundreds, and the numbers of casualties
continue to increase. China mourns the victims and
extends its condolences to the bereaved families and
the injured. We will provide emergency humanitarian
assistance based on Afghanistan’s needs. We call on the
international community to step up its support and on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) to act urgently in support of Afghanistan’s
earthquake relief efforts. Afghanistan still has a long
way to go to achieve peace and development, and the
Afghan people should not be forgotten. It is incumbent
on the international community to provide more support
and assistance.
First, constructive engagement must be strengthened
to support Afghanistan in realizing autonomous
and effective State governance. The lessons of the
past 20 years have shown that military interventions
and foreign models do not work in Afghanistan. All
parties should truly implement the principle that this
work must be Afghan-owned and Afghan-led, be
pragmatic in strengthening their engagement with
the interim Afghan Government, patiently guide and
support national reconciliation and domestic unity in
Afghanistan and explore a governance model suited
to the country’s conditions. It should be an internally
driven and progressive process that requires a forwardlooking attitude and the necessary patience.

22-3985719/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

23/06/2022

A few days ago, the Afghan Taliban authorities
held a first meeting of the Commission for Return and
Communications with former Afghan officials and
political figures and announced that it would hold the
Loya Jirga. Those are all positive trends. It is hoped
that all Afghan parties will maintain dialogue and
consultations and enable political reconciliation, and the
international community should facilitate those efforts.

unreasonable, unjustifiable and unacceptable to freeze
their sizeable overseas assets. The United States should
respond to the appeals of the Secretary-General, human
rights experts, humanitarian agencies and other parties
by ensuring the unconditional return of Afghanistan’s
overseas assets as soon as possible, and UNAMA should
actively promote it, in accordance with the mandate of
the Security Council.

China welcomed the continued extension of the
travel-ban exemption for certain Taliban members
issued by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities. It is
in line with the practical needs involved in supporting
the dialogue among the Afghan parties. We hope that
Council members will remain united in that regard and
refrain from arbitrarily linking that issue to others that
are unrelated.

Thirdly, comprehensive measures should be taken
to support sound development in Afghanistan. The
issues related to insecurity, terrorism, narcotics and
refugees that Afghanistan is facing are intertwined.
We need to adopt a holistic approach and find solutions
to their root causes. We must urge Afghanistan to
eliminate the breeding grounds for terrorism and
resolutely crack down on terrorist organizations such
as the Islamic State and the Eastern Turkestan Islamic
Movement. The Taliban’s ban on poppy cultivation
should be encouraged and Afghanistan should be
supported in developing alternative crops so as to
eliminate drugs. The rights and interests of women and
children in Afghanistan should be fully guaranteed,
including their right to education and employment, and
sustained efforts are needed in that regard.

Secondly, resource imports should be increased to
help Afghanistan overcome economic and livelihood
challenges. The humanitarian and economic situation
in Afghanistan took an abrupt turn for the worse in the
wake of the precipitous withdrawal of foreign troops.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/485), 24.4 million people in Afghanistan, or
nearly 60 per cent of the population, need humanitarian
assistance. Some 19.7 million are facing hunger and
6.6 million are suffering from acute food shortages,
the largest number in the world. Rising food prices and
inflation have made the situation even more dire. To
date only 30 per cent of Afghanistan’s humanitarian
response plan has been funded, a shortfall of $3 billion.
Other geopolitical developments have reduced the focus
of major donor countries on Afghanistan. That is an
extremely dangerous trend that could turn the current
crisis into a greater catastrophe.
The various humanitarian assistance agencies in
Afghanistan should all strengthen their coordination
and synergy. In that process, the ownership of the
interim Government in receiving foreign aid should
be respected. That is a sine qua non for the effective
delivery of aid. In April, dozens of independent
United Nations human rights experts issued a joint
statement underscoring that the United States’ freezing
of Afghanistan’s overseas assets has worsened living
conditions for Afghan women and children and calling
for lifting the freeze as soon as possible. Regrettably,
there has been no progress on that issue. At a time when
the Afghan people are most in need of resources, it is
20/33

At the same time, all those goals cannot be achieved
if Afghanistan does not maintain overall stability and
gradually realize development and progress. A few days
ago we marked World Refugee Day and the fact that for
the first time in history, the number of refugees and
displaced persons around the world exceeds 100 million.
We should not forget the 11 million Afghan refugees
created by the war in Afghanistan, with millions living
in neighbouring countries such as Pakistan and Iran.
According to recent data, since August last year, 90 per
cent of applications submitted by Afghan refugees
for entry into the United States have been rejected.
It is hoped that the relevant country will earnestly
fulfil its obligations under international refugee law,
while providing more support to Afghanistan and
other countries with a view to warding off a larger
refugee tide.
China supports the United Nations in continuing
to play an important role in helping with Afghanistan’s
peaceful reconstruction. Over the past two years,
Special Representative of the Secretary-Genera1 Lyons
led the work of UNAMA in complex circumstances and
achieved positive results. China appreciates the work
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
who recently completed her assignment.
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

As a friendly neighbour of Afghanistan, China has
always been committed to supporting peace, stability
and development in that country. Since the beginning
of last winter, the Chinese Government has provided
¥250 million in emergency aid to Afghanistan and will
continue to implement the ¥1 billion of bilateral aid that
it announced. China recently hosted the third meeting
of Foreign Ministers of the Neighbouring Countries
of Afghanistan, at which its neighbours were urgently
called upon to come up with meaningful and practical
initiatives and support peace and reconstruction
in Afghanistan.
As we speak, many projects have already been
implemented that will play an important role in
promoting the peaceful and stable development of
Afghanistan in the future. China stands ready and
willing to work with the international community to
contribute to a new and brighter future for Afghanistan.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): First of all, Brazil would
like to express its heartfelt condolences to the families
of the victims of the earthquake that struck eastern
Afghanistan yesterday. As we wait for more precise
information about the full extent of the devastation
and the number of victims, Brazil expresses its
appreciation for the best efforts made by the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA),
UNICEF and all United Nations agencies on the ground
to quickly respond to the appeals for support. We
stand in solidarity with all those affected during this
difficult time.

S/PV.9075

Brazil recalls that humanitarian assistance to the
Afghan people does not, and should not, constitute
a violation of the sanctions regime. We recognize
that efforts have been made to address the difficulty
that humanitarian organizations and United Nations
agencies have been facing in sending financial
resources to Afghanistan, but we once again appeal to
all countries to continue to look closely into the issue.
Humanitarian exemptions for any sanctions must be
strictly observed to ensure that they do not undermine
access to food, shelter and essential health supplies for
those most in need. That understanding is applicable to
Afghanistan, but also to other humanitarian crises.
The life-saving aid of the international community
must continue to flow to alleviate the suffering of all
those who are vulnerable in Afghanistan. But we all
know that only long-term development measures will
pave the way for a more prosperous and peaceful future
for Afghanistan. In that regard, Brazil echoes the
appeals for members of the international community to
consider unfreezing the assets of Afghan institutions.
The Security Council must also continue to work
for the protection and promotion of human rights in
Afghanistan, especially the ones that seem to be the
most affected: those of women and girls, children,
human rights defenders, journalists and other
media workers and persons belonging to ethnic and
religious minorities.

Brazil thanks Under-Secretary-General Martin
Griffiths and Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Ramiz Alakbarov for their updates.
We also thank Ms. Yalda Hakim and Ms. Yalda
Royan for their insightful presentations. I welcome
the representatives of Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan and
Uzbekistan at this meeting.

Our special gratitude goes to Ms. Deborah Lyons
for her committed work as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Afghanistan until 15 June. Brazil
thanks Ms. Lyons for her continuous engagement with
all relevant Afghan political actors and stakeholders to
address the many challenges faced by the country and
her tireless work in mobilizing humanitarian assistance
and defending the promotion of human rights, especially
the fundamental rights of women and girls.

The ever-growing humanitarian needs of the
Afghan population in the difficult scenario of competing
demands for international humanitarian assistance are
alarming. Before the earthquake, 59 per cent of the
population was in need of assistance, and only 31 per
cent of the humanitarian response plan was funded.
United Nations agencies and other humanitarian
organizations were already struggling to provide their
essential aid to the population in need. That scenario
will probably just get worse under the impacts of this
week’s earthquake.

Brazil reiterates its full support for the work of both
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in their mandate
to support and promote gender equality, women and
girls` empowerment and the full protection of their
human rights, including to education and the full,
equal, meaningful and safe participation, engagement
and leadership of women at all levels and stages of
decision-making, in line with resolution 1325 (2000)
and related resolutions.

22-3985721/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

We have yet to see women’s return to public life and
girls’ return to secondary-school classroom seats. Women
and girls’ rights must be respected not only because of
Afghanistan’s obligations under international human
rights law, but also because women’s participation in
the economy is paramount for Afghanistan’s economy,
recovery today and future sustainable development.
Afghan women’s organizations that provide services to
women and girls must also be allowed to continue to
carry out their crucial work. The conditions necessary
for that to happen must be guaranteed.
As the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, said last week in
Geneva when describing the situation in Afghanistan,
Afghans “are experiencing some of the darkest
moments in a generation”. The conclusions of the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/485) confirm
this gloomy analysis. The earthquake adds a new
layer of gravity to the already-serious humanitarian
situation on the ground. We must continue to work
together towards an inclusive democratic Afghan
political process, with the full participation of women
that promotes the cessation of hostilities, stability and
national reconciliation.
Mrs. Toroitich (Kenya): At the outset, Kenya
joins others in expressing its heartfelt condolences to
the people of Afghanistan following the devastating
earthquake in Paktika province. We commend the
rapid mobilization by the authorities and humanitarian
actors to provide emergency-response and search-andrescue efforts.
I thank Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Alakbarov and Under-SecretaryGeneral Griffiths for their briefings and updates on the
latest developments in Afghanistan. I would also like to
thank Ms. Yalda Hakim and Ms. Yalda Royan for their
sobering messages.
Kenya is concerned about the fragile security
situation in Afghanistan. We have witnessed an
increase in terrorist attacks perpetrated against
civilians, especially minority groups, which continue
to undermine peace efforts. We expect the Taliban
to renew its commitment to fighting terrorism and
ensuring that Afghanistan is not a haven for Islamic
State or Al-Qaida terrorist groups. Moreover, the
Taliban must ensure that the territory of Afghanistan
shall never again be used by those terrorist groups
to export terrorism to other regions. That should be
22/33

23/06/2022

conducted in a manner that respects basic human rights
and upholds the dignity of the Afghan people.
We commend the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and other
humanitarian agencies that continue to operate in an
increasingly complex and challenging environment.
Their versatility and ability to perform under these
unique circumstances calls for enhanced and predictable
support by the international community.
The bleak economic situation, fuelled by several
internal and external factors, is pushing millions
of Afghans into situations of dire need. As we
discuss the economy, we cannot ignore the important
contribution of women to economic development. Their
underutilization and exclusion in the talent-and-labour
force will continue to restrict economic growth in
Afghanistan. Therefore, at the minimum, we expect the
Taliban to engage women at all levels and incorporate
their voices into mapping out non-discriminatory
policies that address the political, economic and
security challenges facing the country. To address some
of the funding gaps, there is also an emerging need to
consider how frozen Afghan assets can be deployed
within an agreed framework for accountability into the
ailing economy as part of efforts to revamp it.
Kenya deeply regrets that it has been almost 279
days since the Taliban suspended school for girls in
sixth grade and higher. There is no justified excuse to
discriminate against women and girls. As a country
that hosts a large number of refugees, we further
recognize, with praise, Afghanistan’s neighbours for
generously opening their borders over the last few
months, especially during this difficult period. We
therefore urge the international community to support
their efforts through predictable funding.
On behalf of my delegation, I would like to express
our sincere gratitude to Ms. Lyons for her work and
dedication to UNAMA. We wish her all the best in her
future endeavours.
Finally, Kenya reaffirms its unwavering solidarity
with the people of Afghanistan and stands ready to
support all endeavours aimed at securing their safety
and well-being.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, we join other speakers in
expressing our deepest condolences to the families of
the victims of the devastating earthquake that struck
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

south-east Afghanistan yesterday, and we wish a speedy
recovery for the injured. The United Arab Emirates
will always stand ready to alleviate the suffering of the
Afghan people, including by starting to facilitate aid to
help them in this disaster.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to
Mr. Ramiz Alakbarov and Mr. Martin Griffiths for their
comprehensive briefings. We also listened attentively
to the impressive statements by Ms. Yalda Royan and
Ms. Yalda Hakim about the difficult conditions faced
by Afghans, especially women and girls. I would like
to take this opportunity to express our appreciation to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Lyons
for her vital efforts and stewardship of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
during the period of her assignment.
The situation in Afghanistan is frustrating and
alarming, especially given the lack of progress in the
areas highlighted by the Security Council in resolution
2596 (2021) on Afghanistan, including establishing
an inclusive Government, combating terrorism and
upholding human rights, especially the right of
women to work and girls to education, as well as their
participation in all aspects of life. These are not simply
expectations of the international community; they are,
instead, the fundamental building blocks to economic
growth, improved public health and the empowerment
of women, with a view to achieving stability and
sustained peace in Afghanistan.
I would like to focus on four important issues. First,
it is imperative that we keep adequate attention on the
worsening humanitarian situation in Afghanistan.
While we may have managed to avoid a humanitarian
catastrophe this past winter, poverty and hunger rates
continue to rise, as noted in the most recent report of
the Secretary-General on Afghanistan (S/2022/485).
Sadly, Afghanistan is a case study of how rising food
prices — as well as fertilizer and gas prices — are driving
millions into food insecurity. The warning given in
March by the Head of the World Food Programme, who
said that food would have to be taken from the hungry
to give to the starving, has already become a reality
in Afghanistan. This situation is further exacerbated
by the latest earthquake, which has had a devastating
impact on the people in the areas it hit.
The United Arab Emirates welcomed the
adoption of resolution 2615 (2021), which established
a humanitarian exemption to the sanctions regime

S/PV.9075

established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), as an
important step in facilitating the provision of relief aid
and other activities that support basic human needs in
Afghanistan. We believe that we can learn from the
example of Afghanistan and consider whether a similar
approach may be appropriate for other sanctions
regimes, on a case-by-case basis. In this vein, we stress
once again that the potential humanitarian consequences
of sanctions should systematically be considered in the
design of each and every sanctions regime. We also
encourage all donors to make all possible efforts to
ensure that individuals on the sanctions list pursuant to
resolution 1988 (2011) or with links to terrorists are not
able to accrue benefits from any assistance intended for
the people of Afghanistan.
Secondly, we reiterate that the access of women and
girls to education and all aspects of public life is not
optional. Afghanistan’s chances of recovery are doomed
if half its population continues to be marginalized.
The Security Council must continue to demand that
the Taliban’s decision to exclude girls from secondary
education be reversed and that women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation in society be reinstated.
Thirdly, UNAMA must continue to implement its
comprehensive mandate to engage with the Taliban
through structured dialogue, while conveying to it the
messages of the international community. We encourage
UNAMA to continue its active engagement with the
Taliban vis-à-vis women’s empowerment and girls’
education, as well as all other aspects of its mandate.
Fourthly, the security situation in Afghanistan
continues to deteriorate. The latest report of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
indicates that the country witnessed multiple terrorist
attacks over the past months and that some terrorist
groups, such as the Islamic State-Khorasan Province,
are strengthening their capacities and financial
resources. This situation further exacerbates current
challenges in the country in terms of maintaining
security and controlling the activities of these terrorist
groups, as we have witnessed in the attack that took
place this month on a temple in Kabul and the explosion
that targeted a crowded market in Nangarhar.
The most recent report of the Secretary-General
underlined that the Taliban need to engage in a serious
and meaningful counter-terrorism dialogue with
the international community. The Security Council

22-3985723/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

must also send a unified message to the Taliban that
Afghanistan cannot be a safe haven for terrorists.
In conclusion, I want to recall what Ms. Lyons
noted before the Security Council many times: the
road ahead, following August 2021, will not be easy.
Despite the multiple roadblocks that we have removed
since then, we have to redouble our efforts, scale
up support to Afghans and keep up pressure on the
Taliban. We cannot abandon the Afghan people during
this difficult period.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We wish to thank the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Martin Griffiths, and the
Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator
for Afghanistan, Mr. Ramiz Alakbarov, for their
assessments of the situation in Afghanistan. Since
August 2021, they have undertaken tremendous
efforts on the ground which, we are confident, have
saved the lives of millions of Afghans. We have also
closely listened to the briefings by the civil society
representatives. At the same time, we wish to note the
following. Traditionally, we proceed from the following
premise. If the Security Council invites representatives
from civil society, then these people should be from
Afghanistan. They should be aware of the realities
on the ground, and they should be enduring those
difficulties alongside the people. We are pleased that
representatives of the countries of the region have once
again been given the floor to discuss this issue, which
is of great importance to them.
We wish to voice our genuine condolences to the
de facto authorities and the people of Afghanistan in
connection with the devastating earthquake, which
claimed the lives of a thousand people.
We closely read the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in the country (S/2022/485).
Six months have elapsed since the most recent
comprehensive discussion of the Afghan issue in the
Security Council (see S/PV.8954). Unfortunately,
during that time, the humanitarian and socioeconomic
situations have continued to deteriorate. Quality of
life indicators have dropped by a third. The population
of the country has been enduring one of the fastestgrowing humanitarian crises in the world and is literally
on the brink of survival. The country is beset by
starvation, destitution and unemployment. Production
24/33

23/06/2022

and manufacturing are in decline. The agricultural
sector is suffering from drought, and there are acute
shortages of seeds, foodstuffs and fertilizer. The spread
of the coronavirus infection has also had devastating
consequences first and foremost for the most vulnerable
population groups, including women and children.
Against that backdrop, unfortunately, the donors
conference on Afghanistan held on 31 March under
the auspices of the United Nations did not rise to
expectations. Therefore, what seems hypocritical are
attempts by our United States and NATO colleagues to
shift responsibility to the international community as
a whole for the current crisis situation in Afghanistan
and for the recovery of the country, as well as attempts
to force the destitute Afghan people to pay for the
11 September attacks, which they had nothing to do
with. Back in the times of the Soviet Union, more than
140 facilities were built in Afghanistan to form the
backbone of its economy and, in the 20 years of NATO’s
presence in Afghanistan, not a single enterprise was
built, with the Afghan economy directly relying on
international financing.
We appreciate the efforts of those representatives
of humanitarian agencies who are working on the
ground. We take note of the selfless efforts of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the International Committee of the Red Cross, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other humanitarian agencies and their
contributions to assist Afghanistan.
We welcome the fact that humanitarian workers
now can access regions that they were unable to prior to
15 August 2021. We understand, however, that certain
challenges remain. It will take time and patience to
overcome them.
At the same time, a number of problems have
remained unresolved for decades in Afghanistan. We
are confident in that connection that the commitment of
humanitarian agencies to maintain active dialogue with
the de facto authorities will help to make significant
progress in that regard.
We value certain steps taken by the international
structures and financial institutions, including the
World Bank, to alleviate the humanitarian situation.
Unfortunately, those measures remain insufficient to
improve the lives of ordinary Afghans in a lasting way.
Humanitarian assistance from abroad has a limited
effect on mitigating social tensions.
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

In December 2021, resolution 2615 (2021) was
adopted. It was designed to provide a window of
opportunity to step up immediate humanitarian
assistance through all channels. The provisions of that
resolution are a response to the oft-asked question
about ways to provide unimpeded assistance under the
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011).
However, unfortunately, what we have seen is that a
number of countries continue to misinterpret its content
to justify the unilateral restrictions. The already
precarious humanitarian situation is exacerbated by the
Afghan economic collapse and the complete paralysis
of the banking system.
Against that backdrop, we deem outrageous the
attempts by certain States, under any pretext, to halt
the resumption of work between Afghan financial
operators and international banking systems and to
indefinitely delay efforts to unfreeze Afghan assets.
Such actions cast doubt on the sincerity of colleagues’
statements about their interest in the stabilization of the
situation in Afghanistan.
We urge Western donors to stop capitalizing on the
Afghan issue, to return the country’s resources and to
begin to provide comprehensive assistance to normalize
the socioeconomic and humanitarian situations without
reservations or preconditions. Ultimately, those States
bear the main responsibility for the outcomes of their
20-year presence in the country.
The maintenance of stability in Afghanistan is
central to regional efforts towards a peaceful settlement.
We believe that that needs to be the overriding
priority for the entire international community, as any
inaction now will have even greater negative global
consequences in future. Destabilization will benefit
only the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
other groups, including the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement, the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan and
Jamaat Ansarullah. The creation of additional hotbeds
of tension will play into their hands. We all are well
aware of ISIL’s plans to create a caliphate and to expand
its influence in the Central Asian region and then to the
Russian Federation.
There are persistent acute issues related to narcotics
production and smuggling. Afghanistan remains the
world’s leading opiate supplier, and we are aware of
certain steps by the de facto Government authorities
to curb that threat. However, those efforts alone cannot
suffice. Clearly, Afghanistan requires comprehensive

S/PV.9075

assistance from the international community to develop
alternative agricultural crops.
We attribute tremendous significance to the
efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan. We trust that the Mission will continue
to focus closely on the tasks specified in the mandate,
namely, coordinating humanitarian assistance and
facilitating post-conflict recovery in Afghanistan.
At the same time, it will be crucial for the Mission
to have a constructive, trust-based dialogue with the
de facto authorities; to provide assistance in capacitybuilding in order to create the conditions necessary
to effectively resolve problems in a manner that takes
account of regional and cultural specificities and that
is based on the best practices of regional neighbours,
including the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Russia, as a friend and neighbour of Afghanistan, has
traditionally provided humanitarian assistance through
the relevant United Nations agencies. Also bilaterally,
we have been providing humanitarian goods, including
food, warm clothes and medicine. We deeply regret the
fact that the unlawful sanctions against our country are
affecting, inter alia, our cooperation with humanitarian
organizations, severing logistical and financial links. If
necessary, we will stand ready to provide assistance to
Afghanistan through grain supplies.
We stand ready to continue to contribute to the
advancement of a peaceful settlement and national
reconciliation in Afghanistan. We maintain regular
cooperation with the de facto authorities, which have
consistently focused on key issues facing the country,
including the terrorist and narcotics threat, political
inclusivity, humanitarian assistance and human rights,
including those of women and girls.
The Afghan issue is also at the centre of our
efforts in the context of the Moscow format and
other regional mechanisms, as well as the Collective
Security Treaty Organization and the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization.
We intend to continue to provide to the Afghan
people and the de facto authorities of the country
every possible means of support so as to mitigate the
consequences of the socioeconomic crisis in the country.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.

22-3985725/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

We join colleagues in conveying our deep
condolences to the families of the victims of the
earthquake and wish a speedy recovery to those injured.
I thank Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and
Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Alakbarov for their detailed update on the
dramatic situation in Afghanistan.
I thank Ms. Yalda Hakim and Ms. Yalda Royan
very much for bringing such an important and needed
perspective from that part of Afghan society, which
is, unfortunately, shrinking dangerously. I thank in
particular Yalda Hakim for continuing to be such a
strong and, as an Afghan herself, credible voice for
those who need to be heard — the Afghans.
What we have heard today leaves little room for
hope. I was trying to find one single positive aspect to
highlight. I am still searching. Since the takeover, as
we have heard, the economy of the country has been in
freefall. It has contracted by more than a third compared
with the same period a year earlier. There is widespread
unemployment. Food prices are rising by nearly 20 per
cent a year. Families that were middle-class a year
ago are now surviving on a single meal a day. As we
heard from Under-Secretary-General Griffiths, more
than half the country’s population, nearly 20 million
people, face acute hunger. Reports speak of such heartbreaking situations as families selling their children’s
organs just to put food on the table.
When it comes to the security situation, it is
utterly troubling to notice a resurgence of Al-Qaida on
Afghan soil. Despite efforts to the contrary, riven by
factions and with loose control on some parts of the
country, the Taliban have also failed to suppress the
Islamic State-Khorasan Province. There have been
persistent bombings and attacks on civilians, often
against the Hazara minority. That raises the legitimate
question of whether Afghanistan is again ripe for
the wholesale export of terrorists, which must not
be allowed.
When the Taliban took over, nearly a year ago,
they promised peace and harmony. There would be no
reprisals. They would show concern for the vulnerable,
manage the economy and engage with other countries.
Girls would be allowed to go to school, but they needed
time to prepare.
As we heard here today from Ms. Hakim and
Ms. Royan, the reality is different; the Taliban are
26/33

23/06/2022

reverting to form. In March, teenage girls returning to
class for the first day of the school year found the doors
shut. Instead of teachers, they were met by armed men.
Now private schools, the last islands of resistance in the
area of education, are giving way under pressure.
In May, all Afghan women were ordered to cover
themselves from head to toe outside of the home,
basically shutting them out of public life. The Human
Rights Commission was disbanded and minorities,
particularly the Hazaras, are being deliberately targeted.
All that is depressing; it is wrong; it is retrograde.
It runs against the very basic human rights that we
defend here. It contradicts what the Taliban themselves
had promised.
While education has moved humankind forward,
the Taliban have chosen ignorance. No free women
in public life means half of the society left out of the
country’s contribution to the future. How could that
possibly lead to development and prosperity for the
Afghan people? How could that respond to people’s
needs and help them build a future?
Instead, it is a road map to the dark ages of
obscurantism, bigotry and misogyny and a departure
from civilization. When women’s rights are constrained,
the entire society is weakened. A system that excludes
women and talent cannot succeed and will not move
forward. The Taliban have a big problem with progress,
but they have a bigger problem with truth. Most popular
entertainers, singers, actors and comedians were forced
to flee the country. One of them, Nabi Roshan, was
watched by millions each week. Now he is living in
Albania. The Taliban have decided that Afghans do not
need information; they do not need entertainment; they
do not need to laugh; they only need to listen and obey.
But for how long?
Last month, the Taliban leader called on
countries to engage with Afghanistan on the basis of
mutual respect. That means formal recognition, the
establishment of diplomatic relations, development
assistance, trade and investments. But respect is not
given, it is earned — first and foremost, by respecting
commitments, not betraying them. It is earned with
truth, not lies. Unfortunately, the actions of the Taliban
go in the opposite direction — to the detriment of the
people and the country.
It is not that the Taliban do not know. They have
made a choice — a bad and a wrong one. It is therefore
of paramount importance that the Council remain
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

united and speak loudly, telling the Taliban clearly and
unequivocally that, if they do not reverse their course,
the doors to the world will remain closed. They will
not be welcome; they will remain the pariah they have
chosen to be. Worse, they will be responsible for taking
the country back into tension and conflict. That is why
it is high time that a meaningful and inclusive political
process be initiated in good faith and with goodwill,
with women in the room and at the table.
Finally, we greatly appreciate the efforts made by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). We must do all we can to ensure that
humanitarian assistance reaches those entitled to it, not
strongmen with weapons. Despite major difficulties and
renewed challenges, UNAMA must make every effort
to continue to engage with the Taliban in implementing
the mandate given by the Council — for the sake and on
behalf of the Afghan people and for their future.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of the latest note by the President of the
Security Council (S/2017/507) on its working methods,
which encourages all participants in Council meetings
to deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in
line with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Afghanistan.
Mr. Faiq (Afghanistan): Let me start by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your able
leadership of the Security Council for the current
month and for convening us today.
I would like to thank Mr. Alakbarov and Mr. Griffiths
for their briefings. I also wish to thank Ms. Hakim and
Ms. Royan, two brave and powerful Afghan women,
for their strong, loud and clear messages. They truly
exemplify the might and capabilities of Afghan women.
I also wish to take this opportunity to convey
our gratitude and appreciation for the support and
expression of condolences and sympathy towards the
families of those affected by the earthquake in the
southern provinces of Afghanistan, who desperately
need an urgent humanitarian response and assistance,
as well as for underlining the need for continued
engagement to support the people of Afghanistan,

S/PV.9075

particularly vulnerable groups such as children,
women, girls and minorities.
I thank donor countries and countries of the region,
the leadership and personnel of the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees, as well as other United Nations entities
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), for their
sustained efforts to deliver life-saving assistance to the
Afghan people and Afghan refugees in the face of such
difficult times.
Let me also take this opportunity to express the
deep appreciation of the Afghan people to former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Deborah Lyons and her Deputy Special Representative,
Mette Knudsen, for their tireless and dedicated efforts
to support the people of Afghanistan in their quest for
peace, stability and prosperity in tough and challenging
times. I also congratulate the designation of Mr. Markus
Potzel as the new Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and wish him all the best.
As we convene today, Afghans are confronted
with increasingly multifaceted challenges, including
natural and human-made disasters — causing further
devastation, misery, uncertainty and desperation in
their current and future lives. Political instability,
insecurity, economic downturns, record-breaking
droughts and protracted conflict have ravaged
Afghanistan’s economy. Those challenges have
worsened since the collapse of the former Government
and the Taliban’s takeover of Afghanistan by force in
August. Our nation’s staggering political, economic and
security challenges have failed to improve. It is thanks
to the diligent work and support of the United Nations,
NGOs and donors that a total humanitarian catastrophe
was narrowly averted. But despite the delivery of
life-saving humanitarian assistance, Afghanistan is
now no closer to stability, security or self-sufficiency.
The growing number of people in need of humanitarian
assistance, the influx of millions of refugees, the rise
in unemployment and the estimated 95 per cent of the
population that is facing poverty are all alarming and
self-evidently problematic.
In the past 10 months, the Afghan people had
hoped to see practical steps and changes in the policies,
actions and decisions of the de facto Taliban authorities
to address the current humanitarian and socioeconomic
and political situation in Afghanistan, as well as efforts

22-3985727/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

towards reconciliation and trust- and State-building
so as to ensure the rule of law, justice, safety and the
protection of the social, political and economic rights of
all Afghan citizens. However, so far, those efforts have
fallen far short.
Despite calls from Afghans, the countries of the
region and the international community for greater
ethnic, political and geographic diversity, as well as
respect for, and the protection of, the fundamental
human rights of all Afghan citizens, including the rights
of women and girls to work and education, we see that
the Taliban have not showed flexibility in the protection
of human rights and the formation of a representative
and accountable national Government with professional
staff, including women and minorities, to provide
essential services to the people — a Government
that can enjoy national and international legitimacy.
In addition, efforts were made to strengthen the
monopoly and rule over all male and Taliban-affiliated
individuals, with religious ideologies incorporated into
Government institutions and the systematic elimination
of Afghanistan’s human capital, in particular women.
We see the closure of girls’ secondary and high
schools, the further curtailment of fundamental human
rights, forcing women to wear a hijab or burka, restricting
the freedoms of speech, silencing the voices of critics
and credible reports of arbitrary arrests, torture, cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment and punishment
of prisoners and extrajudicial killings. In addition,
enforced disappearances of protesters, former national
security forces and individuals accused of affiliations
with national resistance forces, as well as the reported
forced displacement of people in Panjshir, Takhar
and Baghlan provinces, are contrary to the amnesty
announcement and are clear violations of international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
as well as Islamic guidance and principles. Those acts
of intimidation and fear must be stopped.
Security concerns are also mounting owing to the
emergence of armed resistance groups and the presence
of Al-Qaida/Da’esh and foreign terrorist fighters in
Afghanistan, as reported by the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team. We are also witnessing
a growing number of terrorist attacks and explosions
targeting religious and educational centres, particularly
of Afghan minorities, such as Hazaras, as seen in the
recent attack on a Gurdwara Sikh temple. Those acts
have caused a high number of civilian casualties and
raised concerns and criticism at the national and
28/33

23/06/2022

international levels. Those are serious concerns and
threats to the people of Afghanistan and countries in
the region.
Imagine what it is like to have your God-given
freedoms and fundamental human rights suddenly
taken away from you; to be banned from pursuing your
personal aspirations, including the right to education
and the right to work; and ultimately, as a citizen, to not
be able to achieve your dreams of serving your country
and enjoying a decent life. That is the life of women and
girls in Afghanistan right now. However, that does not
concern only women and girls. All young persons, both
male and female, who hold or are pursuing university
degrees are forced to leave the country owing to the
lack of optimism and hope for a better future. The only
day-to-day aim and objective in life is to find shelter,
food and clothing to survive. Life is lived without goals
or ambitions for the future. The situation for widows
without a male figure in their household is even bleaker.
Such is a typical life for all Afghans today.
Despite all the challenges, there is still hope and
an opportunity to overcome the current challenges
and avert Afghanistan becoming a pariah State and a
safe haven for foreign terrorists or sliding back into
conflict. To attain that goal, first, there is a need for
national dialogue among all Afghans. The people of
Afghanistan are tired of war and conflict; they do not
want more war. The United Nations is well-positioned
to use its existing tool kits, in the light of the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
to organize and facilitate an intra-Afghan dialogue with
the participation of credible Afghans from all walks of
life residing in and outside Afghanistan, including the
representatives of the Taliban and opposition groups,
as well as regional and international partners, and
to work on a national solution by establishing a road
map or mechanism in through all Afghans can reach
an agreement about core issues, such as their political,
social and economic rights, including fundamental
rights and freedoms of all citizens, particularly women,
youth and minorities; their type of Government; their
right to elect representatives; preserving the hard-won
gains of the past 20 years and amending the Constitution.
That requires the full support and engagement of the
Taliban and regional and international partners.
Secondly, I urge the Security Council and
international partners to remain focused on Afghanistan,
even in the face of other pressing international crises.
If Afghanistan is abandoned, we risk squandering the
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

S/PV.9075

progress made over the past 20 years. I would like
to emphasize the role of neighbouring, regional and
international partners, including the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, and thank them for their
efforts in hosting meetings on Afghanistan and their
commitments to continue supporting Afghanistan and,
as was emphasized in the Security Council, for sending
a united message during their engagements.

to honour national and international commitments to
human rights laws and norms and, finally, to promote
and strengthen co-existence and unity among all
Afghans. A prosperous and stable Afghanistan is
within their grasp. A nationwide consensus will require
political will and real compromise by all parties. And
it is the only way to free Afghanistan from a cycle of
dependency and instability.

Thirdly, the Afghan people are deeply grateful for
the international community’s humanitarian assistance
since the collapse of the previous Government, but
such aid is not sustainable. We hope that, through
the consistent engagement, dialogue and support of
regional and international partners, a transparent
and accountable mechanism and benchmarks will
be set up to resume the flow of development aid,
provide job opportunities and improve economic and
sustainable development.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.

Fourthly, we would like to underline the significance
of a greater role and robust engagement by the United
Nations in achieving enduring peace and stability in
Afghanistan through tangible and innovative measures.
Fifthly, my message to the Taliban is that earning
national legitimacy requires winning the hearts and
minds of all Afghans. I should underline that, while
the Afghan people welcome the establishment of the
Commission for Return and Communication with
Former Afghan Officials and Political Figures as a
positive step for confidence-building and reconciliation,
it is contradictory to see the commission extend VIP
treatment to some former high-level officials, despite
serious allegations of corruption and embezzlement
of public assets, while former civil, military and
security officers are prosecuted and detained. That is
counterproductive and contrary to justice. We therefore
call on the Taliban to honour the amnesty, safety and
security of all former Afghan Government officials,
including professional civil and military cadres and
soldiers, regardless of their ethnicity or gender.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that
the Taliban ultimately has the ability to determine
Afghanistan’s fate. I call on the Taliban to demonstrate
willingness in the coming months to work towards the
formation of a broad-based and accountable Government
based on the will of the Afghan people; to reopen girls’
secondary and high schools; to allow women to work and
take part in the development of Afghanistan; to respect
and protect the fundamental rights of all Afghans and

Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
I would like to begin by expressing our heartfelt
condolences to the people of Afghanistan and the
families of the victims of the recent earthquake in
Khost. We stand with the people of Afghanistan
at this difficult time and have already dispatched
two aeroplane shipments of humanitarian aid to the
earthquake-affected areas.
I thank the briefers for their briefings. We take note
of the Secretary-General’s recent report on the situation
in Afghanistan (S/2022/485).
According to the report, in early 2022, humanitarian
needs continued to rise, with 24.4 million people, or
59 per cent of the population, in need of assistance, up
from 18.4 million at the start of 2021.
As a neighbour of Afghanistan, Iran has used
its capacities and resources to help the people of
Afghanistan overcome the challenges they have faced.
We have been hosting millions of refugees, who have
unfortunately received minimal international assistance
over the past 40 years. The most recent example of our
assistance to Afghan refugees has been the extensive
vaccination campaign against the coronavirus
disease for Afghans living in Iran. The neighbours of
Afghanistan, including Iran, should not shoulder all
the burdens associated with receiving Afghan refugees.
Other countries should welcome the refugees as well.
We support the United Nations efforts to meet
Afghanistan’s expanding humanitarian needs, including
the system-wide Transitional Engagement Framework
to provide for basic human needs. We emphasize the
importance of the international community’s continued
engagement with Afghanistan, particularly in
supporting the people’s humanitarian and development
needs, and we urge the international community,
particularly donor countries, to continue to provide all
possible and necessary assistance to the Afghan people.

22-3985729/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

For our part, over the course of the past months, Iran has
provided more than 30 consignments of humanitarian
assistance to the people of Afghanistan.
As we have already stated, Afghanistan’s frozen
assets belong to the Afghan people, and their release,
which is crucial for helping the Afghan economy and
saving lives, should not be politicized or conditional
in any way. We highlight the need to take the relevant
actions, such as reopening channels of financial and
in-kind support and resources to the Afghan people,
as well as to explore real alternatives for unfreezing
Afghanistan’s financial assets and improving access to
lawful banking services.
Similarly, sanctions imposed by the Security
Council on specific individuals and entities in
Afghanistan must not impede humanitarian, economic
or developmental cooperation with Afghanistan.
Attacks claimed or attributed to Da’esh or its
affiliated groups have recently increased and spread in
Afghanistan. We are deeply concerned by such terrorist
activities. That trend underlines the international
community’s continued demand that the Taliban commit
to fighting terrorism and ensuring that Afghanistan is
no longer a safe haven for terrorist groups like Da’esh
and Al-Qaida, which have been responsible for heinous
acts of terror not only in Afghanistan, but throughout
the region and beyond.
Equally critical are efforts to combat drug
trafficking, which must be made a priority. Every
year, Iran is directly affected by that menace and pays
a high price for it. We welcome the Taliban’s decision
to outlaw all drugs. However, given the fact that the
Taliban has not taken the necessary precautionary
measures to confront this year’s harvest, as well as the
unavailability of information on the seizure of drugs
and the arrest of drug traffickers, our concerns about
the impact of the illegal drug trade remain strong.
The absolute need for the formation of an
inclusive Government in Afghanistan that represents
the country’s multi-ethnic society is crystal clear.
The people of Afghanistan from different religious
and ethnic backgrounds, especially the younger
generation who will lead Afghanistan in the future,
must be assured that they have a say in their country’s
affairs. That will not be possible unless an inclusive
Government is established and sufficient attention is
paid to Afghanistan’s political and social structures so
30/33

23/06/2022

that they involve people from all walks of life, including
people of all ethnicities, women and young people.
Despite repeated international calls, however, the
Taliban has failed to make significant efforts to ensure
the Government’s true ethnic and political inclusiveness.
The formation of an inclusive Government in
Afghanistan is a prerequisite and a critical component
for its international recognition.
The report of the Secretary-General indicates
that many of the Taliban’s decisions have weakened
fundamental human rights, particularly those of women
and girls. The Taliban should protect all human rights,
particularly the rights of women and minorities, as
well as the right to education. We continue to consult
with Afghanistan’s neighbours, as well as regional and
international partners, including the United Nations,
in order to assist Afghanistan in achieving long-term
peace, security and stability.
Finally, we support the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan to promote
peace and stability in Afghanistan in accordance with
its mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): We take note of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/485) and thank
Under-Secretary-General Griffiths and Deputy Special
Representative Alakbarov for their briefings.
We heard from three Afghans in today’s Security
Council meeting. They represent themselves. The
Security Council has not, however, invited those who
actually control the country to participate. I believe that,
while the Taliban is being called upon to act, the fact
that the Council is not able to hear its representatives
calls into question the credibility of the Council’s
consideration of the situation in Afghanistan.
We also thank the outgoing Special Representative,
Ms. Deborah Lyons, for her constructive role as Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and express our expectation that her
successor will maintain constructive engagement with
the people and the de facto Government of Afghanistan.
Pakistan takes this opportunity to convey its
deepest condolences over the loss of precious lives and
extensive damage caused by yesterday’s devastating
earthquake in Afghanistan. We will provide all possible
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

assistance to Afghanistan at this tragic hour and urge
the international community to do so as well.
The earthquake will further exacerbate an
already dire humanitarian situation. While the worst
humanitarian scenarios were avoided last winter due to
the characteristic resilience of the Afghan people, as well
as the excellent work carried out by the United Nations
and its humanitarian agencies, human catastrophe
could well happen unless steps are taken to address
the underlying causes of Afghanistan’s humanitarian
and economic crisis. Its consequences would include
massive human suffering, more Afghan refugees, the
revival of internal conflict and an intensified threat
from terrorist groups like Da’esh.
We are at another inflection point in Afghanistan’s
recent turbulent history. In our view, we must be clear
about our objectives, the primary one being to achieve
peace and stability in Afghanistan. My delegation, in
its capacity as Chair of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) Council of Foreign Ministers, has
circulated a document to the Security Council outlining
the pathway to peace and stability as envisaged by the
States members of the OIC in their decisions at the past
two ministerial conferences.
The OIC has called for sustained engagement
by the international community with Afghanistan,
including in the provision of all possible recovery,
reconstruction, development, financial, educational,
technical and material assistance. It has reiterated that
Afghanistan’s access to its financial resources will
be pivotal in preventing a collapse and called for the
exploration of realistic pathways towards unfreezing
Afghanistan’s financial assets and legitimate banking
services. The OIC has also urged the Security Council
in particular to ensure that existing targeted sanctions
do not impede the provision of humanitarian aid or
economic resources to Afghanistan.
The OIC has reiterated that development, peace
and security, stability and human rights are interlinked,
and it has underlined the importance of achieving
sustainable peace and development in Afghanistan
through regional economic and connectivity projects.
It has also emphasized the importance of establishing
inclusive governmental structures, while reaffirming
the importance of ensuring that the territory of
Afghanistan is not used as a platform or safe haven by
any terrorist group, organization or individual.

S/PV.9075

The OIC has recalled the statement issued in New
York on the right of Afghan girls to education, which
called for respect for the right of all Afghans to education.
It has reiterated the central role of OIC member States
and Islamic scholars, as well as the Ulema, in continuing
dialogue, engagement and exchange of best practices
with the Afghan authorities on access to education
and women’s rights in Islam, including through the
exchanges of respective delegations.
Finally, the OIC has called on the international
community, in particular the Security Council, to
support all such engagement efforts and to remove
any practical or logistical hindrances to that end. We
trust that the Security Council and UNAMA will
take full account of those elements for normalization
and stability in Afghanistan, as set out in the OIC’s
joint statement.
We look forward to working with UNAMA under
the new Special Representative. We feel that UNAMA
must focus, first and foremost, on helping to address
the economic and financial crisis faced by Afghanistan,
including by continuing to address the impact of
bilateral sanctions, as well as working towards the
unfreezing of Afghan assets.
We are encouraged that both the Under-SecretaryGeneral and the Deputy Special Representative have
advocated engagement. It is through economic and
political engagement that concerns about human rights,
including the rights of women and girls, political
inclusivity and counter-terrorism, are likely to be
satisfactorily addressed.
Pakistan remains especially concerned about the
terrorist attacks emanating from Afghanistan, which
are attacks against my country. They are sponsored and
financed by our adversary. We will find effective ways
to end such terrorist attacks against Pakistan and stop
the disinformation campaign, which one member of
the Security Council, a State sponsor of terrorism, has
launched against my country.
Pakistan supports the efforts within the platform
of the six neighbouring countries plus Russia to
promote a pathway to peace and economic and political
normalization in Afghanistan. We also believe that the
extended troika of the United States, China, Russia
and Pakistan can make a contribution to building an
agreed pathway to peace and stability in Afghanistan,
including ways and means to effectively address the
threat of terrorism within and from Afghanistan.

22-3985731/33

S/PV.9075

The situation in Afghanistan

Despite our mutual frustrations about the lack
of progress on several issues — political inclusivity,
women’s rights, girls’ education, counter-terrorism — in
our view, the international community’s engagement
with the Afghan authorities has produced some tangible
progress on several fronts. As compared to the past,
there are not thousands of civilian casualties, as was the
count then. The overall political and security situation in
Afghanistan has remained relatively stable. The threat
of a possible civil war or wide-scale reprisal killings or
the mass exodus of refugees has been avoided thus far.
The international community should encourage
all efforts that should be made by Afghans themselves
to promote political reconciliation and inclusivity.
We welcome some of the steps that have been taken,
including the formation of a possible Loya Jirga.
We hope that we will consider the situation in
Afghanistan from the proper historical and geopolitical
perspective. We hope that, at this critical juncture in the
history of Afghanistan, we will make the right choices
that will steer the country towards peace and stability
and help bring about an end to the four decades of
suffering and war that the Afghan people have endured.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uzbekistan.
Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): At the outset, I
would like to join fellow colleagues in extending
sincere condolences to the people of Afghanistan on
the lives lost as a result of yesterday’s earthquake and
in wishing a speedy recovery to all those injured. The
Government of Uzbekistan has expressed readiness
to help the people of Afghanistan in overcoming the
consequences of that natural disaster.
I would like to start my remarks by commending
the Permanent Mission of Albania for convening
today’s meeting on the situation in Afghanistan and by
thanking all speakers for their informative briefings
and statements.
For centuries, the Uzbek and Afghan peoples have
lived side by side in a single cultural and civilizational
space. Both countries are linked to each other by
centuries-old bonds of friendship, shared history,
religion, customs and traditions. Therefore, Uzbekistan
would like to see Afghanistan become a peaceful,
independent and prosperous State. Afghan soil should
never again pose a threat to the countries of the region
or to the international community as a whole.
32/33

23/06/2022

We believe that the de facto Government needs some
time for the practical implementation of its promises
and international obligations. Exerting pressure or
enforcing bans would only exacerbate the already dire
situation in Afghanistan. The further worsening of the
socioeconomic situation may lead to the radicalization
of society, confrontations among various groups and
strengthened positions of extremist forces. At the same
time, we believe that the international community
should continue to demand that the Taliban not renege
on its promises to form an inclusive Government,
ensure human rights, including those of women and
national minorities, and provide access to education for
Afghan girls.
Uzbekistan proceeds from the fact that, in the
foreseeable future, Afghanistan will remain an
important factor in regional security, which will
directly affect the national interests of the countries of
the region, first and foremost its immediate neighbours.
Uzbekistan welcomes the recent decision of
the de facto Government of Afghanistan to ban the
cultivation of opium poppy, as well as the production,
sale, transport and smuggling of narcotic substances of
all kinds. That decision could deprive various terrorist
groups operating in the country of a source of income
from drug trafficking. At the same time, to implement
those steps, Afghan farmers should be given other
alternatives to sustain their livelihoods. That issue
has special importance given the critical humanitarian
situation in the country.
In April this year, Uzbekistan provided the
fraternal nation of Afghanistan with humanitarian
aid, consisting of foodstuffs, clothing and medicines,
including coronavirus disease vaccines and test kits.
At the initiative of the President of Uzbekistan, His
Excellency Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev, we established in
the border city of Termez a multifunctional transportlogistics hub, which is currently being extensively
used by various United Nations agencies to deliver
humanitarian aid to Afghanistan.
In Uzbekistan we believe that, in order to pull
Afghanistan out of the current deep socioeconomic
crisis, it is important to unfreeze the country’s
foreign financial assets, lift unilateral sanctions and
encourage more active participation by international
institutions in financing various infrastructure
projects in the country. Uzbekistan, together with the
Afghan side, has started the implementation of two
22-39857

23/06/2022

The situation in Afghanistan

major projects — the construction of the SurkhanPul-e-Khumri power transmission line and the
Termez-Mazar-e-Sharif-Kabul-Peshawar railroad. The
successful implementation of those projects will be
conducive to transforming Afghanistan into a bridge
between Central and South Asia, further advancing
regional connectivity.
Given the importance of this matter, Uzbekistan
has developed and submitted a General Assembly
draft resolution, entitled “Strengthening connectivity
between Central and South Asia”, and calls upon all
Member States to co-sponsor it.

S/PV.9075

In conclusion, I would like to stress that today
the international community should not abandon the
Afghan people as they face their most challenging
problems. We believe that the United Nations should
continue to play a leading role in mobilizing and
coordinating international efforts to render assistance
to Afghanistan.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I shall now adjourn the meeting so that the
Council can continue its discussion on the subject in
closed consultations.
The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

22-3985733/33
