74,

General AHembly-Tweaty-eeeond Sea■ioa

butions ; sums so advanced ·shall be reimbursed as soon
as receipts from contributions are available for the
purpose;
( b) Such sums as may be necessary to finance commitments which may be duly authorized under the
provisions of the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly, in particular resolution 2364 (XXII) of 19
December 1967 relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses ; the Secretary-General shall make
provision in the budget estimates for reimbursing the
Working Capital Fund;
( c) Such sums as, together with net sums outstanding for the same purpose, do not exceed $150,()(X),
to continue the revolving fund to finance miscellaneous
self-liquidating purchases and activities; advances in
excess of the total of $150,000 may be made with the
prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions ;
( d) With the prior concurrence of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, such sums as may be required to finance payments of advance insurance premiums where the period
of insurance extends beyond the end of the financial
year in which payment is made; the Secretary-General
shall make provision in the budget estimates of each
year, during the life of the related policies, to cover
the charges applicable to each such year ;
( e) Such sums as may be necessary to enable the
Tax Equalization Fund to meet current commitments
pending the accumulation of credits; such advances
shall be repaid as soon as credits are available in the
Tax Equalization Fund ;
6. Should the provision in paragraph 1 above prove
inadeq_uate to meet the purposes normally related to
the Working Capital Fund, the Secretary-General is
authorized to utilize, in 1968, cash from special funds
and accounts in his custody, under the conditions
approved in General Assembly resolution 1341 (XIII)
of 13 December 1958, or the proceeds of loans authorized by the Assembly.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2366 (XXIl). Emoluments of the members of the
International Court of Justice
The General Assembly,
Having Gonsidered the report by the SecretaryGenera188 and the report thereon of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 87
Decides that, with effect from 1 January 1968, the
emoluments of the members of the International Court
of Justice shall bi:! as follows :
(US dollors)

President:
Annual salary . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... .
Special allowance ............ .
Vice-President:
Annual salary . . . . ............ .
Allowance of $45 for every day on
which he acts as President, up
to an annual maximum of ....

30,000
7,200
30,000
4,500

88 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twnty-second.
SessiOfl, A.Mtxes, agenda item 74, document A/C.5/1113.
17 Ibid., document A/6861.

(US dollMs)

Other members:
Annual salary

30,000

Ad hoe judges referred to in Article 31 of the
Statute of the Court:
Fee of $54 for each day on which ad hoe judges
exercise their functions, plus, as appropriate,
a daily subsistence allowance of $28.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2367 (XXIl). Amendments to the Pemlon
Scheme llegulations for members of the
International Court of Justice
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the SecretaryGeneral88 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,89

I
Resolves that the Pension Scheme Regulations for
members of the International Court of Justice, contained in the annex to General Assembly resolution
1562 (XV) of 18 December 1960, as amended by
General Assembly resolution 1925 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963, shall be amended as follows:
ARTICLE III

(WidO'Ws pensicn)
Replace "one-third" by "one-half" wherever the term
appears in article III. The revised text will then read
as follows:
"1. Upon the death of a married member, his
widow shall be entitled to a widow's pension amounting to one-half of the pension which he would have
received had he become entitled to a disability pension at the time of his death, provided that the
widow's pension shall not be less than one-sixth of
the annual salary.
"2. Upon the death of a married former member
who was in receipt of a disability pension, his widow,
provided she was his wife at the date his service
ended, shall be entitled to a widow's pension amountting to one-half of the pension which her husband
was receiving, provided that the. widow's pension
shall not be less than one-sixth of the annual salary.
"3. Upon the death of a married former member
who was entitled to a retirement pension, his widow,
provided she was his wife at the date his service
ended, shall be entitled to a widow's pension calculated as follows:
"(a) If the former member had not begun, at the
date of his death, to receive his retirement pension,
the widow's pension shall amount to one-half of the
pension which would have been payable to him under
article I, paragraph 3, had he commenced to receive
such pension on the date of his death, provided that
the widow's pension shall not be less than onetwelfth of the annual salary;
" ( b) If the former member had begun to receive
his retirement pension, under article I, paragraph 3,
88 Ibid.,

document A/C.5/1113.

su Ibid., document A/6861.
