S/2000/1096

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 November 2000
Original: English

Letter dated 10 November 2000 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
As members of the Security Council are well aware, the Burundi peace process
culminated in the signing of the Arusha Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Burundi on 28 August 2000. The Agreement has entrusted a special role to the
United Nations. It has requested the United Nations to chair the Implementation
Monitoring Committee and to provide support to a wide range of activities together
with other international actors.
The mandate of the Implementation Monitoring Committee is broad and
complex. It includes being asked to supervise and ensure the effective
implementation of the Agreement; ensure respect for the implementation timetable
and accurate interpretation of the Agreement; arbitrate and rule on disputes that may
arise among the signatories; give guidance to and coordinate the activities of the
commissions and subcommissions set up to implement the Agreement and assist the
transitional Government in mobilizing the resources required to implement the
Agreement.
The tasks that the United Nations is expected to perform as Chairman of the
Implementation Monitoring Committee encompass most of the functions that it is
normally called upon to fulfil in support of the implementation of a comprehensive
peace agreement. For the range of activities required to support the peace process,
there will be a need to adjust the current political mandate and strengthen the
capacity of the United Nations in Burundi. The success of the Committee is an
important confidence-building measure and one that should contribute to progress in
other aspects of the peace process.
It is not yet clear how the parties to the agreement and the countries directly
involved in the peace process perceive the functions and operations of the
Implementation Monitoring Committee and the role expected of the United Nations
as its Chairman. It will be important to seek their views on those and related issues
before the planned launching of the Committee in Arusha at the end of this month. I
have, therefore, asked my Special Representative for the Great Lakes region,
Berhanu Dinka, and my Representative in Burundi, Jean Arnault, to undertake
consultations with the Facilitator, the Burundi parties, the member countries of the
regional initiative and the Organization of African Unity. Following the mission and
the meeting at Arusha, I hope to be in a position to submit to the Security Council
proposals on an expanded mandate for the United Nations in Burundi and on how

00-74949 (E) 151100
`````````

S/2000/1096

the United Nations capacity there could be strengthened to help it carry out the
functions entrusted to it as Chairman of the Committee.
In the meantime, and until such time as the details of the new tasks requested
of the United Nations are clarified, I should like to recommend that the Security
Council extend the mandate of the United Nations Office in Burundi until
31 December 2001.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

2
