S/2018/678*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 July 2018
Original: English

Strengthening the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union on issues of peace and security in
Africa, including on the work of the United Nations Office
to the African Union
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to the statement of the President of the
Security Council dated 16 December 2014 (S/PRST/2014/27), in which the Council
requested that the Secretary-General submit an annual report on ways to strengthen
the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union on issues of peace
and security in Africa, including on the work of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (UNOAU). The report provides an update on efforts to enhance the
partnership between the two organizations and on the activities of UNOAU since the
issuance of the previous report (S/2017/744), in August 2017, including issues
reflected in Council resolution 2378 (2017).

II. The United Nations and the African Union
strategic partnership
United Nations Security Council and African Union Peace and
Security Council
2.
The United Nations Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council made commendable progress in enhancing collaboration on peace and
security issues in Africa. On 7 and 8 September 2017, the members of the two bodies
held their second informal joint meeting and eleventh joint consultative meeting in
Addis Ababa. I welcome the recognition, expressed by both Councils, of the
importance of the strategic partnership between the two organizations and of the need
to further strengthen that partnership. I further welcome the intention expressed by
members of the two Councils to conduct joint missions to conflict areas in Africa to
facilitate the formulation of common positions and recommendations for joint or
coordinated action. Members of the two Councils also recognized that briefings by
special representatives and envoys of each organization to both bodies could better
align and strengthen cooperation. During the reporting period, my special
representatives and envoys or their deputies briefed the Peace and Security Council
* Reissued for technical reasons on 12 July 2018.

18-10295* (E)

120718

*1810295*

S/2018/678

on the situations in the Central African Republic, the Democratic R epublic of the
Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Libya, Mali, Somalia, South Sudan and the Sudan, as
well as on the prevention of genocide.
3.
Participants in the eleventh joint consultative meeting of the two Councils also
expressed their convergence in positions on the most intractable conflict situations on
the continent, specifically on conflict and crisis situations in Somalia, South Sudan
and the Lake Chad Basin. Members of the two Councils agreed that it was necessary
to integrate activities related to peacebuilding, recognized that the root causes of
conflict must be addressed and underlined the need for enhanced coordination
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peace and Security Council.
4.
The Peace and Security Council conducted field missions to Burundi, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan.
The missions were supported by the United Nations and enabled the Peace and
Security Council to gain first-hand insight into the realities on the ground and to
reflect them in its decisions. The three African non-permanent members of the
Security Council remained a critical link between the two Councils, as they
articulated African perspectives and common positions on issues of concern to the
continent. Representatives of those members of the Security Council participated in
Peace and Security Council meetings, and the Secretariat and the African Union
Commission regularly brief African members of the Security Council on issues of
mutual concern.
5.
The collective action of the United Nations and the African Union on peace and
security in Africa will continue to be most effective if the United Nations is closely
aligned to or supports the decisions and engagements of the African Union and
subregional organizations. The effectiveness of such joint action was clearly
illustrated in the close collaboration between the United Nations, the African Union
and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in the Gambia and
in Guinea-Bissau. I remain committed to continuing to work with the African Union
and subregional organizations in addressing conflicts and political crises across the
continent.

United Nations Secretariat and African Union Commission
6.
The Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat, and
I have continued to prioritize the development of a systematic, predictable and
strategic partnership that is based on the principle of mutual respect and comparative
advantages and that reinforces the primary responsibility of t he Security Council
under the Charter of the United Nations for the maintenance of international peace
and security, while also recognizing the important role of regional organizations
consistent with Chapter VIII of the Charter. Since the signing of the J oint United
Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security,
the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union is characterized by
closer collaboration, more regular exchange of information and consultations an d
coordinated action. At the opening ceremony of the thirtieth ordinary session of the
Assembly of the African Union, held in Addis Ababa in January 2018, I reaffirmed
the strong commitment of the United Nations to its African Member States. I recalled
that, in one year, the United Nations and the African Union would hold the first annual
conference at the summit level, and the Chairperson and I signed the joint framework
and a second agreement, namely, the African Union-United Nations Framework for
the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. I noted that the partnership was grounded in sound principles of human
rights and good governance. Both organizations recognize the importance of the

2/17

18-10295

S/2018/678

nexus between peace and security and development and that the focus of their joint
efforts must be the search for sustainable political solutions.
7.
In January, I attended the Peace and Security Council summit on combating the
transnational threat of terrorism in Africa, at which I hi ghlighted the need for a
sustained, cooperative and coordinated approach to tackling terrorism. Subsequently,
the Office of Counter-Terrorism undertook a follow-up mission to Algiers and Addis
Ababa in March to engage with African Union counterparts in the development of a
draft memorandum of understanding for collaboration and capacity -building support
in relation to counter-terrorism and the prevention of violent extremism in the context
of the joint framework.
8.
The first high-level dialogue on human rights between the African Union and
the United Nations was held in Addis Ababa on 24 April and attended by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. At the meeting, the two organizations agree d to
enhance collaboration in human rights and peace and security, including on the
women and peace and security agenda and in the compliance and accountability
frameworks for African Union peace support operations.
9.
Cooperation on the women and peace and security agenda has seen progress
during the past year. On 16 May 2018, the Peace and Security Council endorsed the
African Union results framework for monitoring and reporting on the women and
peace and security agenda in Africa, which was developed wi th the technical
assistance of the United Nations Entity for Gender and the Empowerment of Women
(UN-Women), the United Nations Development Programme and international
partners and is designed to help to advance gender equality and the empowerment of
women. After holding the first forum in New York in June 2017, the African Women
Leaders Network held the second Women Leaders Forum for Africa ’s Transformation
in Addis Ababa from 24 to 26 April, under the auspices of the African Union
Commission, in partnership with the United Nations and with the support of the
Government of Germany. The Network adopted its priority areas of work, including
on promoting leadership by women in peace and security and mobilizing political
support to denounce sexual violence in conflict. On 27 February 2018, the Network
launched the New York Group of Friends of the Network with the aim of mobilizing
support for action from Member States. Co-chaired by Ghana and Germany, the
Group has approximately 40 members from Africa, Asia, Eur ope and Latin America.
10. The thirteenth and fourteenth meetings of the United Nations -African Union
Joint Task Force on Peace and Security were held in New York in September 2017
and in Addis Ababa in January 2018, respectively. At those meetings, senio r officials
held extensive discussions on the most pressing peace and security challenges in
Africa and reviewed the situations in the Central African Republic and the Horn of
Africa, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea -Bissau, Mali and the Sahel,
Somalia and South Sudan. They underlined the importance of building
complementarities and harnessing synergies in the implementation of the joint
framework. They also agreed to enhance cooperation in supporting inclusive, credible
and peaceful elections and to continue to work on sustainable and predictable funding
for African Union peace support operations, including through United Nations
assessed contributions.
11. Staff from the Secretariat and the African Union Commission met in Addis
Ababa on 7 and 8 December 2017 for the eleventh annual United Nations-African
Union joint consultative meeting on the prevention and management of conflict. The
participants in the meeting strengthened working relationships, exchanged
information and developed joint action plans. The increased engagement between the

18-10295

3/17

S/2018/678

United Nations and the African Union illustrates the progress the two organizations
have made in strengthening their partnership over the past year.
12. Furthermore, the Secretariat and the African Union Commission continued to
implement two knowledge exchange programmes in the areas of field support: the
staff exchange programme initiated in January 2017 and the participation of
Commission staff in the senior mission leadership and resource training programmes
of the Secretariat.

III. Operational partnership of the United Nations and the
African Union
Challenges and opportunities to peace and security in Africa
13. The overall peace and security situation on the continent remained largely
unchanged. Efforts to resolve conflicts in the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya, Mali and the Sahel, Somalia, South Sudan
and the Lake Chad Basin region are ongoing, with the continued political efforts of
the United Nations, the African Union and regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms, among others. Political transitions continue to divide already
fragile countries, often leading to violence. In West Africa, ECOWAS, the African
Union and the United Nations remain engaged in Burkina Faso, the Gambia and Togo.
The three organizations also jointly conducted good offices initiatives during the
elections in Liberia in October 2017 and in Sierra Leone in March 2018.
14. The primary underlying structural challenges to peace and security continue to
be weaknesses in internal governance, including the rule of law, human rights,
delivery of basic services, managing natural resources, the effects of climate change
and food insecurity. These weaknesses are also exacerbated as a r esult of increased
inequality, corruption, violations of human rights, criminality — including crossborder and international crime — and large swathes of territory without effective
State authority. The recent signing of the African Union-United Nations Framework
for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda illustrates the
importance that both institutions attach to tackling the root causes of conflict in a
collaborative manner.
15. The root causes of some national conflicts may have been fuel led by regional or
global factors, in particular where affiliates of Al-Qaida and of Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant have exploited local grievances rooted in marginalization and weak
State institutions. The impact of climate change on peace and secur ity in Africa is
increasing, particularly in the Lake Chad Basin, the Sahel region and the Horn of
Africa region, where already vulnerable communities have been severely affected.
The United Nations continues to work with national Governments, subregional
organizations and the African Union to address these complex challenges.
16. The African Union is implementing an institutional reform agenda aimed at
ensuring greater effectiveness and efficiency. A key objective of the reform agenda is
to align the organization with the strategic priorities agreed upon at the twenty-eighth
Assembly of Heads of State and Government, held in January 2017, and to implement
a model of self-financing for the African Union. Those reforms should enable the
African Union to partner more effectively with the United Nations and other
organizations in addressing the peace and security challenges on the continent.
17. Between January and March 2018, the African Union considered three flagship
projects aimed at strengthening regional integration and promoting economic
development, namely, the agreement on the African Continental Free Trade Area and
4/17

18-10295

S/2018/678

related protocols, adopted in Kigali in March; the Protocol to the Treaty Establishing
the African Economic Community relating to Free Movement of Persons, Rights of
Residence and Right of Establishment and its draft implementation road map; and the
decision on the establishment of a Single African Air Transport Market. I commend
African leaders for these important initiatives.

Partnership in conflict prevention and peacemaking
18. The United Nations continued to work with the African Union and regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms on conflict prevention and
peacemaking. Recent experience has confirmed that the success of these initiatives
has depended, to a large degree, on the active regional support and the engagement
of regional organizations and the international community in the peace process.
19. As an illustration, efforts to prevent conflict and sustain peace in We st Africa
have been largely successful. ECOWAS is actively engaged in addressing the political
situation in Togo, under the leadership of the President of Ghana, Nana Akufo -Addo.
In Guinea-Bissau, ECOWAS imposed sanctions on 19 individuals deemed to be
obstructing the implementation of the Conakry Agreement on the Implementation of
the Economic Community of West African States Roadmap for the Resolution of the
Political Crisis in Guinea-Bissau. The mediation by ECOWAS led to a breakthrough
with the appointment of a consensual Prime Minister on 16 April. In Mali and the
Sahel, the African Union developed a Sahel strategy, inviting the United Nations and
other stakeholders to advance a shared analysis of and a shared strategy on ways to
address the myriad of structural problems affecting the Sahel. Participants in the
Strategic Consultative Meeting on the Sahel, held in Nouakchott on 28 and 29 March,
co-hosted by the African Union and attended by the Deputy Secretary -General of the
United Nations, recognized that violence, conflict and terrorism in the region can only
be ended by addressing their root causes, which included a lack of access to basic
rights, services and economic opportunities, as well as socioeconomic exclusion,
marginalization, discrimination and corruption. That objective also formed the
cornerstone of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel. The United
Nations and the African Union have continued to collaborate to ensure greater
harmonization and coordination of Sahel strategies under the Ministerial
Coordination Platform for the Sahel. The Platform is the highest regionally owned
political and operational mechanism responsible for ensuring coherence among the
various initiatives and strategies for the Sahel.
20. In Libya, the United Nations also worked closely with the African Union. On
16 January, the Chairperson of the African Union and my Special Representative for
Libya and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya issued a joint
statement to underscore a coordinated approach between the two organizations. They
also agreed that the organizations should work together to facilitate consensus among
Libyans in order to unify institutions and form an inclusive national Government. On
17 April, my Special Representative participated in the fifth meeting of the African
Union Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya. The Committee acknowledged the
role being played by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya and reiterated the
importance of enhancing cooperation between the two organizations in support of
free, fair and credible elections. During the Quartet meeting on Libya held in Cairo
on 30 April, my Special Representative met the High Representative of the African
Union for Mali and the Sahel, Pierre Buyoya, who attended on behalf of the African
Union High Representative for Libya, Jakaya Kikwete. On 29 May, my Special
Representative met with representatives of several African Member States and the
President of the Congo, Sassou Nguesso, in his capacity as Committee Chair, du ring
a meeting with Libyan political leaders held in Paris and hosted by the President of
18-10295

5/17

S/2018/678

France, Emmanuel Macron. At the meeting, Libyan participants committed to holding
elections by the end of 2018. In addition, the United Nations worked with the Africa n
Union and the European Union to facilitate the voluntary return of more than 15,000
stranded migrants and 1,300 refugees.
21. In South Sudan, the United Nations and the African Union continued to support
the high-level revitalization forum led by the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), which is aimed at ending hostilities and revitalizing a road
map for sustainable peace. The third phase of the talks, held in May, sought to forge
compromise among the parties on key issues of governance and security. IGAD made
commendable efforts to narrow the positions of the parties on those issues, including
through shuttle diplomacy and proximity talks. The involvement of the South Sudan
Council of Churches to facilitate stakeholder talks within South Sud an during the
most recent round was also a noteworthy attempt to build trust and confidence among
the parties and to empower them to reach a compromise. On 31 May, the IGAD
Council of Ministers met and authorized the mediators to embark on another round
of proximity talks based on the common ground identified during recent
consultations. The United Nations, the African Union and IGAD urged the parties to
use the next round of talks to engage constructively and break the deadlock on the
outstanding issues relating to governance and security. I welcome the continued
engagement of the Peace and Security Council, as demonstrated by the field mission
undertaken from 15 to 19 April, when it held extensive discussions with the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan and with Government and civic leaders. The Peace
and Security Council delegation expressed full support for the ongoing peace efforts
led by IGAD and stressed the need for complementarity among all peace initiatives.
The three organizations also strongly condemned the persistent and blatant violation
of the renewed cessation of hostilities agreement signed in December. To that end,
the African Union, IGAD and the Security Council renewed their resolve to take
punitive measures against individuals bent on disrupting the peace.
22. In Burundi, concerns over a lack of progress in the inter-Burundian dialogue led
by the East African Community persisted, with continued reports of the curtailment
of fundamental freedoms, arbitrary arrests, detentions and killings. In order to support
the joint efforts of the United Nations and African Union to help Burundian
stakeholders to find sustainable solutions to the political crisis and the resulting
humanitarian situation, my Special Envoy for Burundi travelled to Addis Ab aba in
November and December 2017 as well as in January and March 2018 for
consultations with the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the
Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union. The joint technical
working group of the East African Community, the African Union and the United
Nations held meetings in September, November and December 2017 to pave the way
for dialogue sessions. My Special Envoy will continue to explore options with the
East African Community and the African Union to move the peace process forward.
23. With regard to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, I welcome the continued
progress towards the attainment of key electoral milestones despite the persistent
distrust among political actors over the implementation o f the confidence-building
measures enshrined in the political agreement of 31 December 2016. Continued
cooperation and coordination among partners, as seen in the joint or aligned
statements of the United Nations and the African Union, remain essential. Th e
security and humanitarian situation is still of great concern, with hundreds of
thousands of Congolese citizens in the eastern part of the country having fled their
homes because of attacks by armed groups. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo continued to work
with the Congolese authorities to address the grave security challenges facing the
country. The United Nations and the African Union, along with other regional bodies,
6/17

18-10295

S/2018/678

including the Southern African Development Community (SADC), continued to
implement the Pact on Stability, Security and Development in the Great Lakes Region
of the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region, as well as the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Region. On 26 and 27 February, in commemoration of the fifth anniversary of the
Framework, my Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region and the African Union
convened a workshop in Addis Ababa to assess the implementation of commitments
under the Framework and to formulate concrete recommendations on how to generate
renewed momentum and promote greater ownership by stakeholders.
24. With regard to Cameroon, I am increasingly concerned about the crisis in the
north-western and south-western regions of the country. The United Nations called
for an inclusive dialogue to find lasting solutions to the crisis and expressed its
readiness to support national decentralization efforts within the framework of the
Constitution. Conflict prevention efforts were led by my Special Representative for
Central Africa and by the United Nations country team with a view to averting a
deepening of the political crisis and further violence in the country. Further conflict
prevention efforts by the international community, including the Economic
Community of Central African States and the African Union, ar e needed to address
the crisis.
25. Last, my Special Representative to the African Union undertook, in coordination
with the African Union, good offices missions to the Comoros and Madagascar to
engage Government, opposition, civic leaders, representatives of SADC and other
relevant stakeholders to support measures to avert political crises and violence. After
27 April, my Special Adviser on Madagascar continued the close United NationsAfrican Union engagement in Madagascar as part of the efforts of the international
community to facilitate the Malagasy-led dialogue.

Partnership in peacekeeping and peace support operations
26. Half of the United Nations peacekeeping operations are currently deployed in
Africa. In line with the primacy of politics as the hallmark of the United Nations
approach, the strategic partnership with the African Union has prompted
peacekeeping operations on the continent to increase efforts in support of a common
vision. This was exemplified with the joint field visit to the Central African Republic
and the Sudan undertaken by the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations and the Commissioner for Peace and Security of the African Union in
April. Their subsequent joint briefings to the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and then to the United Nations Security Council further demonstrated
how the complementarity of the two organizations can be instrumental to the benefit
of operations on the ground. While United Nations peacekeeping missions are neither
suited nor equipped to engage in counter-terrorism operations, regional actors on the
African continent have continued to assume a greater role in such operations.
27. In the Sudan, the United Nations and the African Union continued to support
peace and stability through the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The United Nations continued to support the African Union Highlevel Implementation Panel, which is leading efforts to reinvigorate the peace process.
Based on the joint strategic review of UNAMID conducted in April, the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and I submitted a joint special report on 1 June to
both councils recommending a revised concept for the Operation. The two
organizations also continued to work together to facilitate the resolution of
outstanding border issues between South Sudan and the Sudan, through the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei.

18-10295

7/17

S/2018/678

28. In the Central African Republic, the United Nations, including the
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
supported the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation led by the African
Union, including through logistics and mediation expertise. That support facilitated
the dialogue at the national level and supported the Government in reconciliation
processes at the local level. Cooperation also continued with the Regional
Cooperation Initiative for the Elimination of the Lord’s Resistance Army. Following
the withdrawal of the Ugandan forces and United States forces, the United Nations,
in collaboration with the African Union, facilitated two conferences of sector
commanders, one in Entebbe, Uganda, in November 2017 and the other in Addis
Ababa in March 2018, with the aim of preventing the Lord’s Resistance Army and
other armed groups from continuing to take advantage of the security vacuum.
29. In Mali and the Sahel, following Security Council resolution 2359 (2017), in
which the Council welcomed the deployment of the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel, the African Union, supported by the United Nations, undertook a
mission to the Joint Force headquarters in October to assess progress in establishing
the Joint Force. The African Union provided strategic guidance in establishing the
multinational force headquarters and assessed the assistance that the African Union
and other partners could offer. In line with resolution 2391 (2017), in which the
Council authorized specific support by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali for the Joint Force, technical and financial
arrangements were concluded for the implementation of such support. In April, the
Peace and Security Council renewed the mandate of the Joint Force for another year.
In Mali, the United Nations, the African Union, the European Union and ECOWAS
worked as part of the international mediation team led by Algeria to support Malian
parties in implementing the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali through
the Agreement Monitoring Committee.
30. At the Somalia Security Conference held in Mogadishu on 4 December, the
Federal Government of Somalia shared the results of the operational readiness
assessment of the Somali National Army, which revealed the current challenge faced
by the national army in taking over security responsibilit y from the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). Acknowledging an urgent need to build the capacity
of the national army and to develop a realistic plan to transfer national security
responsibilities from AMISOM to the national army, the Federal Gover nment of
Somalia, with support from international partners, including AMISOM, developed a
transition plan. The Federal Government of Somalia, Federal Member States and
international partners reiterated their commitment to supporting the implementation
of the plan, including at the Somalia Security High-Level Meeting, held in Brussels
on 2 May. With regard to AMISOM funding, my Special Envoy, Jean-Marie
Guéhenno, and the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, Ramtane Lamamra, undertook consultations with a broad range of
AMISOM key partners to identify viable options for the future funding of AMISOM.
The Special Envoys submitted their report to the Secretary-General and the
Chairperson in early April; the report was subsequently tra nsmitted to the United
Nations Security Council and to the African Union Peace and Security Council, and,
together with the transition plan, guided the African Union-United Nations joint
review of AMISOM. From 11 to 19 May, the joint review was carried out with the
participation of all AMISOM police- and troop-contributing countries, and
international partners. The letter of the Secretary-General on its outcome is to be
issued to the Security Council to inform the discussion of the Council on the renewal
of the AMISOM mandate.
31. With assistance from the African Union and international partners, the Lake
Chad Basin Commission continued to support the efforts of the Multinational Joint
8/17

18-10295

S/2018/678

Task Force to combat Boko Haram. Between November and May, two major
conferences were held to address the root causes of the conflict through the
development of a stabilization strategy for the Lake Chad region. My Special
Representatives for Central Africa and for West Africa and the Sahel, supported by
the respective United Nations country teams, have advocated the establishment of a
comprehensive joint regional strategy that addresses the root causes of the crisis.
Efforts are also under way to ensure closer links between humanitarian and
development programming, in cooperation with financial institutions such as the
World Bank and the African Development Bank.

Partnership in peacebuilding and rule of law
32. On 18 September, the United Nations and the African Union signed a
memorandum of understanding to strengthen cooperation in support of efforts aimed
at peacebuilding and sustaining peace in Africa, taking a concrete step towards the
implementation of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. On 7 December, the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Peace and Security Council held their annual meeting in Addis Ababa, at
which participants expressed support for an increased focus on conflict prevention,
good governance, human rights and national reconciliation. The participants also
underscored the importance of enhancing coordination to better address the root
causes of conflict, including efforts to address growing transnational and cross-border
challenges to peacebuilding. The Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding
Support highlighted key country-specific and cross-border initiatives supported by
the Peacebuilding Fund, with successful outcomes of proje cts to enhance transitional
justice mechanisms, justice sector and security sector reform, political dialogue and
mediation, the empowerment of youth and women, and community-based
programmes against violent extremism and radicalization.
33. The United Nations and the African Union also collaborated in key areas of the
rule of law and security institutions. In line with the African Union Master Road Map
of Practical Steps for Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020, the United Nations
provided support and advice on the recommendation of the Peace and Security
Council to declare September of each year until 2020 Africa Amnesty Month for the
surrender of illegally owned weapons and arms, and on the development of African
Union guidance on effective arms and ammunition management in its peace support
operations. In addition, the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa provided assistance to Central African States in strengthening
their capacity to effectively implement the Kinshasa Conve ntion for the control of
small arms and light weapons.
34. Following the development of the African Union operational guidance notes on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, the United Nations continued to
support the predeployment training of the Eastern African Standby Force and the
mapping of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration training across Africa
under the relevant African Union capacity-building programme. In addition, the
United Nations supported the African Union in developing a regional strategy for the
screening, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration of persons formerly
associated with Boko Haram.
35. On 14 March, the European Union and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, in partnership with the United Nations, the African Union and
the Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces, organized a
workshop in Brussels on mapping multilateral approaches to security sector reform.
From 4 to 8 June, the African Union, in partnership with the Un ited Nations,

18-10295

9/17

S/2018/678

supported a sensitization workshop in Addis Ababa for security sector officials of
Madagascar, aimed at making further progress in the country in that area.
36. The United Nations and the African Union continued to implement the 2017
memorandum of understanding on mine action. The United Nations provided
technical guidance and support for the implementation of the African Union Mine
Action and Explosive Remnants of War Strategic Framework and its pilot project on
ammunition safety management. Jointly developed safety information protocols were
distributed in five languages to military personnel of African Union peace support
operations and to Member States. The United Nations also participated in an
improvised explosive device threat assessment in Burkina Faso and carried out mine
action interventions in Guinea-Bissau and Malawi.
37. In October 2017, the African Union, the United Nations, regional economic
communities, regional mechanisms and other partners conducted a pilot
predeployment training course for Ethiopian and Zambian individual police officers.
In addition, the United Nations provided support in the development of a police
predeployment training package specific to AMISOM. The African Union also
co-hosted, in Addis Ababa on 4 December 2017, the first course for senior female
police commanders aimed at preparing them for leadership roles in United Nations
and African Union peace support operations. The second such course in Africa was
conducted in Dakar from 3 to 9 May 2018. The African Union also participated in the
United Nations course for police planners. In January 2018, the Specialized Technical
Committee on Defence, Safety and Security of the African Union adopted a policy
for international policing in peace support operations. T he United Nations-African
Union partnership continued to grow through joint training and curriculum
development. The United Nations provided expert advice in the development of 13
police guidance documents of the African Union.

IV. Support for African Union Peace Support Operations
Update on the implementation of the Peace Fund
38. In its resolution 2378 (2017), the Security Council recalled the commitment
made by the Assembly of the African Union at its twenty-fourth ordinary session, held
in January 2015, to fund 25 per cent of the cost of its peace and security efforts,
including peace support operations. The Security Council also expressed its intention
to give further consideration to practical steps that could be taken and to the
conditions necessary to establish the mechanism through which peace support
operations led by the African Union and authorized by the Security Council could be
partly financed through United Nations assessed contributions, on a case-by-case
basis. The African Union has taken steps towards the implementation of the Peace
Fund. Since my previous report, the Assembly of the African Union adopted an
instrument relating to the enhanced governance and management structure of the
Peace Fund at its thirtieth ordinary session, paving the way for the establishment of a
board of trustees, an executive management committee and an independent evaluation
panel, and the recruitment of a fund manager and the staff of the Peace Fund
secretariat.
39. As of June 2018, States members of the African Union had contributed
$45.7 million to the Peace Fund, the highest level of contributions since the
establishment of the Fund in 1993. To reach the endowment target of $400 million by
2021, as set in a decision taken by the Assembly in July 2016, States members of the
African Union have been assessed $65 million annually in 2017 and 2018 and will be
assessed $90 million annually between 2019 and 2021.
10/17

18-10295

S/2018/678

40. In 2018, a key objective of the African Union is to accelerate the full
implementation of the governance and management structures of the Peace Fund. At
its 770th meeting, held on 2 May, the Peace and Security Council requested the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission to appoint the Board o f Trustees of the
Peace Fund by mid-June 2018. It further requested the Chairperson of the
Commission to develop the financial and procurement rules and regulations of the
Peace Fund, to elaborate standard operating procedures and manuals, to establish the
Executive Management Committee, and to commence the recruitment of staff for the
Peace Fund secretariat by September 2018. A second key objective is for the High
Representative for the Peace Fund, Donald Kaberuka, to intensify outreach and
engagement with States members of the African Union as well as with external
partners.

Update on the development of compliance frameworks
41. The development of a compliance framework for international humanitarian law
and human rights and for conduct and discipline for African Union peace support
operations remains a priority for the partnership and is an essential aspect to achieve
greater accountability, transparency and protection for human rights. The Secretariat
worked closely with the African Union Commission to develop key components of
the compliance framework pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2320 (2016) and
2378 (2017).
42. These collaborative efforts have led to key achievements. The policies on
conduct and discipline and on prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and
abuse have been finalized. Guidance and certification notes on human rights
screening as part of the guidelines for troop-contributing countries are currently being
developed to ensure that personnel deployed to African Union peace support
operations do not have prior records of human rights violations.
43. Other initiatives include the preparation by the African Union of training
standards for the integrated protection of civilians to familiarize peace support
operations personnel with the rules and standards of internation al humanitarian law,
human rights, child protection, detention issues and specific protection measures for
women in peace support operations contexts. The African Union also conducted
assessment missions to AMISOM and the Multinational Joint Task Force in March
and April, respectively, to identify gaps and lessons learned in enhancing compliance
in African Union peace support operations. In November 2017, the United Nations
and the African Union held a joint workshop on accountability mechanisms for
African Union peace support operations to identify good practices and the next steps
with respect to oversight and the implementation of accountability mechanisms for
violations of human rights. The United Nations facilitated the participation of African
Union representatives in the United Nations continuous learning programme for
conduct and discipline personnel in United Nations field missions in May 2018. This
collaboration supports the ongoing development of the complianc e and accountability
framework.
44. The African Union Commission also focused on implementing compliance
structures and mechanisms both at the mission level and at headquarters. A
compliance cluster has been established within the African Union, with
representatives from departments with an institutional role relating to human rights
and conduct and discipline. The African Union made efforts to enhance compliance
in its mandated and authorized missions, which included deploying an additional
three human rights officers in AMISOM; launching processes for the revision and
harmonization of AMISOM standard operating procedures for boards of inquiry;
seeking approval for AMISOM standard operating procedures on ex gratia payments
18-10295

11/17

S/2018/678

to victims of AMISOM operations and for dedicated funds; and supportin g the
Multinational Joint Task Force in the development of a mission -wide strategy on the
protection of civilians.

Update on strengthening the operational readiness of the
African Standby Force as the overall framework for peace
support operations
45. Progress has been reported in making four of the African Standby Force regional
brigades operational. An independent verification, confirmation and validation
exercise, in which the United Nations participated as an observer, was conducted in
2017 to ascertain the level of readiness of the regional standby forces. Although more
needs to be done in terms of mandating, financing and logistical support, as well as
further developing civilian and police capabilities, the report on the exercise
confirmed the operational readiness of the Standby Force. On 29 January, the report
was endorsed by the thirtieth Assembly of Heads of State and Government, which
requested all stakeholders to support the full operationalization of the Standby Force
and to harmonize the activities of the African Capacity for Immediate Response to
Crises and ad hoc coalitions with the Standby Force framework for future deployment.
46. The African Union Commission updated the Maputo strategic workplan (2016–
2020), including recommendations contained in the report on the independent
verification exercise, to assist in facilitating the continuous monitoring and evaluation
of the African Standby Force. The Commission also continued its review of the
current doctrine of the Standby Force in order to develop it into a peace support
operations doctrine and concept for the Standby Force.
47. In order to develop a comprehensive legal framework on the deployment of the
African Standby Force, a process has been under way to engage with the regional
economic communities and regional mechanisms to agree on harmonized political
decision-making and mandating procedures. The African Union Commission issued
training directives for the Standby Force for the period 2018–2020 as part of its efforts
to develop an exercise in the planning, management and training capability of the
Standby Force. Relevant regional economic communities and regional mechanisms
were also directed to conduct at least two continental and regional level exercises
each year.
48. The African Union Commission developed a common costs document that
contains details on the categories of support that are expected to be provided and
funded by the African Union through the Peace Fund. The document served to guide
the Commission in facilitating the planning, rapid deployment and sustainment of
African Union peace support operations and was approved at the tenth meeting of the
Specialized Technical Committee on Defence, Safety and Security in January.
49. Last, the African Union has made progress on the development of logistics
capabilities, including the establishment of the Continental Logistics Base and the
strategic lift capability of the African Standby Force. Since the inauguration of the
Continental Logistics Base in Douala, Cameroon, on 5 January, efforts have been
focused on its operationalization as a key enabler of the African Standby Force, in
particular through the deployment of a start-up team and work on standard operating
procedures. The African Union Commission is also facilitating th e establishment and
operationalization of a continental movement control centre for the coordination of
strategic lift operations, as well as regional movement control centres in the five
subregions.

12/17

18-10295

S/2018/678

Update on the development of a reporting framework
50. In the light of the imperatives of flexibility and ownership in both organizations
and the well-established reporting frameworks that have been developed over decades
by the Secretariat, a reporting framework is being developed in conjunction with the
African Union with consideration of the complementary processes of and unique
differences between the two organizations.
51. As highlighted in the communiqué of the Peace and Security Council of 2 May,
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission established an interdepartmental
task force on the operationalization of the Peace Fund and the African Union -United
Nations partnership with respect to securing predictable and sustainable financing for
peace support operations mandated or authorized by the African Union. Discussions
with the task force regarding the style, format, content and frequency of information sharing and reporting on mandate delivery and accountability will continue with
regard to reporting between the United Nations Secretariat and th e Commission and
by the Secretariat and the Commission to the two Councils.
52. With regard to fiduciary reporting in cases where an intervention is partially or
fully funded through United Nations assessed contributions, it was agreed with the
African Union Commission that the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United
Nations, as well as its financial and budgetary procedures and standard reporting
framework, would apply. This would include formal results-based budgets and budget
performance reports, financial reporting, compliance and audits.
53. My report on options for authorization and support for African Union peace
support operations (S/2017/454) contained proposed financing models for United
Nations support for African Union peace support operations. The models included
voluntary contributions to a trust fund, joint financing and budgeting, the support
office model, joint financing of a hybrid mission, and a direct subvention to the
African Union. Comprehensive support for the financing mechanisms requires a
coordinated approach between United Nations organs. While the Security Council
endorses a mandate that includes a possible support package, the reporting framework
for financing remains within the purview of the General Assembly. The activation of
one of the funding models mentioned above would require advance preparation,
which would include determining, inter alia, the specific financing modalities and
budgeting processes for each respective model and how the human rights due
diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces
would be applied in each case.

V. Partnership with other regional organizations
and arrangements
54. Regional economic communities and regional mechanisms are often the first to
experience the early warning signs of impending conflict and have the most to gain
from conflict prevention. They are important partners to the United Nations in
promoting dialogue and reconciliation, exercising influence on parties to conflict to
ensure the implementation of peace agreements, countering terrorism, preventing
violent extremism and addressing migration issues. At the same time, recent
experience has illustrated that regional interests and proximity to the parties can also
complicate conflict prevention and resolution efforts, highlighting the importance of
effective partnership for the two organizations and the regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms to engage early and develop a common
understanding of conflicts and a coordinated response.

18-10295

13/17

S/2018/678

55. On 20 September 2017, I met the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
and the European Union High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
on the margins of the General Assembly to discuss trilateral cooperation and identify
new areas for collaboration. A further meeting, which also included the President of
the European Commission, was held on the margins of the African Union -European
Union Summit. At the summit, which was held in Côte d’Ivoire on 29 and
30 November, the situation of migrants and refugees in Libya was discussed, and it
was agreed that a joint task force of the African Union, European Union and United
Nations would be created to assist voluntary returns to countries of origin and the
resettlement of those in need of international protection. The task force was formally
launched in Addis Ababa on 4 December, and met in Brussels on 14 December to
discuss concrete initiatives and actions. On 22 February 2018, a high -level mission
of the three organizations visited Tripoli to assess the progress that had been made
and to enhance cooperation with Libyan authorities in the joint response to migration
and protection challenges. Between 28 November 2017 and 30 May 2018, a total of
13,919 persons received assistance under the IOM humanitarian voluntary return
programme. The United Nations also worked closely with the African Union, its Ad
Hoc High-level Committee on Libya and other regional organizations, including the
European Union and the League of Arab States, in addressing political, security and
humanitarian challenges in Libya.
56. In addition, the United Nations and the European Union supported preparations
for the July 2018 elections in Mali. The European Union was also an important partner
to the United Nations more generally in the Sahel region, including through the
provision of financing for the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and in
support of AMISOM in Somalia.

VI. Activities of the United Nations Office to the African Union
57. UNOAU continued to work closely with the African Union to strengthen
collaboration and unity of action. The Office is the conduit for enhancing the strategic
and operational partnership with the African Union, providing c ontinuous political
engagement, substantive and technical support, and facilitating convergence in
decision-making, including between the Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council. Regular consultations with the senior leadership of the African U nion
Commission resulted in enhanced, forward-looking joint action with the African
Union and regional economic communities and regional mechanisms. My Special
Representative to the African Union continued to promote the importance of a
common understanding and joint analysis of conflict situations in devising
coordinated conflict prevention and management strategies.
58. My Special Representative to the African Union also undertook, in coordination
with the African Union Commission and in consultation wit h SADC, preventive
diplomacy missions in the Comoros in October and November 2017 and in February
2018 to support the national dialogue process, as well as in Madagascar in October
and in March to help to create an environment conducive to peaceful preside ntial and
legislative elections. Joint United Nations-African Union messaging emphasized the
need for a consensual, transparent and inclusive approach in order to address a
political stalemate and avert election-related violence, respectively. Further political
engagements were carried out by the Special Representative in support of African
Union efforts towards a common regional strategy, including through a mission
carried out in the Sudan in March.
59. As a result of UNOAU advocacy and coordination, United Nations and African
Union special representatives delivered joint briefings to the two Councils more

14/17

18-10295

S/2018/678

frequently, and engaged in coordinated mediation and good offices activities in areas
of common concern. UNOAU provided 45 briefings to the Peace and Security
Council, presenting United Nations positions on emerging and ongoing crises, and
facilitated briefings by my special representatives and envoys. The two organizations
also issued joint statements that demonstrated their alignment in support of polit ical
processes and in addressing political crises. In addition to substantive support,
UNOAU facilitated field visits by the Peace and Security Council and visits by the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission to Somalia, South Sudan and the Sahel
region, and provided logistical support to missions to the African Union.
60. UNOAU continued to support the implementation of the mechanisms of the
African Peace and Security Architecture by providing expert technical advice and
facilitating surge capacity from United Nations headquarters and other entities. Those
activities included a workshop conducted in New York from 4 to 8 June for the Peace
and Security Council Committee of Experts on the work and pro cedures of the
Security Council; a workshop conducted in Nairobi on 12 and 13 April on integrating
indicators on atrocity crimes into the Continental Early Warning System; and
UNOAU participation in the inaugural meeting of the African Network of Women in
Conflict Prevention and Peace Mediation, also known as “FemWise”, a new network
of women peacemakers, under the umbrella of the Panel of the Wise, to share best
practices in mediation. In addition, UNOAU provided technical support through
working-level engagements in partnership with the African Union on conf lict
prevention and management.
61. UNOAU supported AMISOM by providing technical advice through
participation in operational assessments, implementation planning, capability
readiness assessments, joint reviews and reviews of concepts of operations.
Coordination among the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia, the United
Nations Support Office in Somalia and UNOAU ensures common messaging and
positions, including on United Nations support for AMISOM.
62. UNOAU also supported the planning and management of other peace support
operations mandated by the African Union, including through a joint assessment for
the establishment of the headquarters of the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel in July 2017. Advice to the Multinational Joint Task Force was also provided
through participation in the meetings of the joint steering committee of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission and the African Union aimed at streamlining additional African
Union support. UNOAU actively participated in verification missi ons of the rapid
deployment capability of the regional standby forces across the five African Standby
Force regions between July and October 2017, and provided expertise towards the
establishment of the Continental Logistics Base in January 2018 and toward s the
development of the strategic lift capability. Furthermore, UNOAU participated in
assessment missions led by the African Union in Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Nigeria and Somalia, leading to the development of standards
for ammunition safety management and improvised explosive device mitigation.

VII. Observations and recommendations
63. The United Nations and the African Union continue to prioritize the
development of a systematic, predictable and strategic partnership based on mutual
respect, shared values and comparative advantages. Such a partnership ensures bettercoordinated, coherent and effective initiatives to prevent, resolve and manage the
increasingly complex peace and security challenges in Africa. I welcome the progress
made in the partnership, in particular the trend towards joint briefings of the two
Councils by special representatives and envoys of the two organizations, joint field

18-10295

15/17

S/2018/678

visits by senior officials and greater collaboration between the Secretariat a nd the
African Union Commission. I welcome the intention expressed by members of the
two Councils to conduct joint field missions in the near future in order to facilitate
the formulation of common positions and recommendations.
64. Contemporary threats to peace and security in Africa are placing new demands
on the United Nations, the African Union and the regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms. The successful management of political crises and the
prevention or mitigation of violent conflict on the continent have been achieved when
African States are unified, enabling the African Union and the United Nations to
support efforts to prevent conflict and sustain peace. The two organizations must
continue to work closely with regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms and neighbouring countries to address conflicts on the continent, ensure
consistency of messaging and align positions and action.
65. As part of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, regional organizations will
play a central role in collectively addressing the existing challenges to peacekeeping.
I intend to involve the African Union in particular in the process of capturing mutual
commitments to peacekeeping through a declaration to which Member States will be
invited to subscribe later in 2018.
66. The African Union continues to make commendable progress in enhancing its
capabilities in conflict prevention and resolution, including in peace support
operations. States members of the African Union are working towards self -reliance
and have paid the highest level of contributions since the establishment of the Peace
Fund in 1993. I welcome the intention of the Security Council, expressed in its
resolution 2378 (2017), to consider practical steps that can be taken to establish the
mechanism through which peace support operations led by the African Union could
be partly financed through United Nations assessed contributions. The updates
contained in section IV of the present report provide a basis for continued discussion
on this issue. The Secretariat will engage further with the interdepartmental task force
of the African Union Commission on the operationalization of the Peace Fund and the
African Union-United Nations partnership with respect to securing predictable and
sustainable financing for peace support operations mandated or authorized by the
African Union. In line with the requests expressed by the Council in its resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017), I intend to explore in greater detail with the General
Assembly the financing options outlined in section IV of the report on options for
authorization and support for African Union peace support operations (S/2017/454).
67. Achieving genuine progress on the compliance framework for African Union
peace support operations remains a long-term and gradual effort that will require
continued strong commitment by the African Union and United Nations leadership,
including sustained capacity in the African Union Commission and the ability to show
tangible progress in existing operations. It will also require the same level of
commitment by Member States and relevant partners.
68. The ongoing reforms in the United Nations and the African Union provide an
opportunity to reconfigure the Secretariat and the African Union Commission to
better address contemporary peace and security challenges. Resources are limited,
and demands remain high. It is becoming critical to be more creative and work to
each institution’s comparative advantages. The endeavours of the two organizations
must be anchored in a firm commitment to strengthening multila teralism, recognizing
that their common destiny lies in greater international cooperation to address the
complex challenges facing Africa and impacting the rest of the world. In this regard,
I remain resolutely committed to deepening partnerships with the African Union
across the continent, including with regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms, Member States, the private sector and civil society.
16/17

18-10295

S/2018/678

69. UNOAU is the conduit and main interlocutor between the United Nations and
the African Union. The engagements between UNOAU and African Union officials
are essential to the efforts to strengthen the partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union. In discharging this important responsibility, I remain mindful
of the need to review and strengthen the Office in line with the growing demands of
the partnership. In the coming months, I intend to conduct the assessment requested
in Security Council resolution 2320 (2016) and to report on the findings in my next
report to the Council.
70. I pay tribute to the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki
Mahamat, for his leadership and his unwavering commitment to the partnership with
the United Nations, and more generally to multilateralism. I also express my
appreciation to the African Union, its member States and regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms for their continued cooperation in addressing
challenges to peace and security in Africa. Finally, I wish to expres s my appreciation
to my Special Representative to the African Union, Haile Menkerios, as well as the
staff of UNOAU and all United Nations and African Union entities working to
advance the common effort for peace, security and development in Africa.

18-10295

17/17
