S/2021/62

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 January 2021
Original: English

United Nations Support Mission in Libya
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report, submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2542
(2020) and 2510 (2020), covers political, security and economic developments in
Libya, provides an overview of the human rights and humanitarian situation and
includes an outline of the activities of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) since the issuance of my previous report on 25 August 2020 ( S/2020/832)
and interim report on 30 December 2020 (S/2020/1309) on proposed ceasefire
monitoring arrangements in Libya.

II. Political, security and economic developments
2.
Since my previous report (S/2020/832), a de facto truce in central Libya has
continued to hold. Meanwhile, consultations with the Libyan parties to advance a
ceasefire agreement, resume political talks and advance economic reforms have
continued, under the auspices of the United Nations.
3.
From 6 to 10 September, delegations representing members of the House of
Representatives and of the High State Council met in Bouznika, Morocco, to discuss
the appointment of sovereign positions listed in article 15 of the Libyan Political
Agreement, including the Governor of the Central Bank of Libya and the Head of the
Audit Bureau.
4.
From 7 to 9 September, representatives of the main Libyan parties met in
Montreux, Switzerland, at the invitation of the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue and
in the presence of UNSMIL, to discuss transitional arrangements leading to a
comprehensive solution to the Libyan conflict. The participants issued recommendations
that included a time frame for the transition, the restructuring of the executive
authority and its selection and oversight mechanism.
5.
On 16 September, in a televised address, the Prime Minister, Faiez Mustafa
Serraj, announced his intention to resign as President of the Presidency Council and
hand over power to a new executive authority by the end of Oc tober 2020. On
30 October, in response to calls from the High State Council and some members of
the House of Representatives, Mr. Serraj announced that he would remain in post until
an agreement was reached to ensure a smooth transition to the new executiv e
authority.

21-00238 (E)

210121

*2100238*

S/2021/62

6.
On 20 September, the High State Council endorsed the outcome of the Bouznika
talks (see para. 3). The delegations of the House of Representatives and of the High
State Council met again in Morocco on 30 September and reached a provisional
agreement on the selection criteria, including representation of the three historic
Libyan regions, competencies and appointment mechanisms for sovereign positions.
Consultative meetings continued in Tangier, Morocco from 23 to 28 November, and
in Ghadamis, Libya, on 6 December.
7.
In October, the National Oil Corporation progressively lifted the declaration of
force majeure, ending the blockade on the oil infrastructure after more than nine
months. On 23 October, the Corporation confirmed that foreign arm ed elements
reportedly operating in Sharara oil field and Ra’s Lanuf oil port had vacated the
premises.
8.
On 23 October, the Agreement for a complete and permanent ceasefire in Libya
between the Libyan Army of the Government of National Accord and the Li byan
National Army of the General Command of the Armed Forces ( S/2020/1043, annex)
was signed at the United Nations Office at Geneva by the Libyan Army of the
Government of National Accord of the State of Libya and the Libyan National Army,
General Command of the Armed Forces. I transmitted the Agreement to the Security
Council on 27 October.
9.
Notwithstanding the ceasefire agreement, Government of National Accord
forces continued to maintain their presence at Abu Qurayn and Washkah, with
ongoing patrolling activities reportedly taking place and military cargo flights
reported at Watiyah and Misratah airports. The Libyan National Army and affiliated
groups maintained fortifications and military outposts equ ipped with air defence
systems between Sirte and Jufrah, and north of Jufrah airbase. In addition, the Libyan
National Army extended the military build-up of forces in southern Libya,
implementing fortifications and air defence systems in and around Birak al-Shati’
airbase.
Implementation of the intra-Libyan dialogue tracks, facilitated by the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya
10. During the reporting period, tangible progress was achieved in advancing the
UNSMIL-facilitated political, security and economic intra-Libyan dialogues within
the framework of the conclusions of the Berlin Conference on Libya.
11. On 17 September, my acting Special Representative chaired the third meeting
of the UNSMIL-facilitated intra-Libyan economic dialogue. The virtual meeting
convened 29 Libyan economic experts and representatives from the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank to discuss and review the
policy road map developed during the economic dialogue, which was adopted by the
international follow-up committee to the Berlin Conference on Libya in July 2020.
The road map provides a set of priority economic reforms required to establish a
durable economic arrangement, including the transparent management of oil revenues.
12. In September and October, UNSMIL held consultative meetings in preparation
for the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, including tribal leaders, mayors, women and
youth.
13. From 19 to 23 October, the fourth round of in-person meetings of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission was held in Geneva, under the auspices of the United Nations,
and the ceasefire agreement was signed on 23 October (see para. 8). The Libyan
parties requested the assistance of the United Nations for the inclusion of a Libyan
ceasefire monitoring mechanism in the ceasefire agreement (see S/2020/1043).
Throughout November, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission reconvened in Ghadamis,
2/17

21-00238

S/2021/62

Sirte and Marsa al-Burayqah to discuss the operationalization of the agreement and
the unification and restructuring of the Petroleum Facilities Guard. In December, the
5+5 Joint Military Commission continued to exert efforts and engage regularly inside
Libya to advance the implementation of the ceasefire agreement.
14. Progress on the security track generated momentum for the resumption of
UNSMIL-facilitated intra-Libyan political talks. On 26 October, my acting Special
Representative convened the first virtual session of the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum. UNSMIL briefed participants on the latest developments in the security,
economic and international humanitarian law and human rights tracks of the
international follow-up committee. A group of women, youth and mayors briefed the
Forum on the UNSMIL-led consultations, which took place prior to the talks.
15. From 9 to 15 November, UNSMIL convened the first in-person meeting of the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, with the support of UNDP. The meeting was held
in Tunis and hosted by the President of Tunisia. The Forum brought toge ther
75 participants, including 17 women, representing all regions, as well as the main
political and social constituencies in Libya, including the House of Representatives
and the High State Council. On 15 November, the Forum adopted a political road
map, which concludes with the holding of presidential and parliamentary elections on
24 December 2021, marking the seventieth anniversary of the country’s independence.
16. The Libyan Political Dialogue Forum political road map, entitled “The
preparatory phase for a comprehensive solution”, complements the Libyan Political
Agreement. It sets out general principles and objectives guiding the transition period
under reconstituted and unified institutions, as well as the main time frames for the
endorsement of a new executive authority by the House of Representatives and for
the constitutional arrangements. Key human rights principles that emerged from
consultations with civil society actors were included in the road map, including
ensuring that the Libyan political process be rights-based and rights-centred, that the
political agreement reflects the needs, interests and grievances of victims and their
families, ending impunity, empowering women through meaningful participation and
fostering an environment conducive to peace, stability and democracy.
17. The Libyan Political Dialogue Forum also agreed on the competencies,
eligibility criteria and prerogatives for a reformed executive authority to lead a
government of national unity during the transitional period. T he reformed executive
authority, which would be composed of a three-member Presidency Council and a
separate Prime Minister with two deputies, would be tasked to reunify State
institutions and provide security and basic services to the population until ele ctions
were held. The Forum agreed to meet regularly to monitor the implementation of the
road map.
18. Since November, my acting Special Representative has reconvened the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum on a regular basis, to continue discussions on a se lection
mechanism for the executive authority. The participants narrowed the initial nine
options for the selection mechanism down to two. Separately, on 14 December, the
Speaker of the House of Representatives formed a committee, including some Forum
members, to provide alternative solutions should the Forum not advance.
19. On 21 December, my acting Special Representative launched virtually the legal
committee of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum to follow up on the discussions of
the constitutional committee established by the House of Representatives and the
High State Council and to make recommendations on, inter alia, a proposal or
proposals for an appropriate constitutional basis and arrangements for the national
elections. The committee is comprised of 18 members of the Forum, with
representatives of the House of Representatives, the High State Council and other
constituencies, including women. The Legal Committee has held three virtual
21-00238

3/17

S/2021/62

meetings, during which members shared proposals for constituti onal arrangements
for elections.
20. On 4 January, my acting Special Representative established the Advisory
Committee of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum to discuss issues related to the
selection of a unified executive authority and to propose concre te and practical
recommendations to the Forum to decide upon. The committee is composed of
18 members of the Forum to ensure broad geographical, political and cultural
diversity, as well as the participation of women and youth.
21. On 26 December, the 5+5 Joint Military Commission announced the exchange
of prisoners between the Government of National Accord and the Libyan National
Army, as part of the confidence-building measures agreed to during their meetings in
Sirte. Thirty-three Libyan National Army prisoners were exchanged for 15 Government
of National Accord prisoners near Shuwayrif, under the auspices of the 5+5 Joint
Military Commission and elders from Misratah and Zintan. The second round of
prisoner exchanges took place on 6 January.
International follow-up committee to the Berlin Conference on Libya
22. The international follow-up committee met virtually on 27 August, 29 September,
6 November and 16 December at the senior official level. Its four working groups,
covering security, political, economic and international humanitarian law and human
rights aspects, provided advice to Libyan authorities and supported additional
confidence-building efforts.
23. Since August 2020, the security working group, co-chaired by France, Italy,
Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the African
Union, has held 10 meetings to accompany Libyan efforts to operationalize the
ceasefire agreement and develop a monitoring mechanism. On 23 November 2020,
the 5+5 Joint Military Commission participated in the Security Working Group
plenary meetings and requested the Security Council to adopt a resolution endorsing
the 23 October ceasefire agreement and its provisions. The Security Working Group
plans to invite the Joint Military Commission to its next meeting in January 2021.
24. The political working group, co-chaired by Algeria, Germany and the League of
Arab States, met on 24 September and 3 December, to accompany and support United
Nations efforts to reach a political solution to the Libyan conflict. On 5 December,
the co-chairs issued a statement calling on all Libyan stakeholders to support the
outcomes of the political dialogue and encouraged all participants of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum to agree on the modalities of the new executive authority,
and refrain from hate speech. They also said in the statement that progress on the
political track could contribute to further consolidating the implementation of the
ceasefire agreement and advance talks on economic governan ce.
25. On 20 and 22 October, the economic working group, co-chaired by Egypt, the
United States of America and the European Union, together with representatives of
the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, reviewed the presentation
developed by the Libyan Experts Economic Commission on the economic situation
of the country and priority economic reforms to be delivered to the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum. On 5 November, the economic working group recommended at its
plenary meeting that quick impact projects be developed to form the basis of a
reconstruction mechanism, as envisaged in the conclusions of the Berlin Conference.
On 14 and 15 December 2020 and 5 January 2021, UNSMIL convened a technical
meeting of key Libyan economic experts, including the World Bank, in Geneva, to
further develop economic reforms and restore public confidence in the management
of the economy of Libya. The Economic Working Group, with the participation of the
World Bank, representatives of both branches of the Central Bank of Libya, the
4/17

21-00238

S/2021/62

Ministry of Finance, the National Audit Bureau and the National Oil Corporation,
together with members of the Libyan Experts Economic Commission, also met to
discuss currency reform, the banking crisis and the unification of the nation al budget,
including a timetable for implementing these reforms.
26. The International Humanitarian Law and Human Rights Working Group,
co-chaired by the Netherlands and Switzerland, met on 8 and 24 September and
1 December. Their discussions were focused on support for accountability and
transitional justice. In order to strengthen national capacities, the Working Group
advocated for technical and financial support to the General Authority for Search and
Identification of Missing Persons. On 1 December, the Minister of Justice, the
Director of the General Authority for Search and Identification of Missing Persons
and civil society representatives briefed the Working Group on national efforts and
plans to further prioritize transitional justice mechanisms, while implementing the
Libyan Political Dialogue Forum outcomes.
International and regional engagement
27. Regional and international stakeholders continued to engage in support of a
political solution to the Libyan crisis. On 27 August, my acting Spe cial Representative
met with the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Morocco and other government officials
in Rabat to discuss the initiative by Morocco to support United Nations mediation
efforts. On 29 August, my acting Special Representative met with the Foreign Minister
of Egypt, other senior government officials, and the Secretary -General of the League
of Arab States in Cairo. At the invitation of the Government of Egypt, UNSMIL
facilitated talks on the constitutional framework between representatives of t he High
State Council and the House of Representatives from 11 to 13 October in Cairo.
28. On 5 October, I co-chaired a ministerial meeting on Libya with the Minister of
Foreign Affairs of Germany on the margins of the seventy-fifth session of the General
Assembly. Participants reaffirmed their commitment to the conclusions of the Berlin
Conference and expressed their strong support for the resumption of the political
talks. I reiterated the concerns of the United Nations about the violations of the arms
embargo and stressed the need for Libyans to seize the opportunity to agree on a
political solution to the conflict with the support of the international community.
29. My acting Special Representative intensified engagement with international
stakeholders to galvanize support for a permanent ceasefire agreement and the
resumption of the intra-Libyan dialogue. From September to December, she also held
consultations with senior officials of several Member States.
Situation in the western region
30. As the provision of electricity services deteriorated in August and September,
demonstrations were held across Libya against corruption, deteriorating living
conditions and lack of access to basic services. Demonstrations were reported in
Zawiyah and Sirte on 20 August, and on 23 August in Tripoli and other towns in
western Libya. Dozens of peaceful demonstrators and organizers were arbitrarily
arrested and detained in Tripoli. Many were reportedly tortured and at least one was
reportedly raped by an unidentified armed group.
31. On 23 August, the Ministry of the Interior issued a statement accusing Tripoli based and other armed groups of indiscriminately firing live ammunition at
demonstrators. On 29 August, the Presidency Council suspended the Minister of the
Interior from office, as part of a government reshuffle. Following a hearing about the
role of the security forces in the demonstrations, the Minister was officially reinstated
on 3 September.

21-00238

5/17

S/2021/62

32. Although the provision of electricity services improved, largely owing to lower
temperatures and demand, structural issues of the national electricity grid remain a
serious concern. UNSMIL is working closely with the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), the World Bank and the United States Agency for Int ernational
Development (USAID) to support the General Electricity Company of Libya in
prioritizing and costing repairs to the grid to avoid a system -wide collapse.
33. The number of recorded incidents involving explosive devices decreased as
compared with the previous reporting period. Since 26 August, the Libyan Mine
Action Centre has recorded 18 incidents involving explosive devices in southern
Tripoli and Sirte, resulting in 28 casualties (11 fatalities and 17 injured). Twenty -six
civilians and two mine clearance operators from the Ministry of Defence and the
Ministry of the Interior were victims of the incidents.
34. Following the discovery of multiple mass graves in and around Tarhunah in June
(see S/2020/832), 115 sets of human remains have been exhumed. The slow
identification process led to public calls for prompt action and response. Armed
groups continued to operate with impunity in Tarhunah, resulting in a continued
volatile security situation. Numerous human rights violations and abuses, including
enforced disappearances, extrajudicial killings and widespread torture, have led to a
state of impunity and an absence of rule of law in Tarhunah.
35. During the reporting period, the Ministry of the Int erior conducted search and
arrest operations to disrupt smuggling activities by criminal networks in Zawiyah and
other western locations. On 14 October, Government of National Accord law
enforcement agencies arrested Abd al-Rahman al-Milad in Tripoli. Mr. al-Milad was
added to the United Nations sanctions list pursuant to Security Council resolution
1970 (2011) in June 2018 for heading the regional unit of the coast guard in Zawiyah,
which was consistently linked with acts of violence against migrants.
Situation in the eastern region
36. In eastern Libya, there were continued reports of criminal activity, including
killings, kidnappings for ransom, carjacking and extortion.
37. Underlining nationwide discontent over corruption, the lack of provision of
basic services and a shared desire for change, largely peaceful demonstrations were
reported in early September in Benghazi, Ajdabiya, Bayda’, Qubbah and Marj, as well
as in the southern city of Sabhah. Following reports that a civilian had been killed
and three others injured in Marj during demonstrations on 12 September, UNSMIL
called for a thorough investigation and the speedy release of all those arbitrarily
arrested and detained by groups affiliated to the Libyan National Army. Under the
pressure of public unrest, on 13 September, the House of Representatives reported
that Abdullah al-Thinni, prime minister of the parallel “interim government”, had
submitted his resignation. The House of Representatives subsequently rejected his
resignation.
38. On 11 October, the parallel “interim government” announced the release of
seven Indian nationals who had been kidnapped on 14 September in the Shuwayrif
area while on their way to Tripoli. On 10 November, Hanan al-Bara’ssi, a human
rights lawyer and political activist, was shot dead in Benghazi. U NSMIL called for a
prompt and thorough investigation into her death, and for the perpetrators to be
brought to justice.

6/17

21-00238

S/2021/62

Situation in the southern region
39. During the reporting period, the Libyan National Army established fortifications
and military outposts equipped with air defence systems in the vicinity of Birak
al-Shati’ and Tamanhint airbases.
40. In southern Libya, there were reports of criminal activities. On 25 August, an
armed group affiliated with the Libyan National Army disrupted the ele ction in the
southern municipality of Traghin. The Committee for Municipal Council Elections
suspended electoral processes in the neighbouring municipalities of Qatrun and
Sharqiyah planned for 31 August, following similar reports of Libyan National Army
disruptions.
41. On 9 November, two pumps of the Great Man-Made River were destroyed in
the Hasawnah well fields, located near Birak al-Shati’, bringing the total number of
water wells destroyed in the past two years to 151. Continued attacks on the Great
Man-Made River continue to threaten water security in north-western Libya,
including Tripoli. UNSMIL continued to work on projects to incentivize communities
to protect the vital infrastructure and improve water use efficiency, while the UNDP
Stabilization Facility continued efforts to restore power grids and water and sewage
networks.
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in Libya and Organization of Al-Qaida in
the Islamic Maghreb
42. Although operationally weakened as a result of a series of counter-terrorism
operations, the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and a support network of
the Organization of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) remain a threat in
Libya.
43. The Libyan National Army conducted counter-terrorism operations in southern
Libya, supported by foreign advisers, specifically in the area between Ghadwah,
Awbari, Murzuq and Tmisan village, and west of Birak al-Shati’. On 23 September,
the ISIL Emir for North Africa, Abu Moaz al-Iraqi, was reported killed during one of
these operations on 14 September. On 27 November, the Libyan National Army
dismantled a support network of AQIM in Awbari, with the arrest of elements accused
of being arms and drug dealers.
Economic situation
44. The Libyan economy is at a precipice. The utilities sector, including electricity
and water, is coming dangerously close to systemic failure owing to a combination of
insecurity and a lack of development funding. It is estimated that the blockade on oil
production had resulted in over $10 billion in lost revenue and caused significant
damage to oil infrastructure. As at 23 December, oil production had returned to
pre-blockade levels, at 1.2 million barrels per day with preparations to increase
production even further.
45. The closure of the oil fields, combined with the ongoing conflict, caused
generational damage to the economy, including a national debt amounting to close to
$97 billion. According to the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia
(ESCWA), the cost of the conflict in Libya since its outbreak in 2011 exceeds
$576 billion. In 2020, the country spent 63 per cent of its budget on salaries, 17 per
cent on subsidies but only 1 per cent on development. Some 2.2 million Libyans, over
a third of the population, are now on the public payroll. In less than a year, Libya’s
foreign currency reserves dropped from $78 billion to $57 billion, while the country’s
economy continues to rely heavily on global oil prices.

21-00238

7/17

S/2021/62

46. With the resumption of oil production, pressure is buildi ng to develop a more
durable economic arrangement for the management of national resources. Since the
lifting of force majeure, oil revenues have been held in abeyance in an account
controlled by the National Oil Corporation. This arrangement was agreed up on to
restart oil production and intended as an interim measure until a more sustainable
economic arrangement is negotiated among Libyan stakeholders.
47. Signalling progress, on 13 October the board of trustees of the Libyan
Investment Authority announced that it would conduct the first comprehensive audit
since it was created in 2008. In conjunction with the ongoing UNSMIL -facilitated
financial audit review of the two branches of the Central Bank of Libya, these audits
should significantly increase transparency in the management of public funds. On
1 December, the Presidency Council held a meeting of the Council of Ministers to
declare its intention to negotiate an economic arrangement that would allow for the
use of oil revenues. On 16 December, the Central Bank of Libya Board of Directors
met for the first time in five years and decided to unify the country’s exchange rate,
demonstrating a positive step towards stabilizing the Libyan currency and combating
corruption.

III. Other activities of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya
A.

Electoral support
48. Despite challenges related to instability and coronavirus disease (COVID -19),
the Committee for Municipal Council Elections organized eight municipal council
elections between August and December in Misratah, Ghat, Rajban and Zawiyah
al-Gharbiyah. National observer groups assessed the polling procedures as credible.
In January, four municipal elections were organized, including in municipalities in
Tripoli. The Committee announced on 28 December that elections in Tajura’ and
Sabratah would be held on 14 January.
49. On 7 November, the Chairperson of the High National Elections Commission
briefed the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum virtually on the mandate and role of the
Commission, the preconditions for a feasible and credible electoral process and the
challenges related to the absence of government funding. The Chair person confirmed
the Commission’s technical capacity to implement elections pending an enabling
political and security environment, a feasible legislative framework and a timely and
adequate disbursement of financial resources. On 23 November, the Government of
National Accord allocated 50 million dinars (approximately $37 million) to the
Commission to enable it to fulfil its mandate and conduct presidential and
parliamentary elections in December 2021. On 28 December, the Chairperson of the
Commission briefed the legal committee of the Forum on measures taken by the
Commission to strengthen its institutional capacity as part of planning for different
scenarios to implement national elections on 24 December 2021.
50. UNSMIL continued its cooperation with the High National Elections Commission
and the Committee for Municipal Council Elections, with the aim of supporting the
institutions in delivering their mandate.

B.

Human rights, transitional justice and the rule of law
51. From 26 August to 3 December 2020, UNSMIL recorded at least 18 civilian
casualties (9 deaths and 9 injured), including 1 woman and 10 children, representing

8/17

21-00238

S/2021/62

a decrease in civilian casualties as compared with the second quarter of 2020, notably
as a result of the cessation of hostilities.
52. UNSMIL continues to engage with relevant Libyan actors and the population in
pursuit of efforts to exchange combatants, detainees and mortal remains, including by
documenting requests for the release of the bodies of f amily members.
Unlawful deprivation of liberty, detention and torture
53. During the reporting period, some journalists were reportedly arbitrarily
arrested by Libyan National Army-affiliated groups in eastern Libya. Most of the
arrests were reportedly due to their work or for their tribal and family affiliations. In
Tripoli, on 21 October, the head of the Libyan Media Association, Mohamed Omar
Baaio, was illegally detained by an armed group, together with his two sons and the
newly appointed head of programmes of the Libya al-Wataniya television channel,
Hind Ammar. Mr. Baaio’s sons were released a few hours later and Ms. Ammar was
released on 23 October. Following concerted advocacy by UNSMIL and other actors,
Mr. Baaio was released on 9 November.
54. Approximately 8,800 people, of whom an estimated 60 per cent were in pretrial
detention, continued to be held in 27 official prisons, under the authority of the
Ministry of Justice, with limited access to judicial services to challenge the legality
of their detention or seek redress for violations. Thousands of others remain detained
in illegal detention facilities operated by armed groups, allegedly suffering torture,
extortion, rape and other human rights abuses.
55. UNSMIL provided technical assistance to the Ministry of Justice and the
Supreme Judicial Council to screen and release detainees as a mitigation measure
against the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the context of the UNSMIL-UNDP
Police and Security Joint Programme, technical support was also provided to the
Judicial Police to increase their capacities and adopt standard operating procedures
to enhance the management and the organization of correction facilities.
56. UNSMIL, in cooperation with the Ministry of Justice and the Judicial Pol ice,
advocated for the provision of basic health care to prisoners in an effort to stem the
spread of COVID-19. Subsequently, health-care units were operationalized in several
prisons, and some correction facilities were sanitized. Medical screening was
conducted and visitation procedures were reviewed, in order to prevent the spread of
the virus in these institutions.
57. From August to October 2020, the Ministry of Justice and the Public Prosecution
Office announced that more than 1,400 individuals had been released from prisons
across the country, bringing the total to 3,900 in 2020. The release is a measure to
stem the spread of COVID-19. Libyan authorities declined to provide the names of
those released, including women and children, and UNSMIL has not been able to
verify the reported releases.
Groups in vulnerable situations
Migrants and refugees
58. Migrants and refugees, including women and children, continued to be routinely
subjected to discrimination, arrest, arbitrary detention, torture and other human rights
violations and abuses. UNSMIL received reports of torture, deprivation of food and
health care, enforced disappearances and sexual and gender-based violence against
persons detained in the Suq al-Khamis, Abu Salim, Nasir and Abu Isa centres operated
by the Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration. Men and boys were allegedly
routinely shot at or severely beaten by guards trying to pressure families for ransom

21-00238

9/17

S/2021/62

pay. Detainees were also shot at when attempting to escape, resulting in injuries and
deaths.
59. On 28 September, around 355 migrants and asylum seekers, including 258 men,
57 women and 40 children, were arrested by security forces at their homes, places of
work and other gathering places in Ujaylat and the outskirts of Sabra tah. The migrants
and asylum seekers were taken to the Dahman assembly point in Sabratah, controlled
by the Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration and the Security Directorate under
the Ministry of Defence. During the arrests, two males of unconfirmed age were shot
and injured, and two women were reportedly sexually assaulted. On 1 October, at
least three migrants were reportedly killed by armed men at the Dahman assembly
point during a riot to protest the lack of food, medical care and potable water.
60. There were also continued reports of large-scale deportations by officials of the
Directorate for Combating Illegal Migration along the southern border of Libya with
Chad and Sudan under the so-called “emergency procedures”, raising concerns of
collective expulsion and possible cases of refoulement, with the Kufrah detention
centre becoming a de facto deportation centre. A newly established Directorate desert
patrol unit headquartered in Assah, reportedly initiated regular patrols and intensified
security checks along the Libyan border with Algeria, raising concerns as to
discriminatory profiling and increased expulsions outside of process and procedural
safeguards.
61. During the reporting period, the number of individuals held in migrant detention
centres increased owing to more interceptions or rescues at sea by the Libyan
authorities and the closure of sea routes to migrants and refugees through interception
on land, preventing their departure. In 2020, more than 11,900 migrants and refugees
were intercepted at sea, disembarked in Libya and frequently transferred to arbitrary
detention in abusive conditions, while others have disappeared altogether. This
represents an increase, compared with the 9,200 intercepted throughout 2019. There
are currently more than 2,300 persons in eight officially registered detention centres
in Libya, of whom 695 are persons of concern to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
62. On 12 November, three shipwrecks were recorded, in which over 100 people
were killed. On 15 November, a vessel carrying migrants off the coast of Khums in
western Libya sank, killing at least 74 migrants. UNSMIL received multiple reports
of failure to assist and pushbacks of migrant boats in the central Mediterranean, both
by relevant international authorities and the Libyan Coast Guard. The United Nations
continued to provide life-saving assistance at disembarkation points and monitoring
to identify those in need of international protection.
Women and children
63. Approximately 278 women reportedly remain in detention centres nominally
under the authority of the Ministry of Justice, while an estimated 200 women are held
at Mitiga detention centre. UNSMIL received multiple allegations of sexual violence,
torture and ill-treatment and other sexual abuse by guards against women and children
suspected of being linked to ISIL fighters. Some 69 children remain detained with
their mothers in Judaydah prison. Violence against women and children is further
compounded by the lack of female guards at prisons and detention centres.
64. Cases of sexual and gender-based violence remain underreported in Libya
owing to fear of reprisal, intimidation and misplaced stigma related to underlying
discriminatory gender norms. To improve documentation of conflict-related sexual
violence, UNSMIL established the monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements
on conflict-related sexual violence in Libya, in line with resolution 1960 (2010).

10/17

21-00238

S/2021/62

Support for judicial authorities
65. Despite ongoing challenges, the unified administration of justice saw signs of
improvement, demonstrated by the collaboration of member s of the newly elected
Supreme Judicial Council and the resumption of legal proceedings in the south, and
in Sirte and Darnah. Latest figures indicate that, from August to November, following
UNSMIL advocacy, 11 court hearings took place inside Judaydah pr ison in Tripoli,
resulting in the release of eight detainees.
Human rights due diligence policy
66. The United Nations system in Libya continued to implement the human rights
due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces
(see A/67/775-S/2013/110, annex), with a view to preventing and mitigating the
identified risks of grave violations of international humanitarian law, human rights
law or refugee law. Owing to the COVID-19 pandemic, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes focused their activities on life-saving programmes.

C.

Security sector
Implementation of the ceasefire
67. The United Nations continued to facilitate and support the Libyan-led and
owned negotiations on the implementation of the ceasefire agreement, including the
development of a monitoring mechanism. The Secretariat established a Libya
planning team chaired by the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs,
which includes representatives of relevant components of the Department of
Operational Support, the Department of Peace Operations, the Office of Legal Affairs
and UNSMIL. A separate report was submitted to the Security Council on
29 December 2020 (S/2020/1309) on options for an effective ceasefire monitoring
mechanism under the auspices of the United Nations, in accordance with resolution
2542 (2020).
Arms and ammunition management
68. UNSMIL continued to assist Libyan communities and authorities in mitigating
the threat from explosive ordnance and the proliferation of weapons and ammunition
through technical assistance and support from the Mine Action Service. Activities
were focused on the disposal of explosive ordnance and battle area clearance in
southern Tripoli and Misratah. On 30 September, the Service completed a 12 -month
project in which more than 540 explosive remnants of war were removed from an
area of 59,557m 2.
69. The Mine Action Service also completed a project to reinforce information
management capabilities to map explosive remnants of war contamination in Tripoli,
to facilitate clearance operations and to support the protection of civilians. In response
to the continuing threat from explosive remnants of war, humanitarian mine action
sector partners trained and accredited six additional non-technical survey teams,
which will conduct essential surveys in Tripoli and facilitate prioritizat ion of future
clearance.

D.

Women’s empowerment
70. As part of its gender inclusion strategy for the intra-Libyan dialogue, UNSMIL
organized a multi-stakeholder consultation process with women’s groups in October.

21-00238

11/17

S/2021/62

Participants included 120 women from cultural components, peacebuilders, human
rights defenders, journalists, academics, youth and political parties.
71. The sessions produced recommendations, which reaffirmed UNSMIL advocacy
for ensuring women’s inclusion in the UNSMIL-facilitated intra-Libyan dialogue
tracks. In accordance with these recommendations, two additional women were
included in the economic dialogue. UNSMIL advocated for the inclusion of women
in the 5+5 Joint Military Commission subcommittees and for a gender perspective to
be considered during the monitoring and implementation of the ceasefire agreement.
The recommendations were presented virtually to the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum on 26 October and 7 November.
72. On 15 November, the 17 women participants in the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum issued a statement outlining a series of principles and recommendations for
improving women’s participation in the political process and governance. They called
for better representation in political life and called on the State to fulfil its international
commitments regarding the rights and protection of women. Their request that women
should account for no less than 30 per cent of leadership positions in the reformed
executive authority was echoed in the political road map agreed by the Forum.
73. During the reporting period, UNDP and the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) provided training for
20 women and youth organizations across Libya to enhance their organizational skills
in order to reduce inequality and promote women empowerment.
74. On 11 October, five women judges were appointed to the two specialized courts
established in Benghazi and Tripoli to address violence against women and children.
UNSMIL, in partnership with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and
UN-Women, conducted a training programme on international standards for the new
judges.

E.

Young people, peace and security
75. As part of its efforts to ensure full participation of youth in the Libyan Political
Dialogue Forum, UNSMIL held a virtual meeting of the Libyan youth track on
18 October, bringing together 40 male and female participants from various political,
ethnic and tribal backgrounds. The participants presented their recommendations to
the Forum.
76. The Youth against COVID-19 Fund, established by the United Nations
Population Fund and a national partner organization, supported youth -led initiatives
combating the COVID-19 pandemic in Benghazi, Sabhah, Ghat and Sirte. In this
context, in October, virtual training programmes and grant-awarding schemes were
initiated to empower young people, in particular young women, in crisis response.
77. UNDP provided capacity-building training to 80 young men and women through
its regional Youth Leadership Programme. The aim of the initiative is to promote their
political and civic engagement and to equip them with tools to create and improve
their social initiatives.

F.

Coordination of international assistance
78. The humanitarian response continued to be coordinated by three area
coordination groups and the Inter-Sector Coordination Group, under the leadership of
the Humanitarian Coordinator, with support provided by the U nited Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.

12/17

21-00238

S/2021/62

79. While the ceasefire agreement and the resumption of oil production has had a
positive impact for some of the country’s most vulnerable people, in the near term,
humanitarian needs are expected to persist, compounded by the ongoing impact of
COVID-19. It is estimated that, in 2021, 1.3 million people will need some form of
humanitarian assistance, an increase of 40 per cent as compared with 2020.
Consultations were conducted with national stakeholders in all three regions on
humanitarian needs and response planning for 2021.
80. The coordination and response to the COVID-19 pandemic continued to be led
by the World Health Organization (WHO), supported by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, inter alia, in close cooperation with the
National Centre for Disease Control, the Ministry of Health of the Government of
National Accord and the health authorities in the east, as well as regional health and
municipal authorities.

G.

Humanitarian, stabilization and development assistance
81. Following the suspension of hostilities in southern Tripoli in June 2020, there
has been a slow decrease in the number of displaced persons, from 426,000 in June
to 316,000 in December. However, the risks posed by booby traps, including
improvised explosive devices, landmines and explosive remnants of war, as well as
the absence of basic services and damage to infrastructure, continued to impede the
safe and dignified return of all populations. The United Nations continued to support
the authorities with the development of a national internal displacement strategy,
including through consultations with relevant stakeholders.
82. The number of migrants and refugees in Libya has steadily dec reased, from
626,000 in April to 574,000 in November, in part as a result of a reduction in labour
opportunities for migrant workers, increased unemployment and tightened security
controls and COVID-19 mobility restrictions implemented by the authorities.
Discrimination in access to services and a lack of documentation continued to prevent
migrants and refugees from meeting their basic needs, including health care, food,
shelter, education and specialized protection assistance.
83. Confirmed COVID-19 cases have increased five-fold since September, with
cases increasing daily. As at 7 January, 102,880 cases of COVID -19 were confirmed,
including 1,558 deaths. However, owing to limited testing capacity and poor mortality
surveillance, health experts suspect the number of cases and deaths to be much higher.
While 31 laboratories are operational in the country, there are persistent and acute
shortages of COVID-19 testing supplies, and response capacity is mostly
concentrated in Tripoli, Misratah and Benghazi. It is expected that the three separate
COVID-19 response plans in the country will soon be consolidated into one national
response plan.
84. The UNSMIL national reconciliation project, implemented with UNDP and
WHO, supported a health diplomacy initiative to strengthen the COVID-19 response
and helped increase awareness of needs and response planning, as well as build
longer-term mechanisms for public health cooperation throughout Libya. On
12 September, virtual exchanges were held with over 30 health-care professionals in
Benghazi, Misratah, Sabhah and Tripoli, resulting in a COVID -19 preparedness
assessment and performance cooperation goals. On 6 November, the health diplomacy
initiative senior medical advisers briefed participants of the Libyan Political Dialogue
Forum virtually. On 21 November, an online scientific information session was
organized with some 200 participants to share projections for the winter season and
best practices on COVID-19 response management.

21-00238

13/17

S/2021/62

85. In view of the continued sabotage of the Great Man-Made River infrastructure,
the national reconciliation project increased its engagement with the local
communities to improve communication channels with the Great Man -Made River
project and the General Electricity Company of Libya and begin working on mutually
beneficial projects.
86. The continued closure of primary health-care facilities owing to shortages of
health workers, power cuts and lack of personal protective equipment has impacted
the COVID-19 response and access to other essential health services. This includes
reproductive health care, services for children under five years of age and treatment
for patients with non-communicable diseases.
87. On 5 November, WHO and UNICEF warned that the supply of vaccines for
tuberculosis, polio and measles would run out by the end of 2020 if immediate
measures were not taken by national authorities to procure and distribute additional
supplies. In December, 804 cold boxes and vaccine carriers were dispatched through
UNICEF for the Libyan National Centre for Disease Control to be distributed to
278 vaccination sites. A second vaccine stockout this year would impact children’s
vaccinations schedules, increasing the risk for 250,000 children of contracting
vaccine-preventable diseases.
88. The negative socioeconomic impact of the conflict and COVID-19 are
stretching the coping capacities and resilience of people throughout Libya. Continued
engagement with all authorities enabled humanitarian personnel and supplies to reach
those in need. In 2020, humanitarian organizations reached more than 318,000 people.
This includes support for 81,000 internally displaced people, 154,000 vulnerable,
conflict-affected Libyans and recent returnees and 82,000 migrants and refugees.
89. Bureaucratic impediments and COVID-19 restriction measures hampering
humanitarian access decreased during the reporting period. Partners reported
355 access constraints in October, representing a 36 per cent decrease as compared
with September, and a further 355 cases in November. Sig nificant progress was also
made on the issuance of visas by the authorities for international humanitarian staff,
following nearly eight months of visas not being issued for international staff by
international NGOs working in Libya. Despite some progress on the timely clearance
of humanitarian supplies at points of entry, health partners continued to report delays
for critical COVID-19 and other health supplies.
90. Humanitarian agencies and partners continued to support the COVID -19
response in Libya. This included support for increased testing capacity, contact
tracing and case treatment, the provision of essential COVID-19 supplies and training
and technical support for health staff. Humanitarian agencies are working with the
authorities to strengthen and expand disease surveillance across Libya, including the
development of standard criteria for reporting confirmed COVID -19 cases and
establishing early warning and event-based surveillance. Sanitation and waste
management services and the provision of hygiene kits to vulnerable and low-income
households continued. Humanitarian partners provided training to health and
community workers and launched risk communication and community engagement
campaigns.
91. The United Nations continued to support increased COVID-19 awareness
campaigns and risk communication activities by disseminating more than 300,000
items of information materials and conducting campaigns on social and mass media.
COVID-19 risk communication activities also targeted vulnerable groups and health
staff in at-risk locations, including displaced persons in shelters, migrants and
refugees in official detention centres, health facilities and points of entry and
disembarkation. Between August and November, close to 1.4 million people were
informed about prevention and access to services for COVID-19 through messaging.
14/17

21-00238

S/2021/62

92. The UNDP resilience and recovery project provided support to 52 municipalities
across Libya to improve access to quality basic and social services for the most
vulnerable groups. The UNDP Stabilization Facility for Libya completed 292 projects
across the country, with an additional 42 projects to support the rehabilitation of
schools and medical facilities and improve sanitation services.

IV. Deployment of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
and security arrangements
93. During the reporting period, the United Nations maintained an international
civilian staff presence in Libya of 60 to 90 international staff on a rotational basis,
with most international staff in Tripoli and a small presence in the Benghazi hub.
94. Staff presence was monitored closely and adjusted in line with the prevailing
security situation, requirements for humanitarian assistance and changing
requirements to protect staff from contracting or potentially spreading COVID-19.
All international staff in Tripoli continued to be accommodated at the Oea compound,
which continues to be protected by the United Nations Guard Unit. National staff
were instructed to report to work in the compound only when their presence was
required and to work remotely at other times.
95. UNSMIL continued to implement a comprehensive set of measures to ensure
the best possible protection of United Nations personnel against the COVID -19
pandemic. The measures were regularly reviewed and adjusted in accordance with
advice by WHO and UNSMIL medical staff, and with measures put in place by the
Libyan and Tunisian authorities. Owing to host government restrictions, the United
Nations’ ability to conduct flights between the two countries remained limited. Strict
COVID-19 preventive measures are applied on all flights.
96. The rotation of the United Nations Guard Unit was conducted with two flights
on 31 October and 20 November from Kathmandu to Tripoli. Road movements in
Tripoli were conducted in strict compliance with security risk management measures
and reduced to those absolutely necessary, in view of the COVID -19 pandemic.

V. Observations and recommendations
97. Sustained international engagement across the UNSMIL-facilitated intra-Libyan
dialogues has generated considerable impetus, demonstrated by tangible progress on
the political, security, economic and international humanitarian law and human rights
tracks, moving Libya forward on the road to peace, stab ility and development.
98. I commend the Libyan parties for putting the country’s interests first through
the signing of the 23 October ceasefire agreement, under the auspices of the United
Nations. I also welcome the continued resolve to implement the provisions of the
ceasefire agreement and to operationalize a Libyan-led and Libyan-owned Ceasefire
Monitoring Mechanism.
99. I welcome the outcome of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum, held in Tunisia
in November, culminating in a road map leading to the holding of national elections
on 24 December 2021, and an agreement on a structure of a reformed executive
authority. The renewed cooperation that has enabled Libyan institutions to implement
long overdue economic reforms is a positive step towards reaching durable economic
arrangements, including the transparent management of oil revenues. I urge the
Libyan parties to maintain their resolve in reaching a lasting political solution to the

21-00238

15/17

S/2021/62

conflict, resolving economic issues and alleviating the humanitarian situation for the
benefit of all Libyan people.
100. As the Libyans are taking important steps to move the country forward through
a political solution to the conflict and to regain their full sovereignty, I reiterate my
appeal to all regional and international actors to respect the provisions of the ceasefire
agreement. I encourage the international community to support the parties in ensuring
its implementation without delay. This includes ensuring the departure of all foreign
fighters and mercenaries from Libya, and full and unconditional respect for the
Security Council arms embargo. I also urge the Security Council to give UNSMIL a
clear but flexible mandate to enable the Mission to support the Libyan -led and
Libyan-owned ceasefire monitoring mechanism.
101. I welcome the continued engagement of the country’s neighbours and regional
partners in support of the United Nations-facilitated intra-Libyan dialogue tracks. I
reiterate the need to ensure a single and coordinated international approach in Libya .
I express my gratitude to the President and to the Government of Tunisia for hosting
the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum.
102. The continued threat of terrorism and violent extremism in the subregion
remains a concern. Progress towards the reunification of Libyan security institutions
would contribute to mitigating the risk of ISIL, and other terrorist and extremist
groups, reconstituting.
103. I welcome the decision of the Government of National Accord to allocate funds
and resources to the High National Elections Commission. I call upon the
Government of National Accord to ensure its full support to the Commission to enable
the holding of elections by December 2021, as agreed in the road map. I commend
the continuous efforts of the Libyan electoral authorities to conduct municipal council
elections, despite the challenging security environment and COVID -19.
104. UNSMIL will continue its efforts to ensure the inclusion of women and youth
in the intra-Libyan dialogues. I commend the women participants of the Libyan
Political Dialogue Forum for their important contributions as bridge builders and
encourage them to continue to play a prominent role. I encourage all Libyan actors to
implement Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security.
105. The role of Member States and regional organizations, including the African
Union, the European Union and the League of Arab States is critical. I welcome their
active support for the efforts of the United Nations, including as co -chairs of the
working groups of the international follow-up committee. The continued active
engagement and support of the international follow-up committee is essential to
ensure the implementation of the agreed ceasefire and to facilitate the conduct of a
meaningful and inclusive political dialogue, as well as advance the ec onomic and
humanitarian law and human rights tracks. I welcome the continued offer by the
African Union to host a national reconciliation conference. I also thank Germany,
Italy, the United Kingdom and the European Union for their financial contributions
for the holding of the Libyan Political Dialogue Forum.
106. Armed groups throughout Libya hold thousands of men, women and children in
prolonged arbitrary and unlawful detention and subject them to torture, sexual
violence and other human rights abuses. Unlawful detention remains a driver of the
conflict. I reiterate my call to the national authorities to identify and close all illegal
detention facilities. Those lawfully detained must be transferred to officially
registered detention facilities and treated in accordance with applicable international
laws and standards. Furthermore, I call for the immediate and unconditional release

16/17

21-00238

S/2021/62

of those detained arbitrarily or otherwise unlawfully deprived of their liberty, as well
as an end to conflict-related sexual violence.
107. The continued arbitrary detention of migrants and refugees in formal detention
centres and at informal smuggler sites remains a critical concern. Refugees and
migrants in Libya should be released from detention and provided with safe shelte r.
Libya is not considered to be a safe port of disembarkation for refugees and migrants.
I urge relevant Member States to revisit policies that support the interception at sea
and return of refugees and migrants to Libya. In addition, refugees and migrant s
should be included in the country’s COVID-19 planning and response.
108. I welcome progress in releasing health items that had been held in customs for
many months. It is critical that authorities ensure the timely availability of
humanitarian assistance. This includes a more predictable and timely process for the
clearance of humanitarian supplies, in particular, COVID-19 health items, through
Libyan ports and airports, including by considering the issuance of a blanket waiver
for all COVID-19 supplies. I urge Member States to support the Humanitarian
Response Plan for Libya, including the aspects included in the Global Humanitarian
Response Plan for COVID-19, which is vital to ensure that lifesaving needs are met
and that existing vulnerabilities are not exacerbated further owing to COVID-19.
109. I wish to express my appreciation to my acting Special Representative for Libya,
Stephanie Williams, for her leadership, and to all United Nations personnel working
in Libya. I also want to express my appreciation for my outgoing Deputy Special
Representative, Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator, Yacoub El Hillo, for his
contribution to the work of the United Nations in Libya. I wish to reiterate my sincere
appreciation to the Government of Nepal for providin g the vital personnel of the
United Nations Guard Unit.

21-00238

17/17
