Re11olutions adopted on th., reports uf the Second wmmittee

--------~---------

5. Requests the Secretary-General, without prejudice to the need for organizational changes, to initiate
consultation and studies with States Members of the
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies,
with the specialized agencies, the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the regional economic commissions and
the Committee for Industrial Development, on the
advisability of holding, not later than 1966, an international symposium, preceded, as appropriate, by regional and sub-regional symposia, relating to the
problems of industrialization of developing countries,
and to report to the Economic and Social Council at its
thirty-seventh session and to the General Assembly at
its nineteenth session.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1941 (XVIII). Decentralization of the economic
and social activities of the United Nations
and strengthening of the regional economic
commissions and the United Nations Office
in Beirut

The General Assembly
1. Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General on
decentralization of the economic and social activities
of the United Nations and strengthening of the regional
economic commissions, 12 and his first report on the
meeting with the executive secretaries of those commissions13 indicating the steps that have been taken
and his intention of further implementing the policy of
decentralization;
2. Welcomes in particular:
(a) The decision of the Secretary-General that the
executive secretaries will participate actively in the
programming of technical co-operation for the biennium
1965-1966;
( b) The growing number of regional advisers in the
regional secretariats, which enhances the capacity and
the expertise necessary for efficient advisory services
to the Governments at their request;
3. ~~, elcomes the report of ,the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Q'.Iestions to the
General Assembly at its eighteenth session on the
subject,1~ and the very constructive comments and
recommendations contained therein pertaining both to
the concept and to the process of implementing the
policy of decentralization;
4. Endorses the views and recommendations of the
Economic and Social Council set forth in its resolution
955 (XXXVI) of 5 July 1963, particularly paragraph
5 thereof relating to the participation of the regional
secretariats in the preparation for the forthcoming
. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
and paragraph 3 regarding the United Nations Office
in Beirut, and recommends to the Secretary-General
the establishment of a technical assistance co-ordination
unit in the United Nations Office in Beirut;
5. Reaffirms its conviction that all regional economic
commissions, as the principal United Nations bodies in
the economic and social field in the various regions,
12 lbid., Thirty-sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 12,
document E/3786.
18 /bid., document E/3798.
a Official Records of the General Assembly, Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda items 12, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39 and 76,
document A/5584.

31

as well as the United Nations Office in Beirut, have a
special and increasing role to play with regard to the
Expanded Programme and the regular programme of
technical assistance as well as the projects of the Special
Fund, in full co-operation with the resident representatives of the Technical Assistance Board and the
directors of Special Fund programmes wherever
necessary;
6. Reaffirms also that its resolutions 1518 (XV) of
15 December 1960, 1709 (XVI) of 19 December 1%1
and 1823 (XVII) of 18 December 1%2 concerning
decentralization of the economic and social activities
of the United Nations and strengthening of the regional
economic commissions apply to all the existing regional
economic commissions, in so far as they affect Member
States;
7. Endorses the view ,that the regional secretariats
should continue, as appropriate, to increase their contribution to the United Nations technical assistance
programmes, with respect not only to the formulation
of projects but also to their execution and evaluation,
and to undertake some financial and administrative
responsibilities related thereto;
8. Looks forward to the forthcoming study by the
Administrative Management Service concerning the
utilization of staff in the economic and social fields;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to accelerate the
continuing implementation of the policy of decentralization and strengthening of the regional economic commissions set out in General Assembly resolutions 1709
(XVI) and 1823 (XVII) and to submit, as part of
his activities · during the International Co-operation
Year and within the framework of the United Nations
Development Decade, a comprehensive report on this
question for consideration by the Economic and Social
Council at its 1%5 summer session and by the General
Assembly at its twentieth session;
10. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to assess, in the light
of the Secretary-General's report referred to in paragraph 9 above and the study of the Administrative
Management Service, the results of decentralization in
terms of its fundamental objectives as defined in
General Assembly resolutions 1709 (XVI) and 1823
(XVII) and Economic and Social Council resolutions
823 (XXXII) and 955 (XXXVI), and to submit its
report to the Assembly at its twentieth session.
1276th plenary meeting,
11 December 1963.
1942 (XVIII). Question of a declaration on international economic co-operation

The General Assembly,
Attaching particular importance to the need for a
declaration on international economic co-operation as
a means of promoting sound, stable and fair economic
relations between all States and of stimulating the
efforts aimed at the economic and social progress of
all peoples of the world,
Taking note of the progress made by the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
ad hoe Working Group established under Council resolution 875 (XXXIII) of 13 and 18 April 1962 in the
elaboration of a draft declaration on the principles of
international economic co-operation,
