S/PV.8246

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8246th meeting

Friday, 27 April 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Duclos. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Dah
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Lewicki
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Tachco

Agenda
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2018/277)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-12770 (E)
*1812770*

S/PV.8246

The situation concerning Western Sahara

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning Western Sahara
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2018/277)
The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/394, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2018/277, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea, France, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Ethiopia, Russian Federation
The President (spoke in Spanish): The draft
resolution received 12 votes in favour, none against
and three abstentions. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 2414 (2018).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Ms. Tachco (United States of America): The
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara (MINURSO) is a peacekeeping mission that
should have finished its job a long time ago. It is a
2/9

27/04/2018

mission that began 27 years ago, almost to the day. It is
a mission that was designed to help achieve a specific
purpose — one that it has not yet completed. That is
not the fault of MINURSO. The fact is that we, as a
Security Council, have allowed Western Sahara to
lapse into a textbook example of a frozen conflict. And
MINURSO is a textbook example of a peacekeeping
mission that no longer serves a political purpose.
So this year, the United States has taken a different
approach with this renewal. Our goal is to send two
messages. The first is that there can be no more business
as usual with MINURSO and Western Sahara. The
second is that the time is now to lend our support — our
full support — to the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst Köhler, in his
efforts to facilitate negotiations with the parties.
The United States wants to see progress at last
in the political process meant to resolve this conflict.
That is why we have renewed the MINURSO mandate
for six months, instead of one year. Over the next six
months, we expect that the parties will return to the
table and engage Personal Envoy Köhler. We also hope
that neighbouring States will recognize the special and
important role that they can play in supporting this
negotiating process.
The United States emphasizes the need to
move forward towards a just, lasting, and mutually
acceptable political solution that will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara. We
continue to view Morocco’s autonomy plan as serious,
credible and realistic, and it represents one potential
approach to satisfying the aspirations of the people
of Western Sahara to run their own affairs with peace
and dignity. We call on the parties to demonstrate their
commitment to a realistic, practicable and enduring
political solution based on compromise by resuming
negotiations without preconditions and in good faith.
Entrenched positions must not stand in the way
of progress.
In the meantime, we expect that all parties will
respect their obligations under the ceasefire and refrain
from any actions that could destabilize the situation or
threaten the United Nations process. Unilateral changes
to the status quo on the ground will not help us get to a
lasting and peaceful solution. It would be unfortunate for
anyone to seek to pick apart the language in the renewal
for the sake of political point-scoring. The expectation
is clear. It is time to see progress towards a political
18-12770

27/04/2018

The situation concerning Western Sahara

solution and, after 27 years, to stop perpetuating the
status quo.
Reflecting on his time as United States Ambassador
to the United Nations, John Bolton once wrote:
“MINURSO seemed well on the way to acquiring
a near-perpetual existence because no one could
figure out what to do with it.”
He concluded: “This could well go on forever”. More
than a decade later, as we gather once again here in this
Chamber, Ambassador Bolton’s warning has proven
accurate. With today’s renewal, the Security Council
has taken a step towards ending this cycle. The next
step will be for us to support Personal Envoy Köhler
and to see real and substantive talks resume at last.
Should that fail, we will then need to take a hard look
at our work and our responsibilities when the Mission
again comes up for renewal in six months.
Ms. Guadey (Ehiopia): We have all been following
the new developments that have unfolded over the past
few months surrounding the issue of Western Sahara
and the undeniable progress that we have begun to see
towards the relaunch of direct negotiations following
the appointment of the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral, President Horst Köhler.
In this connection, we would have liked to vote
in favour of the text proposed by the United States.
Unfortunately, the points raised during the negotiations
on the resolution to make it much more balanced and
neutral were not taken on board. We were indeed
flexible in our approach and ready to engage in real
negotiations to reach the desired consensus on the text,
but we were not given the chance to do so, even if some
if not all of our comments were reflected in the text
submitted for the vote and it was put in blue without
passing through the silence procedure. Therefore, we
had no option but to abstain.
That having been said, however, we would like
to reiterate the important role that the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) has been playing and will play in
supporting the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
in his efforts to find a political solution to the issue of
Western Sahara. We continue to urge the two parties to
continue to closely cooperate with MINURSO.
The situation in Guerguerat was a matter of concern
for the Council in the past, and we hope that this
lingering tension will not undermine the new effort to

S/PV. 8246

find a political solution to the issue of Western Sahara.
We call on both parties to honour their commitments
to the agreement reached with MINURSO in relation
to the ceasefire. While expressing our concern about
the recent rhetoric towards escalation, we underline the
need for both parties to refrain from taking any action
that could increase tensions, which would also make
it difficult to create an environment conducive to the
peace process.
The recent developments, of which we are all aware,
make it all the more urgent for the Council to support
the work of the Personal Envoy. We hope that the fifth
round of direct negotiations will be launched as quickly
as possible. However, any meaningful progress in the
peace process will hinge on the full cooperation of
the two parties with the Personal Envoy. We therefore
request the Council to engage the parties to enhance
their engagement, demonstrate the necessary political
will and commit themselves to resuming direct
negotiations in good faith and without condition.
We also reiterate the absolute necessity for
the Security Council to refrain from making any
pronouncement that could potentially undermine the
commitment of the parties to the peace process. As the
Personal Envoy has said repeatedly, the Council should
not be seen to be siding with one or the other party,
which would undermine efforts aimed at facilitating
the resumption of negotiations. What we tried to do
during the negotiations was to heed that call and make
every possible effort to balance the text so that the
Council would be able to convey the right message.
Unfortunately, we were not able to do so.
Finally, we would like to reiterate Ethiopia’s longstanding and consistent position in support of a just,
lasting and mutually acceptable political solution that
would also provide for the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara, in the context of arrangements
consistent with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation could not support
resolution 2414 (2018). The main problem was that the
process of drafting and agreeing the decision was neither
transparent nor consultative. We note, unfortunately, that
none of the principled and properly justified comments
that we repeatedly directed to the authors — including
those of a compromise nature — was taken into
account. A series of useful proposals put forward by

18-127703/9

S/PV.8246

The situation concerning Western Sahara

the other members of the Council were also met with
no response. As a result, the text remains unbalanced
and the entire situation strengthens our doubts about
the issue of informal country-specific penholderships
in the Security Council.
We decided not to block the resolution because we
accept the value of continuing the work undertaken
by the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara. However, had we voted in favour of
we would have abandoned our principled position in
support of the existing foundations of a settlement,
which, pursuant to the resolutions of the Security
Council, is based on the fundamental principle that
any model of settlement must be mutually acceptable.
Instead, the main emphasis of the resolution is
placed on such shaky and contradictory categories as
practicability and realism, which could open the way
for all kinds of equivocal interpretations.
We will remain an impartial and balanced player
that maintains contacts with all the regional parties
with which we maintain historical and friendly
relations. We must warn, however, that the document
that was adopted today, contrary to the expectations of
its sponsors, could end up having a negative effect on
the efforts of the new Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst Köhler, to revive
the political process. Attempts to accelerate the process
could lead to an outcome that is opposite to what is
sought. In that regard, we believe that a review of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission is unacceptable,
and we do not support efforts to mandate the Mission
with the authority to monitor the human rights situation.
In addition, we absolutely do not understand why
the resolution includes passages concerning generic
aspects of peacekeeping, despite the fact that that is the
prerogative of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations of the General Assembly. For example, the
work on establishing benchmarks for the effectiveness
of peacekeeping operations — which, incidentally,
should apply not only to the military and the police but
also to the civilian components of a mission, as well as
the units at Headquarters that oversee them — has not
been completed. Why are we trying to prejudge events?
With regard to the initiatives of the SecretaryGeneral to standardize the culture of performance,
neither we nor the troop-contributing countries fully
understand what that entails. What is it, and how can
we welcome it at this stage?
4/9

27/04/2018

The text also contains a series of provisions that
undermine the impartial and balanced approach of the
Security Council to the issue of Western Sahara, which
we do not support. We are convinced that overcoming the
differences and achieving a just and lasting settlement
will be possible only by political means on the basis of
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council. The
ultimate formula must be acceptable both to Morocco
and to the Polisario Front, and provide for the selfdetermination of the people of Western Sahara in the
framework of procedures in line with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. That is
the key concept underpinning a settlement in Western
Sahara. It is unacceptable to try and replace it with
other formula.
In conclusion, I underscore that the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara plays an
exclusively stabilizing role in establishing conditions
on the ground conducive to the resumption of dialogue
between Morocco and the Polisario Front. We need
to encourage joint efforts to launch the negotiating
process. Let us not decide the outcome in place of
the parties. We are concerned about the vacuum in
the process, and the failure to settle the situation in
Western Sahara can be exploited by various extremist
forces, which would have a negative impact the military
and political situation in the entire region.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2414 (2018). I
would like to thank the United States penholder for
its efforts on the text. The resolution that we have just
adopted sets out a horizon. It should enable us jointly to
prevent any risk of escalation, to support the essential
work of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO) and to encourage a
constructive momentum for the political process.
Ten days ago, with a tense situation on the ground,
we met in consultations with Special Representative
Colin Stewart. He encouraged us to send a clear
message to prevent any risk of escalation. The adoption
of the resolution responds to that call by helping the
situation on the ground to return to normal so that real
progress can be made in the political process.
I would like to reiterate our full support
for MINURSO, which is doing outstanding and
indispensable work on the ground in monitoring
respect for the ceasefire and in having ensured the
stability of the area for years. The role of the force is
18-12770

27/04/2018

The situation concerning Western Sahara

essential. Its means must be preserved. In that regard,
the renewal for only six months of the Mission’s
mandate, which seeks to keep the Security Council
mobilized in support of the political process, must
be an exception. We should ensure that that does not
affect the management and planning of its resources.
Maintaining an annual framework ensures the stability
of peacekeeping operations.
Finally, it is particularly important that the
members of the Council can come together. As we have
seen in recent years, we need a constructive dynamic
to support a new impetus in the political process. That
dynamic, which has been ongoing for several months,
is essential. I would therefore like to reiterate our full
support for the political process under the auspices
of the Secretary-General and the facilitation of his
Personal Envoy, Mr. Horst Köhler, in order to find a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution
to the question of Western Sahara.
We hope that the mandate renewal will encourage
the strengthening of that dynamic and serious and
credible efforts to advance the process in accordance
with the parameters set by the Security Council. The
dialogue initiated in recent months thanks to meetings
organized by the Personal Envoy provides opportunities
in that regard. We hope that it will succeed.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Sweden voted in
favour of resolution 2414 (2018), adopted today, because
of our support for the Secretary-General’s ambition to
relaunch the United Nations-led political process and
our firm belief that that must be our main priority.
Indeed, the aim of reaching a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution, which will provide for the
self-determination of the people of Western Sahara,
remains as valid as ever. It is now time to turn that
vision into a reality.
First, the resolution provides an opportunity
to break the political deadlock that has plagued the
question of Western Sahara for a decade. For many
years, the Security Council has recognized that the
status quo is not acceptable. However, there has been
a lack of political will to move the political process
forward. We believe that the resolution signals that
business as usual is no longer an option.
Secondly, the resolution expresses its full support
for the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara (MINURSO), which plays a key
role in a challenging environment. It also supports

S/PV. 8246

the efforts of President Horst Köhler, Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara. Since
his appointment, he has impressed all of us with his
dedication, knowledge and experience.
Thirdly, the resolution makes clear that women and
youth must be fully included in the political process
and that they have a meaningful role to play.
Fourth, the resolution calls on the neighbouring
States to make important contributions to the political
process and to increase their engagement in the
negotiation process.
Fifthly, the resolution encourages the parties to
cooperate further with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. It also highlights
the plight of the Sahrawi refugees, the insufficient
funding and the risks associated with the reduction of
food assistance. The resolution urges the international
community to provide more funding to that end.
Finally, the resolution strongly encourages the
enhanced cooperation of the parties with the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, including visits to the region, as none have
taken place since 2015.
That having been said, there are new elements in
the resolution with regard to actions taken by the parties
that we find lack sufficient balance and do not fully
reflect the developments on the ground. The situation
must be properly re-evaluated after six months, when
the Security Council will again review the mandate
of MINURSO.
On procedure, as members know, we think that
the Council is always stronger when it speaks with
one voice. We seek unity not for the sake of unity but
because our decisions will resonate more strongly.
If the concerns of some delegations, which were of a
relatively minor character, had been considered, we
may well have reached consensus on the resolution.
Over the past couple of weeks, we have witnessed
an escalation of rhetoric and tensions on the ground.
It is crucial that the parties show restraint and avoid
taking provocative actions. We urge them to de-escalate
and to redirect their attention towards advancing the
political process.
We need to resolve one of the most long-standing
disputes on the agenda of the United Nations and to
address the plight of the people of Western Sahara

18-127705/9

S/PV.8246

The situation concerning Western Sahara

27/04/2018

once and for all. The vision of reaching a just, lasting
and mutually acceptable political solution, which will
provide for the self-determination of the people of
Western Sahara, now seems a little more within reach.

Personal Envoy Köhler. We encourage both parties to
base their efforts on the relevant Council resolutions
and seek a fair, lasting and mutually acceptable solution
through negotiations.

Despite the shortcomings of the text, we believe
that the resolution is a step in the right direction
towards a resumed negotiation process. Without any
doubt, much hard work remains, in particular for the
parties, which will face tough choices ahead. In order
to advance the political process, the parties need to
renew their commitment in a spirit of realism and
compromise. They now have a window of six months
to resume negotiations without preconditions and
in good faith. We hope that they will shoulder that
important responsibility.

Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom was pleased to vote in favour of resolution
2414 (2018), which we believe sends a strong signal
of the support from the Security Council in three key
areas — first, support for de-escalation; secondly,
support for the continuing work of the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO); and, finally, supporting the overall goal
of progress towards a lasting and mutually acceptable
solution that provides for the self-determination of the
people of Western Sahara.

Today we have sent a clear signal that the Council’s
patience cannot last forever and that appropriate
conclusions must be drawn in the case of an absence
of progress. In that regard, we note that all possible
solutions must be kept on the table, including the
holding of a free and fair referendum.

With that goal in mind, we encourage the parties
to engage now with a political process in a spirit of
realism and compromise. The six-month window
provided by the resolution is an opportunity and
an indication of the importance the international
community attaches to achieving progress. Another
indication is the appointment of the new Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General, as well as the commitment
he has already shown, in his first months, to finding
a solution. The United Kingdom strongly supports the
efforts of Personal Envoy Köhler, as well as the work
of MINURSO and its new Head, Mr. Colin Stewart.
We call on all concerned to engage positively over the
coming months, in line with both the spirit and the
letter of resolution 2414 (2018).

Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, which
is committed to implementing the Security Council’s
mandate in earnest and has made efforts to maintain
regional stability. We support the extension of the
Mission’s mandate and support it in continuing to play
a constructive role in searching for a solution to the
question of Western Sahara.
The situation in Western Sahara is complex. The
priority is to maintain regional stability and to create
favourable conditions for the restart of the political
process. Therefore, the Council should remain united
and speak with one voice. During the negotiations,
amendments were proposed. The Council should
have been given more time to seek consensus. To take
hasty action on a draft resolution when there are still
differences affects the unity among Council members.
China expresses regret over the fact that resolution
2414 (2018) failed to fully accommodate the concerns
of the parties affected, and was compelled to abstain in
the voting.
China’s position on the question of Western Sahara
is consistent and remains unchanged. We will continue
to proceed from a just and objective standpoint, support
the United Nations in promoting a political solution
to the question and support the mediation efforts by
6/9

Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
Kuwait voted in favour of resolution 2414 (2018),
renewing the mandate of the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO),
as we believe that the presence of the Mission in such
circumstances is of the utmost importance, given that
it contributes to enhancing and consolidating stability
in the region.
Meanwhile, the resolution on which we have just
voted is a reflection of the desire of the SecretaryGeneral to relaunch the political negotiations between
the parties. In that regard, we appreciate the efforts
of the Head and members of MINURSO to carry out
the mandate, as provided for in the relevant Council
resolutions, including the one we have just adopted.
Kuwait reiterates its full support for the efforts of
Mr. Köhler, Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Western Sahara, to relaunch the negotiations
18-12770

27/04/2018

The situation concerning Western Sahara

under the auspices of the United Nations, without any
preconditions and in good faith, so as to reach a just
and mutually acceptable political solution that ensures
that the people of Western Sahara can exercise their
right of self-determination within arrangements that
are in accordance with the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant
Council resolutions.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank and commend the Personal Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst
Köhler, for his efforts. We also thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, Mr. Colin Stewart.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea, which
always advocates the peaceful resolution of conflicts,
wholeheartedly welcomes the renewal of the mandate
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO). We voted in favour of
resolution 2414 (2018) because we understand that
the provisions of this new resolution commit all the
parties to continue advancing towards a political
process that has stagnated for quite some time without
significant progress.
The text seeks the adoption of measures to guarantee
peace and security in the region, while demanding
total and unconditional respect for all agreements
reached with MINURSO under the auspices of the
Secretary-General, whose tireless efforts in the search
for an acceptable and mutually beneficial solution we
commend. We call on the international community to
resolutely support those efforts.
We take this opportunity to acknowledge the
efforts and sacrifices of the parties involved in the
conflict, which has raged for decades on the African
continent, with a view to reaching a definitive and
mutually satisfactory solution as soon as possible in
order to finally bring the Saharan people the peace they
yearn for and stability to the subregion.

S/PV. 8246

making compromises and seeking mutually acceptable
solutions, without fuelling further confrontations.
Kazakhstan welcomes the active efforts of the
Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western
Sahara, Mr. Horst Köhler, in exploring the positions
of the parties and seeking ways to find compromises
through a number of high-level meetings in the region
and beyond. We see that as a promising sign and
encourage Mr. Köhler to continue his engagement
through a wide range of actors in order to broaden their
support and commitment to relaunching the political
process in the spirit of a new dynamic.
Kazakhstan recognizes the important role played
by the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara on the ground and voted in favour of
renewing its mandate for the next term. We express
hope that, during the new mandate, efforts towards
rapprochement and negotiations will be redoubled.
At the same time, it is obvious that the adoption
by consensus of resolutions on mandate renewals of
United Nations peacekeeping operations would send a
stronger message to all of the parties concerned. It is
also our understanding that the international efforts to
advance political reconciliation should be consolidated
under the United Nations-led efforts. It is important for
the Council to maintain unity, support the work of the
Personal Envoy and send a clear signal to the parties.
Finally, a message was sent to the party to the
effect that they should refrain from any escalation that
could endanger the creation of conditions favourable
to the political process or the finding of a mutually
acceptable solution that is consistent with the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter.

Equatorial Guinea also voted in favour because it is
convinced that the initiatives under way can lead to the
desired resolution of the conflict.

Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The delegation of Bolivia
voted in favour of resolution 2414 (2018) given the need
to relaunch the political process and in order to express
its full support to the Personal Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Western Sahara, Mr. Horst Köhler, and
to the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara in the discharge of their respective
missions and mandates.

Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan recognizes
that this conflict is one of the most long-standing
ones in Africa and that the views of the parties do
not converge. In that regard, we reiterate that there is
no alternative to the process of reconciling interests,

We wish also to reiterate our full support for
the Secretary-General’s proposal to revitalize the
negotiation process by infusing it with a fresh dynamic
and spirit, in order to achieve, through a negotiated
process, a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political

18-127707/9

S/PV.8246

The situation concerning Western Sahara

solution leading to the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara, in keeping with the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council.
Despite all of this, my delegation expresses its
concern at the fact that none of the proposals made
during the negotiations were taken into account. Those
proposals were aimed at making the text more balanced,
on the basis of the most recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation concerning Western Sahara
(S/2018/277), with a view to crafting a resolution that
everyone could fully support.
Likewise, we are concerned about the unexpected
change made to the text with regard to the duration of
the mandate. That change was not discussed at any time
during the negotiation process, nor was the delegation
of Bolivia consulted thereon.
On the basis of the principle of transparency,
Bolivia expresses its concern at the arbitrary nature
of the penholder’s actions in this instance, as this sets
a bad precedent in terms of the working practices of
this body and could, in the long run, become a very
negative custom.
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the adoption of resolution 2414
(2018), on the extension of the mandate of the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO) until 31 October 2018.
My delegation voted in favour of the resolution,
which clearly sets out the framework and the goals
of the mandate handed down by the Security Council
to the Secretary-General so as to enable him to take
concrete action through negotiations, with a view to
breaking the political impasse on the conflict, which has
lasted for far too long. This will require a renewed and
determined commitment on the part of the stakeholders
to take ownership of the political process, with a view to
holding a fifth round of negotiations under the auspices
of the Secretary-General.
In that respect, we welcome the serious and
credible efforts made by the Kingdom of Morocco to
achieve a definitive resolution to the conflict through
its autonomy proposal. My country welcomes the
commitment of the Secretary-General and his Personal
Envoy and strongly encourages them to continue
8/9

27/04/2018

working towards promoting a framework for dialogue
that could lead to peace in Western Sahara.
We welcome also the invitation extended by
Security Council to neighbouring States, which is
aimed at securing their genuine involvement in making
a fruitful contribution to the political process, so as to
find a definitive solution to the crisis that would benefit
all of the countries of the region.
We wish also to underscore the importance, in
line with resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015), of
involving women and young people in the framework
of negotiations, as called for by the Security Council.
MINURSO’s key role was reaffirmed by the
Council, specifically as concerns compliance with
the ceasefire and existing agreements as well as the
maintenance of security through the region as a whole.
My country hopes that on the basis of the straightforward
provisions of this new resolution, negotiations will
begin, in a spirit of frankness, between the stakeholders
in their quest for compromise, with a view to reaching a
definitive resolution to the conflict.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): We voted in
favour of resolution 2414 (2018). The fact that it could
not count on the unanimous support of the Council
should not distract us from what is truly important,
namely, the relaunching of the political process. This
is something that I believe we all support, because it is
in the interest of the people, the parties and the wider
region that this conflict be resolved.
Our common ambition therefore must be to arrive at
a just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution
that will provide for the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara in the context of arrangements
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
In this regard, we reiterate our full support for the
efforts of the Personal Envoy, the former President
of Germany, Horst Köhler. We call on the parties to
continue to engage with the Personal Envoy in good
faith, and we emphasize the need to resume negotiations
without preconditions.
We recognize the importance of the work of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara in maintaining stability on the ground and in
creating the conditions necessary for political progress
to take place, and we commend the work of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Colin Stewart.
18-12770

27/04/2018

The situation concerning Western Sahara

We also express our full support for the Mission
and for the women and men serving under very
challenging conditions.
Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Poland welcomes the
adoption of resolution 2414 (2018), which extends
the mandate of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO). We
encourage both parties to cooperate closely both with
the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General and
MINURSO to avert any possible flare-up of tensions.
In that regard, Poland reiterates its support for
an inclusive, durable and acceptable solution to the
conflict, developed in accordance with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

S/PV. 8246

Sahara in order to support the political process, with a
view to achieving a solution to the question of the status
of Western Sahara and to meeting the humanitarian
needs of the Sahrawi people.
We believe it urgent to relaunch the political
process, under the auspices of the United Nations
and the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General,
without preconditions and in good faith, with a view to
facilitating agreement on a just, lasting and mutually
acceptable political solution based on international law
and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and
that would lead to the self-determination of the people
of Western Sahara.

Let me also express our full support to the
Secretary- General’s Personal Envoy, Mr. Horst Köhler.
We believe that with his dedicated efforts and through
negotiations with all parties, neighbouring States
and other stakeholders, there is a chance to achieve a
lasting solution.

Finally, we would express our concern at the
difficulties facing the Sahrawi refugees and their
dependence on external humanitarian assistance, as
well as our expectation that progress in the negotiations
will improve the human rights situation and living
conditions of the people of Western Sahara in all of
its aspects.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

Peru deems it necessary to renew the mandate of the
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western

There are no more speakers inscribed on my list.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

18-127709/9
