S/PV.8883

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8883rd meeting

Tuesday, 19 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kamau. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by
a compilation of annexes (S/2021/884) containing the statements submitted by interested
non-members of the Council.

21-29502 (E)
*2129502*

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

19/10/2021

movement and access restrictions, including the severe
closure of Gaza, further fuel the cycle of violence.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in the meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in the meeting: Mr. Tor
Wennesland, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process; Mr. Daniel Levy, President, U.S./
Middle East Project; and Ms. Hanan Ashrawi, political
and civil society leader.

A large number of Palestinians, including children,
continue to be killed or injured by Israeli security
forces. Settler-related attacks against Palestinians and
their property, including in the presence of Israeli
security forces, continue. Israeli civilians continue
to be subjected to attacks by Palestinians, which
have caused deaths, injuries and damages. Israeli and
Palestinian civilians are suffering and paying a steep
price for the persistence of the conflict, including the
protracted occupation.
In addition, the Palestinian Authority (PA) is
facing an unprecedented fiscal and financial crisis. A
strengthened PA and PA institutions are needed in order
to implement the necessary reforms and eventually
return to Gaza. I am concerned that those negative
trends are occurring simultaneously across the West
Bank and Gaza; they should not be left unaddressed.

Mr. Wennesland: At the outset, I welcome the
ongoing engagement between senior Israeli and
Palestinian officials. I strongly encourage further
expansion of such efforts, which can improve conditions
on the ground and pave the way towards reinvigorating
the peace process. But we should have no illusions about
the current state of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Daily violence continued throughout the occupied
Palestinian territory during the reporting period.
In Gaza, while a relative calm largely prevailed, on
30 September a Palestinian man was killed by Israeli
security forces as he approached the perimeter fence.
The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) said that the man had
approached the fence in the central Gaza Strip with two
other men carrying a suspicious bag and digging in the
ground. Relatives of the man disputed the accounts,
saying he was hunting birds. In the occupied West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, clashes, attacks, search and
arrest operations and other incidents resulted in the
death of three Palestinians and injuries from live fire
and rubber-coated metal bullets to 66 Palestinians,
including nine children and one woman. Four Israeli
civilians and two soldiers were injured in the course of
those events.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian territory
continues to deteriorate, and we have seen no progress
towards realizing a two-State solution. That political
stagnation is fuelling tension, instability and a
deepening sense of hopelessness. The security situation
in Gaza remains fragile, and security dynamics in the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, are
deteriorating, including growing tensions in and around
the holy sites.

On 30 September, a Palestinian woman was shot
and killed by Israeli security forces after reportedly
attempting to stab Israeli security forces officers in
Jerusalem’s Old City. On the same day, Israeli security
forces shot and killed a Palestinian man in the village of
Burqin near Jenin. According to Israeli security forces,
the man had opened fire at Israeli troops as they were
conducting an arrest operation. Palestinian Islamic
Jihad later claimed that the man was one of its members.

Settlement activity, evictions, demolitions and the
seizure of Palestinian property; military operations
by Israeli security forces, in particular in Area A; and

On 14 October, Israeli security forces shot and
killed a 14-year-old Palestinian and wounded another
while they were allegedly throwing Molotov cocktails

The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Wennesland.

2/26

21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

at civilian vehicles west of Bethlehem. On the same day,
a Palestinian man drove his vehicle into and injured an
IDF soldier near the Qalandia checkpoint. Israeli forces
fired on the vehicle and injured and arrested the driver.
In addition, since 8 October we have witnessed
nearly nightly clashes between Palestinians and
Israeli civilians, as well as Israeli security forces, in
and around the Old City. Meanwhile, settlers and
other Israeli civilians perpetrated 26 attacks against
Palestinians, resulting in 18 injuries and damage to
property. Palestinians perpetrated 31 attacks against
Israeli settlers and other civilians in the West Bank,
resulting in injuries in four cases and in damage to
property in the rest.
On 28 September, some 70 Israeli settlers attacked
the Palestinian village of Mufaqara, l-Rakeez and
Al-Tuwani, in the South Hebron Hills. The settlers
injured nine Palestinians, including children, killed
livestock and damaged vehicles and homes, as well as
community infrastructure. A 3-year-old Palestinian boy,
hit in the head by stones as he slept, was hospitalized
with a skull fracture. In related clashes, 20 Palestinians
were injured by Israeli Defense Forces. Palestinians
also threw stones towards Israelis during the incident,
injuring one soldier.
On 29 September, Israeli Foreign Minister Mr. Yair
Lapid condemned the attacks tweeting, “This violent
incident is horrific and it is terror.” He called the
perpetrators “a violent and dangerous fringe” and said
Israel had “a responsibility to bring them to justice”.
Israeli security forces arrested at least six Israelis in
relation to those incidents, including two children, as
well as three Palestinians. And at least four Israelis
have reportedly since being arrested, and later released.
An investigation by the Israeli authorities is ongoing. I
welcome the swift condemnation of the attacks from
the Israeli Foreign Minister and underscore that all
perpetrators of violence must be held accountable and
swiftly brought to justice.
Since the annual olive harvest began a week ago,
some 1,200 olive trees have reportedly been vandalized
by settlers. On 15 October, some 40 settlers attacked
Palestinian farmers east of Yasuf village, north of Salfit,
injuring a Palestinian woman with pepper spray and
three others by throwing stones. I call on Israel to take
all the necessary steps to fulfil its obligation to protect
Palestinian civilians from violence, including by Israeli

S/PV. 8883

settlers, and to investigate and hold accountable those
responsible for such attacks.
On 4 and 18 October, the Israel Civil Administration
held discussions on objections to two settlement
housing plans, for a total of nearly 3,500 units in the
strategic E-1 Area in the West Bank. I am concerned
that Israeli authorities continue to consider plans for
constructions in E-1. If built, those units would sever
the connection between the northern and the southern
West Bank, significantly undermining the chances for
establishing a viable and contiguous Palestinian State
as a part of the negotiated two-State solution. I reiterate
that all settlements are illegal under international law
and remain a substantial obstacle to peace.
On 5 October, the Jerusalem Magistrates’ Court
granted the appeal of a Jewish Israeli who had been
expelled from the Holy Esplanade for praying in
violation of Israeli police regulations that allow only
Muslims to pray at the site. The Court’s decision was
condemned as a violation of the status quo by the
Palestinian, Egyptian and Jordanian Governments,
by Palestinian factions and by Muslim and Christian
leaders in Jerusalem and throughout the region. The
police appealed the decision to the Jerusalem District
Court, which overturned the lower court decision
and reinstated the appellant’s temporary visit ban on
8 October. In a statement released the same day, Israel’s
Public Security Minister reiterated that the status quo
must be observed, adding that any changes to the
existing arrangement “would endanger public safety
and could cause a flare-up”. I welcome that statement
by the Israeli Minister. And I reiterate that all sides
must respect and uphold the status quo at the holy sites.
Israeli demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian
homes and other structures continued during the
reporting period. Overall, the Israeli authorities
demolished, seized and forced owners to demolish 18
Palestinian-owned structures in Area C and seven in
occupied East Jerusalem, displacing five Palestinians,
including three women and one child. The demolitions
were carried out owing to the lack of Israeli building
permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to
obtain. On 29 September, Israel’s High Court of Justice
granted a request by the State of Israel to postpone to
March 2022 its response to a petition to implement
an eviction notice against the Bedouin village of
Khan Al-Ahmar, in Area C of the West Bank. In its
request, the Government cited the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the current diplomatic security situation,

21-295023/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

19/10/2021

adding that there had been significant progress towards
an agreement that could avoid a demolition.

Assistance to Palestinians, scheduled to take place in
Oslo in November.

On 4 October, Israel’s Supreme Court presented a
proposal to four Palestinian families facing evictions in
the occupied East Jerusalem neighbourhood of Sheikh
Jarrah and to the Israeli settler cooperation seeking to
evict them. The proposal would significantly postpone
eviction efforts, while requiring the families to pay a
nominal annual rent to the settler cooperation. The Court
specified that the agreement would in no way prejudge
ongoing legal proceedings to determine ownership of
the properties. If the parties do not reach an agreement
by 2 November, the Court stated, it would issue a ruling.
I urge Israel to cease demolitions and evictions in line
with its obligations under international humanitarian
law. In a welcome development earlier today, Israeli
and Palestinian officials announced that some 4,000
Palestinians living in the West Bank without proper
documentation would be registered in the Palestinian
population registry and receive identity documents.

Efforts continue to stabilize the situation in Gaza
and support recovery and reconstruction following
the May escalation. The United Nations has launched
reconstruction efforts for severely damaged housing
units. Preparations for additional reconstruction have
begun with assistance from Qatar after the lifting of
some restrictions on the entry of construction materials
by Israeli authorities. Up to 1,800 of the more than 2,000
destroyed and damaged civilian homes will be rebuilt
in the first phase. In addition, Egypt began repairing
one of Gaza’s main coastal roads in late September.

The PA’s fiscal situation is reaching a breaking
point. Expenditures far exceed its revenues, and the
gap is growing. Donor support, including direct budget
support, has continued its multi-year decline. Estimates
suggest that the PA will have a 2021 budget deficit
of approximately $800 million. That would nearly
double the 2020 gap, and, even with donor support
and emergency measures, we will see that situation
continue. The borrowing capacity of the PA with banks
has been exhausted.
Together with other long-standing fiscal leakages
that are contributing to the financial crisis, Israel
continues to deduct millions of dollars a month from
clearance revenue transfers in response to Palestinian
payments to security prisoners, their families and
the families of those killed in the context of attacks.
Israel’s recent loan of 500 million shekels against
future Palestinian revenue was critical, but it only
temporarily delays the looming crisis and does not
address the structural impediments imposed on the
Palestinian economy.
Significant reforms and policy changes by both
Israelis and Palestinians must be implemented to
address the structural challenges. Such reforms could
and should be met with increased support from the
international donor community. That will form a key
part of the upcoming agenda of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
4/26

During the month of September, nearly 7,000
truckloads of goods were sent to Gaza through the Israelicontrolled Kerem Shalom crossing — approximately
80 per cent of the pre-escalation monthly average.
About 2,000 truckloads entered through the Egyptiancontrolled Rafah crossing, marking one of the highestrecorded volumes of entering goods. In addition,
as of 18 October, more than 6,000 permits had been
issued for Gaza merchants and traders to enter into
Israel — a critical contribution to boosting the local
economy, which can be expanded.
While I welcome the issuance of permits and
improvements in the movement of goods into and
out of the Gaza Strip, much more is needed to
facilitate sustainable access. I reiterate that the Gaza
reconstruction mechanism remains best-placed to
enable the entry of the accountable delivery of items
and materials that would otherwise not be allowed into
the Strip.
I remain concerned about the continued budgetary
shortfall of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and
I welcome the recently announced contributions from
key donors. However, UNRWA continues to lack the
necessary funds to sustain its critical programmes for
the rest of this year. UNRWA remains indispensable
with regard to regional stability and must have the
necessary resources to fulfil its mandate.
I now turn briefly to the region. With regard to the
Golan, while the ceasefire between Israel and Syria
has been generally maintained, violations of the 1974
Disengagement of Forces Agreement by the parties
continue, increasing tensions. Both parties’ adherence
to the terms of the Disengagement Agreement is
important for preserving stability.
21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In Lebanon, a new Government was formed
on 10 September by Prime Minister Najib Azmi
Mikati, ending 13 months of the caretaker period.
The 24-member Government, which includes one
woman minister, voted to reach an agreement with the
International Monetary Fund on tackling the energy
crisis and holding the 2022 elections on schedule.
The investigations into the Beirut port explosion has
faced setbacks as a result of reported intimidation of
the judge in charge of the investigation. On 14 October,
deadly clashes erupted in Beirut at a protest calling for
his removal.
We can no longer lurch from crisis to crisis. Our
approach cannot be to address the current situation
piecemeal, incident by incident on a short-term, dayto-day basis, as stand-alone issues. A broader package
of parallel steps by the Government of Israel, the PA
and the international community is needed. Such
a framework should begin to address key political,
security and economic challenges that are preventing
progress. Such efforts are urgently needed and will
require a clear political commitment and involvement
from the Government of Israel, the PA and the
international community.
We must begin to restore hope in a peaceful and
sustainable negotiated resolution to the conflict.
Despite the enormity of the current political, economic
and humanitarian challenges, we cannot afford to be
pessimistic or passive. I welcome the efforts of the
envoys of the Middle East Quartet, including in the call
held on 14 October. I encourage both parties to urgently
implement positive and significant policy shifts to
address the security situation, improve the Palestinian
economy and strengthen Palestinian governance and
institutions. I also urge Israeli and Palestinian authorities
to find additional avenues for cooperation, including on
the implementation of existing agreements.
That is not the endgame, but rather key steps in
the process that can and must lead us back to genuine
negotiations, end the occupation and allow for the
realization of a two-State solution on the basis of the
1967 lines, international law, United Nations resolutions
and previous agreements. We must build consensus in
support of a broader framework for engagement, or face
an increasingly desperate reality shaped by extremist
voices and unilateral actions that will heighten the risk
of Palestinians, Israelis and the region entering into a
more severe conflict. The United Nations is actively
engaged in advancing those efforts, including through

S/PV. 8883

the Middle East Quartet, key regional partners and
Israeli and Palestinian leaders.
The President: I thank Mr. Wennesland for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Levy.
Mr. Levy: I thank the Security Council and the
Kenyan presidency for giving me this opportunity to
brief members today.
I would like to enter into the record of today’s
meeting a report published by the Carnegie Endowment
for International Peace and the U.S./Middle East Project,
which I head, entitled Breaking the Israel-Palestine
Status Quo, and to acknowledge my co-authors — Zaha
Hassan, Hallaamal Keir and Marwan Muasher.
In short, that report calls for a rights-based
approach to Israel-Palestine, building on but not
replacing international law. It acknowledges the simple
reality that pursuing a more-of-the-same peace process
guarantees further failure and reinforcement of the
negative trends that we have just heard described in
such detail by Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland. It
should come as a wake-up call to the Council and its
deliberations that the extent of that deterioration has
led Palestinian human rights groups; Israeli human
rights organizations, including B’Tselem; and, indeed,
Human Rights Watch to make a legal designation
that the crime of apartheid and persecution is being
committed by Israel against the Palestinians. That is
quite new.
The Council knows better than I — after, all it
holds these debates every month — that the endless
incantation of worn-out slogans gets us nowhere. Israelis
will say that the United Nations body is unfairly and
uniquely obsessed with this conflict. Palestinians will
say that the Council has unfairly and uniquely failed to
act to protect Palestinians and make good on its own
decisions. When a conflict takes on those attributes
of being chronic and intractable, we must try to break
out from the repetitive and predictable — to disengage
from autopilot.
Allow me to humbly suggest that we first recognize
three core concepts, that we turn to these to guide our
actions, which themselves need to change, and that
this hopefully opens the way to some necessary new
thinking. And as I briefly offer thoughts on these, I
want it to be known that I am cognizant that I have no
claim to having all the answers.

21-295025/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The first framing proposal is to consider a legitimacy
deficit in Palestinian politics. The Palestine Liberation
Organization must become fully representative,
inclusive and, by extension, better able to demonstrate
strategic agency and to negotiate. Palestinians have
a right to elect representatives to their national
institutions; that requires a Palestinian leadership
decision, as well as supportive, not preventive, steps by
Israel and the international community. We also cannot
ignore or condone when existing Palestinian selfgoverning authorities on the ground, with their limited
mandate, repress their own people.
Secondly, there is an accountability deficit
when it comes to Israel’s actions. If the unlawful
and peace-negating policies of Israel continue to be
met with impunity, there should be no expectation
of positive change. It is that simple. Israel pursues
policies in violation of international law and of United
Nations resolutions because it can. No tangible cost or
consequence is attached.
Thirdly, there is a symmetry deficit. We must
acknowledge the overarching and defining relationships
of power in this conflict — the fundamental asymmetry
between an occupying State and an occupied people.
We cannot lapse into a misplaced both-sides-ism. The
focus therefore must primarily be on redressing Israeli
actions, precisely because that reflects the unequal
relationship of power, whereby Israel pre-eminently
determines outcomes on the ground and denies basic
freedoms to another people. Israeli rights cannot be
sacrificed, but they cannot come at the expense of
Palestinians in need of protection and the restoration
of their rights, whether in Gaza, the West Bank, East
Jerusalem, in refugee camps in the diaspora, or when
facing forms of structural discrimination inside Israel.
In that context, last year’s normalization accords
exacerbated that asymmetry without providing an
on-ramp for peace.
Those core conceptual understandings should help
guide our actions, which can in turn create the building
blocks for new thinking and peace. They can also help
explain why repeated attempts at economic peace,
at confidence-building measures, at managing or
shrinking the conflict without addressing occupation
and rights are doomed to continual dismal failure, as
Coordinator Tor Wennesland said. Without the politics,
the rest cannot be done.
6/26

19/10/2021

So how can we do that? In a few weeks, the Council
will mark the fifth anniversary of resolution 2334
(2016). It should implement that resolution — really
implement it. That resolution, for example, calls on all
States to distinguish between the territory of the State
of Israel and the territory occupied since 1967. So every
time Israel’s illegal settlements are allowed to benefit,
without checks, from trade agreements, from bilateral
cooperation and exchanges, which Israel has with third
parties, then resolution 2334 (2016) is violated.
One place that differentiation is happening is in the
Human Rights Council database of companies complicit
in doing business with illegal settlements. I say, achieve
a durable ceasefire between Israel and Gaza that ends
the blockade of Gaza and generates more security
for Palestinians and Israelis alike. Talk to whoever it
is necessary to talk to. Set aside conditionalities and
encourage regional parties to do likewise.
In short, this is not about maximum pressure,
but it is about using leverage, including the currently
neglected instruments at the Council’s disposal, so
that Palestinian rights are better protected, so that they
can live without the threat of displacement or arbitrary
arrest and detention, with protection for land and
resource rights, and for freedoms, including those to
move and organize.
The commitment of the new United States
Administration to equal measures of freedom, dignity
and security for Israelis and Palestinians and the July
remarks of the Chinese Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Wang Yi, of Chinese support for platforms of informal
dialogue and readiness to offer their own views and
proposals are both welcome and will hopefully be acted
on in meaningful ways.
Finally, in both this body and in the respective
societies, we can be nurturing and giving breathing
space to new thinking that is peace-oriented and
rights-respecting and takes us beyond the current
impasse. That same resolution 2334 (2016) was adopted
five years ago, when a certain Joseph R. Biden was
Vice-President. That also noted that a one-State reality
was being entrenched. Many consider that to be the case.
So as this body take steps to salvage a two-State
outcome, we must also be open to the possibility that
maybe there is no off-the-shelf solution at this stage.
Is there really nothing more to say about how to
address the legitimate concerns and aspirations of both
peoples, the rights of both Jews and Palestinians to self21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

determination, without placing one right on top of the
other or pitting one against the other, for security not
to be something that either Israelis or Palestinians can
have but a necessity for both, for the rights of Palestinian
refugees and the Jewish impulse for a refuge of last
resort to both be respected?
To paraphrase the Ugandan academic and author
Mahmood Mamdani, can we think about political
identities and political communities as mutable, not
inborn — the products of history that have been created
by and can be dismantled by political processes in the
interest of political justice. This body may at some
stage be forced to revisit its partition vote of 1947 and
its historic endorsement of two States. If that is not to
happen, then far-reaching and long-delayed thinking
and action are required that, to be clear, lie outside of
the current collective comfort zone.
I look forward to hearing my friend Ms. Ashrawi
and Ambassador Mona Juul, and all the members of
the Council.
The President: I thank Mr. Levy for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ashrawi.
Ms. Ashrawi: I am deeply grateful for the
opportunity to address the Council today, especially to
the Republic of Kenya for this kind invitation.
As Council members have been hearing for over
70 years, the United Nations and its various bodies
have been seized of the Palestine question, repeatedly
reviewing conditions, as we have heard by our colleague
Tor Wennesland and his predecessors, adopting
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), and
dispatching fact-finding missions to no avail. Sadly, the
Security Council has been unable to assert its authority,
allowing this injustice to become a perpetual tragic
human moral, political and legal travesty.
It would therefore be disingenuous of me to
come before the Council assuming I could inform
its members of something that they do not already
know. Nevertheless, I do appreciate the opportunity to
communicate in a candid manner, not to recite endless
statistics — Council members have them — nor to
reiterate the ongoing pain of the people deprived of
their basic rights, actually including even the right to
speak out. They have been admonished not to whine or
complain as a means of silencing the victim.

S/PV. 8883

The tragedy is that Council members know all
of this, yet it has had minimal impact, if any, on the
horrific conditions in occupied Palestine. I imagine it
must be disheartening and frustrating for the United
Nations and its members to find themselves trapped in
the cycle of deliberate disdain and futility. It is therefore
imperative that the Security Council consider where it
has gone wrong and what it can do to correct course
and serve the cause of justice and peace, particularly in
addressing the core issues and thinking outside the box,
as my colleague Daniel Levy has again said.
Undoubtedly, the absence of accountability for
Israel and of protection for the Palestinian people has
enabled Israeli impunity to ride roughshod over the
rights of an entire nation, allowing for the perpetuation
of a permanent-settler colonial occupation. Much of the
prevailing political discourse overlooks reality, as has
been said, and is diverted and subsumed by chimeras
and distractions proffered by Israel and its allies
under such banners as economic peace, improving
the quality of life, normalization, managing the
conflict, containing the conflict or even shrinking the
conflict. These fallacies must be dismantled. Volatile
situations of injustice and oppression do not shrink;
they expand and explode with disastrous consequences.
Similarly, the delusion of imposing calm under siege
and systemic aggression, particularly as in Gaza, is an
oxymoron, for calm or security, on the one hand, and
occupation or captivity, on the other, are antithetical
and irreconcilable.
Likewise, the fallacy of confidence-building
measures — my apologies to Tor Wennesland on this,
but I think there can be very little confidence under
occupation — is misguided, since occupation breeds
only contempt, distrust, resentment and resistance. The
oppressed cannot be brought to trust or accept handouts
from their oppressor as an alternative to enjoying their
rights to freedom and justice.
The misleading and flawed “both sides” argument
or “both-side-ism”, as Daniel Levy put it, calling for
balance in a flagrantly unbalanced situation, is another
attempt at obfuscation and generating misconception,
as though both occupier and occupied — oppressor or
oppressed — have equal responsibility for this horrific
situation. Israel’s impunity is further enhanced using
such excuses as being the so-called only democracy
in the Middle East or a strategic ally or having
shared values, or even for the sake of protecting its
fragile coalition.

21-295027/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

There has also been tacit and at times overt
acceptance of Israel’s ideological absolutist arguments,
including the invocation of religious texts as a means of
dismissing and supplanting contemporary political and
legal discourse and action. The so-called Jewish State
law, which allocates the right to self-determination
exclusively to Jews in all of historical Palestine, is
therefore endorsed and normalized. In the meantime,
the massive disinformation machine persists in its
racist, maligning and demonizing of the Palestinian
people, going so far as to label all of them as terrorists,
or a demographic threat, which is a dehumanizing
formula exploited as a way to deny the right of millions
of Palestine refugees to return.
Such slander has warped political focus and
discourse globally. Some States have gone off on a
tangent, pursuing Palestinian textbooks for so-called
incitement, as though the occupation is not a source of
provocation and incitement, or adopting the International
Holocaust Remembrance Alliance definition that
conflates criticism of Israel with anti-Semitism, or
criminalizing the Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions
movement, or intimidating and censoring academics
and solidarity activists who stand up for Palestinian
rights. These distortions ignore the unequal and unjust
laws designed to persecute Palestinians individually
and collectively. They are evidenced in the defamation
of our political prisoners and the targeting of their
families’ livelihoods, as though Israeli military courts
or prison systems have anything to do with justice
or legality.
Council members all know that, since 1967, over
a million Palestinians have been imprisoned and over
75,000 Palestinians have been killed by Israel. And
yet the Council labels all these people as terrorists or
not deserving of any kind of rights or attention. The
mindless refrains that Israel has the right to defend
itself, while the Palestinian people are denied such
a right is perverse, and that the occupiers’ violence
is justified as self-defence, while the occupied are
stigmatized as terrorists. Similarly, we cannot afford in
all things we do to disregard the context of occupation
and its systemic aggression as the framing device for
all critical assessments and action; everything must be
viewed in that context.
Occupied Palestine, including Jerusalem, is the
target of a comprehensive and pervasive policy of
colonization and erasure. We can talk about settlements
wherever we have the numbers, but it is nothing but a
8/26

19/10/2021

collective form of expansion, polarization and invasion,
of displacement and replacement, in which Israel is
appropriating everything Palestinian: our homes, our
land and resources, our cultural and human heritage,
our archaeological sites, which we have safeguarded
for centuries, our history, our cuisine, the names
of our streets and most egregiously the identity of
Jerusalem, as we witness in the ethnic cleansing of
the Old City — Sheikh Jarrah, Silwan, inter alia. Even
our cemeteries have been desecrated, such as in the
building of a so-called Museum of Tolerance on top of
human remains in Mamilla cemetery.
And Israel continues to stoke the flames of a holy
war with repeated assaults on our holy sites, particularly
Al-Aqsa mosque. Jerusalem is being targeted in a
deliberate campaign of annexation and distortion, and
now Israel brazenly declares its intent to complete
the settlement siege of Jerusalem and destruction of
the territorial contiguity of the West Bank with its
outrageous settlement plans for E-1, Qalandria or
Atarot airport, Pisgat Ze’ev and Givat Hamatos. We
cannot be distracted by symbolic gestures that create
false impression of progress. We have to look at reality.
And claims that the time is not right or that it is
difficult now to work for a peaceful solution give
licence to Israel to persist in such perilous policies.
And repeating the verbal commitment to the two-State
solution while one State is allowed to deliberately
destroy the other rings hollow.
All of this does not preclude our recognition of our
own shortcomings. We do not shirk our responsibility
to speak out against internal violence, human rights
abuses, corruption or other such practices that are
projected and presented by our own people. It is our
responsibility to carry out democratic reform and
revitalize our body politic while ending our internal
divisions. This is a Palestinian imperative.
And we must caution others against exploiting our
shortcomings to justify Israeli crimes or international
inaction or to condition any positive engagement
on the creation of an ideal system of governance
in Palestine while we languish under a lawless
system of Israeli control. We ask that the Security
Council, as trustees of the rules-based order, uphold
its responsibilities, provide us with protection from
aggression and empower our people to amplify their
voice, both in governance and in liberation.
21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Peace is not achieved by normalizing the occupation,
sidelining the Palestinian question or rewarding Israel
by repositioning it as a regional super-Power. Such
an approach keeps in place the causes of regional
instability and insecurity, while enabling Israel, as a
colonial apartheid State, to superimpose greater Israel
on all historic Palestine.
Generation after generation, the people of Palestine
have remained committed to the justice of their cause,
the integrity of their narrative, the authenticity of their
history and culture and their inviolable right to live in
freedom and dignity as an equal among nations and
in the fullness of our humanity. It is time to declaim
another type of justice, invoke our collective will to
activate the Charter of the United Nations and affirm
the relevance of international law. As Mr. Levy said,
it is time to think outside the box and stop doing more
of the same, hoping for different results. The time has
come for courageous and determined action, not only
to undo the injustice of the past but also to chart a
clear and binding course for a peaceful future of hope
and redemption.
The President: I thank Ms. Ashrawi for her briefing.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): We congratulate Kenya
on its presidency of the Security Council. We thank you,
Mr. President, as Foreign Affairs Principal Secretary of
Kenya, for presiding over this important meeting and
welcome you to the Security Council. We also wish
to thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his
briefing and to extend a special word of appreciation
to today’s other briefers, my dear sister Ms. Hanan
Ashrawi and Mr. Daniel Levy, adding the important
voice of civil society to our deliberations on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestine question.

S/PV. 8883

impossible, and in the statements of its officials, who
negate our right to self-determination and independence
and denigrate the existence of our people.
Given that Israeli stance, it does not make much
sense to say that we will wait until the parties are ready
and willing, because not only is one party telling the
Security Council that it will not adhere to international
law and the international consensus, but it is also actively
violating it, with no regard for the Council’s appeals.
How do we therefore hope to reach the destination of
a just and lasting peace if Israel is allowed to sit alone
behind the steering wheel, determining the course and
our collective fate?
It is normal to hope that a certain sense of selfpreservation and self-interest would push Israel to
see that the project that it pursues is self-defeating.
But Israel’s violation vision is clearly guided solely
by its colonial appetite, as proved over and over by
its policies and practices, which breach international
law, including the Council’s resolutions, and are the
cause of deep anguish and hardship for the Palestinian
people, who have suffered the wrath of its occupation
and the misery of exile for generations. It has decided
to ignore all signals that demonstrate how unwise its
plans are. After 75 years of such policies, aimed at the
dispossession, forcible displacement and denial of the
rights of our people, while in 1948 two thirds of our
people were forced to leave their homeland, Palestinians
are on the verge of being a majority of the population
living between the Jordan River and the sea.

Whatever step we take is guided by the destination
that we are hoping to reach. The international community
identified that destination a long time ago and has never
deviated from that determination. That is what we refer
to as the international consensus, which is based on the
two-State solution on the pre-1967 borders.

However, Israel believes that it can seize our
geography and control our demography. Did it
not manage to ensure, since 1967, the inability of
Palestinians to build on more than 60 per cent of the
West Bank and on 87 per cent of East Jerusalem,
facilitating its plan to unlawfully annex maximum
land with minimum Palestinians? While Palestinians
are besieged in fragmented, and even walled, enclaves,
their land and resources will therefore remain under
Israeli control, their fundamental rights will be denied
and a dual system will ensure privileges for one group
and discriminate against another.

However, it is patently clear that that is not the
destination that Israel has in mind. That is clear in
its insistence on maintaining its illegal occupation. It
is clear in the colonial policies that it pursues on the
ground, which openly aim at making such a solution

I know that it sounds familiar. It is called apartheid,
and anyone who believes that that is a welcome prospect
is blinded by ideology and a feeling of supremacy that
is destructive to both those who hold it and those who
suffer from it.

21-295029/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

19/10/2021

Israel thinks that the last part of its plan is Palestinian
surrender. It calls that Palestinian acceptance of the
unlawful reality that it has created. To achieve that, it
tries to convince Palestinians that they are better off
if they stop struggling and accept the premise that
international law does not matter, that Palestine is
no longer a priority and that Israel will never be held
accountable for its actions. It wants them to lose hope
so that they finally surrender.

We need a collective approach that relies on the
positions already adopted by the Council, including
resolution 2334 (2016), which was mentioned by
previous speakers today, and those of the international
community at large. That approach must explore the
tools available at the national and international levels
in a genuine spirit of multilateralism and commitment
to the peaceful resolution of conflicts, as enshrined in
the Charter of the United Nations.

But what Palestinians rely on is not hope alone
but faith — the deep-seated faith that humans cannot
surrender to their chains and that the servitude and
captivity of a nation will never be compatible with the
human condition. The very history of those around this
table and of the United Nations is a tale of the rebellion
of peoples against their chains and valiant struggles for
liberation and justice.

We need the Security Council to accompany the
steps it deemed necessary to reach the destination,
with the enforcement of consequences for those who
refuse to move forward on that path. Let us start by
putting the brakes on illegal unilateral measures. Let
us start by exploring every available avenue in order
to provide the Palestinian people the protection to
which they are entitled. Let us mobilize the goodwill
and available resources around the globe by convening
an international conference under the auspices of the
Quartet that would involve the actors who can make a
contribution to peace. Let us not think that momentum
appears by magic; it is generated and sustained by our
collective action.

I therefore turn to the Security Council and to
the institution as a whole. They have expressed clear
positions. They have been steadfast in their opposition
to illegal unilateral actions. They have given generous
assistance and support to Palestine statehood and the
Palestinian people. They have invested in peace for
decades and decades.
Of course, they could continue to intervene each
time that we reach a breaking point, such as when Israel
decides to formalize its annexation, as it did a year ago.
They could intervene to deal with the flames generated
by Israeli provocations at Haram Al-Sharif, to stop the
forcible displacement of Palestinians in Sheikh Jarrah
and Silwan, to broker a ceasefire after Israel kills
dozens of Palestinian families, as it did in May, or to
stop the latest announcement of settlements that would
destroy the chances of peace, as we have witnessed in
recent days. We truly value such efforts, but they only
slow Israel down on the destructive path on which it is
embarked; they do not stop it.
We need the Security Council to take hold of the
steering wheel. To some, it may seem useless now
or difficult given competing priorities or requiring
too much political capital for little progress. But the
alternative is so dire that the Council will eventually
need to intervene, and by then it will be much more
costly and much more difficult.
The Security Council has determined clearly the
way forward. It has created a mechanism to be an
expression of its will — the Quartet. Who is better
placed to have their hands on the steering wheel?
10/26

Thirty years ago, when the Madrid Peace
Conference was held, it was not an expression of the
will of the parties, but rather a reflection of the strong
will of the international community that left the parties
with no option but to show up. The Conference was
not successful in itself, but it generated a dynamic that
allowed peace efforts to reach new heights and to achieve
a breakthrough. If anybody had assessed the chances
of success when Yitzhak Shamir was Prime Minister
of Israel, they would have thought that those efforts
were doomed and therefore useless. The statements and
political positions of Israeli Prime Ministers cannot
be the decisive factor that determines whether peace
efforts have a chance of success. They are not the only
party that decides and guarantees success.
The only question worth asking is what incentives
does Israel have to change its behaviour? What
disincentives does it face if it persists with the same
policies? Those who are leading these colonial policies
are hoping to transform the international community
into a bystander or a silent witness or, at worst, a
critical commentator. But the international community
is an actor and a decisive one at that, and it must act as
such. It is important for the international community
to signal as soon as possible that it is determined to
ensure that we are on the right track and will not allow
21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

anyone to derail the process. If the Council cannot make
determinations and policies related to the maintenance
of international peace and security, then who is?
The Palestinian people will not disappear. They
will continue reinventing their just struggle until they
achieve their national, collective and individual rights.
One way or the other, they will live in freedom and
dignity in their homeland. If we believe that the way for
that to happen is through the two-State solution based
on 1967 borders, action can no longer be delayed. As
the saying goes: “actions speak louder than words”.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): Thirty years ago, in October
1991, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir addressed
the Madrid Peace Conference and declared:
“We believe the blessing of peace can turn the
Middle East into a paradise; a centre of cultural,
scientific, medical and technological creativity... It
could put the Middle East... on the road to a new era.
Thirty years later, we are seeing Prime Minister
Shamir’s vision slowly coming to life. The recent
Abraham accords and the long-standing relations
between Israel, Egypt and Jordan have put us on the
road to a new era in which the Middle East will not be a
centre of conflict, but of creativity and solutions to the
world’s most pressing challenges.
That potential is particularly clear as the world
prepares for the critical United Nations Climate Change
Conference in Glasgow. Israel is a global leader in
crucial areas such as water management, sustainable
agriculture and renewable energy. Together with the
nations of the Abraham Accords and all peace-seeking
nations, we can turn the Middle East into a global hub of
climate innovation for the benefit of our environment,
our economies and the future of our children.
Unfortunately, rather than pushing peace forward,
the Security Council debates on the situation in the
Middle East only seem to perpetuate the conflict.
Rather than helping to turn the vision of peace into
a reality, these debates create an alternate and false
reality. These biased debates give the Palestinians
the illusion that they will never be held accountable
for their crimes and that all of their radical demands
could be granted by the international community. The
unbalanced discussions — I hope the Council felt
it — only serve to strengthen Palestinian rejectionism

S/PV. 8883

of any further negotiations with Israel, thereby
maintaining the conflict.
Today, we heard from the Palestinian Ambassador
the same lies, falsehoods and distortions that we hear
at every debate on the situation in the Middle East. Is
he not ashamed to come before the Security Council,
when his Government is paying hundreds of millions of
dollars to terrorists? How can he possibly speak about
aggression when his leaders in schools glorify the
murder of Jews and incite terror? He dares to talk about
international law when his courts recently sentenced
two Palestinians to 15 years in prison for the “crime” of
trying to sell land to a Jew.
Is the Ambassador not embarrassed to speak about
human rights while his police forces are beating to death
real civil society activists, such as Nizar Banat? The
Ambassador sits here and talks about the situation in
Gaza. Why does he not tell the Council whose decisions
led to cutting off Gaza’s electricity in 2017? How can he
claim to represent the Palestinian people when 80 per
cent of Palestinians are fed up with President Abbas?
When the members of the Security Council allow
this organ to be turned again and again into a platform for
the most outrageous anti-Israel libels, they are not only
stopping the train of peace from moving forward, they
are knocking it off the tracks. As I said, these debates
reflect an alternate and false reality that is detached
from the reality on the ground. It is an alternate reality,
in which hundreds of Palestinian terrorist attacks are
not the Council’s focus, while every Israeli court ruling
regarding illegal Palestinian construction becomes
the most critical crisis in the Middle East. It is a false
reality, in which every Palestinian claim against Israel
is the most urgent issue on the agenda, while the terror
in and the destruction of Iran and its proxies throughout
the region are almost an afterthought.
The most recent example of that absurd approach is
the decision to invite, as a representative of civil society,
an individual who was a member of the Executive
Committee of the Palestine Liberation Organization
and has been a Palestinian politician for decades. What
is next? Will the Council invite Hassan Rouhani and
Javad Zarif as representatives of Iranian civil society?
Ms. Ashrawi is not just a lifelong spokesperson for
the Palestinian political leadership; she is an opponent of
peace. Following the Abraham accords, she condemned
those historic peace agreements and claimed that the
leaders of the United Arab Emirates and Bahrain had

21-2950211/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

been coerced and cajoled into making peace with Israel.
Does the Security Council really want to give a platform
to an enemy of peace? MIFTAH, the Palestinian
Initiative for the Promotion of Global Dialogue and
Democracy, the organization that Ms. Ashrawi founded
and led, has published anti-Semitic blood libel, claiming
that Jews use Christian blood on Passover. Does the
Security Council really want to legitimize someone
responsible for spreading gross anti-Semitism?
If the Council wishes to invite members of civil
society, why not invite courageous Palestinian and
Israeli entrepreneurs who are working together to
create coexistence? Why not invite representatives of
bodies who are providing treatment to Israeli children
injured and traumatized by Hamas’ rocket attacks? If
the Council invited Ms. Ashrawi, why not ask her to
explain her criticism of President Abbas for undermining
democracy and establishing an authoritarian regime?
As Prime Minister Shamir said 30 years ago in
Madrid, Israel strongly desires peace. It is absolutely
critical that the Council send the clear message that
peace will come when the Palestinian Authority ceases
to pay millions of dollars in salaries to terrorists and,
instead, uses those funds to build medical centres,
schools and a vibrant private sector. Peace will come
when Palestinian children are taught that their national
heroes are scientists, inventors and peacebuilders rather
than terrorists whose only claim to fame is that they
tried to kill Jews.
While some members of the Security Council
remain stuck in the mud of their anti-Israel obsession,
the real threat to global security is quickly advancing.
Iran continues to progress towards its goal of becoming
a nuclear-threshold State. The murderous Ayatollah
regime continues to openly violate its international
commitments in the fields of enrichment, stockpiling
uranium metal and advanced research and development,
while obstructing the International Atomic Energy
Agency. It uses diplomatic talks to buy time so that it
can enrich uranium to near weapons-grade levels, while
gaining nuclear know-how that can never be reversed.
At the same time, Iran continues to spread death,
destruction and instability throughout the region as it
seeks to advance a Shi’ite hegemony over the Middle
East, and exports terror around the world. But the
Council does not have to take it from me. It should take
it from Major General Gholam Ali Rashid, a senior
commander in Iran’s armed forces. In a speech by
12/26

19/10/2021

Major General Rashid on 25 September, he described
the Iranian Revolutionary Guards’ grand strategy of
terror. He said,
“I have assembled for you six armies outside of
Iran’s territory, and I have created a corridor 1,500
kilometres long and 1,000 kilometres wide, all the
way to the shores of the Mediterranean Sea. One
army is in Lebanon; it is called Hizbullah. Another
army is in Palestine and it is called Hamas and the
Islamic Jihad. One army is in Syria. Another army
is in Iraq and another is in Yemen.”
If the Security Council does not take strong action
against the six armies, those armies will soon be
protected by an Iranian nuclear umbrella, and the
Ayatollah’s reign of terror will turn into a hurricane
of violence.
Let me be clear. Israel favours a diplomatic
solution — one that would truly prevent Iran from
becoming a nuclear-threshold State. However, Iran
has no intention of negotiating such a solution. It has
no desire for a longer and stronger agreement. Its
only desire is to prolong negotiations, while keeping
international pressure from becoming stronger. The
dangers of failing to take action in the face of Iran’s
flagrant violations of its commitments cannot be
overstated. Non-compliance is a contagious disease,
especially in our region. Yet, as Iran poses an existential
threat to Israel, the State of Israel can never and will
never allow Iran to become a nuclear-threshold State.
We will do whatever is necessary to stop Iran’s nuclear
drive and counter the threat from its armies of proxies
along our borders and beyond our borders.
Some 30 years after the Madrid Conference, Israel
remains committed to peace with all our neighbours.
The road to peace is clear. It requires standing up to
Iran — the greatest threat to security in our region. It
requires a Palestinian leadership willing to transform its
culture of hate into a culture of peace and it requires an
international community led by the Security Council,
willing to adopt a new approach, based on promoting
cooperation, understanding and people-to-people ties.
If we take that road, we can indeed turn the Middle East
into a paradise of progress, prosperity and peace.
The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members of the Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Coordinator Wennesland for
21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

his briefing. I also thank briefers Hanan Ashrawi and
Daniel Levy for sharing their views with us today.
I welcome the participation of the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine Mansour and Israeli
Ambassador Erdan.
Before I address what we have just heard, I would
like to briefly comment on the content of these monthly
meetings. The monthly agenda calls for a briefing
on the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question. The Council spends a great deal
of time on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which is both
understandable and consistent with the agenda. But, far
too often, the substance of those discussions is centred
almost entirely around criticism of Israel and counterattacks. I sincerely hope that, going forward, Council
members will do their best to take a more balanced
approach. In addition, there are other countries and
situations in the region that merit Security Council
attention and should not be neglected.
That said, all of us here sincerely care about
providing a better future for Israelis and Palestinians
alike. This is a complex crisis with deep suffering
on both sides. Along with bringing balance to those
discussions, we need to reflect on the actions truly take
us closer to the goal of peace. The first step towards
resolving any conflict is frank and direct dialogue. The
United States, therefore, supports the resumed direct
contact between Israeli and Palestinian leaders. To
that end, we also welcome the re-engagement between
Israeli and Jordanian leaders, as well as the progress
from the Abraham Accords.
I had the opportunity to sit down with Prime
Minister Bennett last month for a productive discussion
about the challenges and opportunities facing Israel
here in the United Nations system. We have also
been engaging with Palestinian partners, and Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State for Israel and Palestinian
Affairs Amr recently travelled to the West Bank to
meet with President Abbas.
Gaza continues to have an acute need for
humanitarian relief and recovery. Humanitarian actors
need regular, predictable and sustained access to Gaza.
Member States should provide financial, as well as
material, assistance to help meet the needs of the people
of Gaza.
That includes funding the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near

S/PV. 8883

East (UNRWA), so that the organization can continue to
run schools and health services that support Palestinian
families. The United States provided more than
$318 million to UNRWA this year, but it still faces a
shortfall of roughly $100 million. We applaud Kuwait’s
recent contribution of $21.5 million to the Agency and
we encourage others to follow Kuwait’s example and
help to ensure the continuation of vital services for
Palestinian refugees.
At the same time, we need to see UNRWA
undertake the necessary reforms to ensure its
financial sustainability. We will work with UNRWA to
strengthen the Agency’s accountability, transparency
and consistency with humanitarian principles,
including neutrality.
As the international community moves to increase
its assistance to the people of Gaza, we call on Hamas
to cease its cruel detention of two Israeli civilians.
Civilians are not pawns. Similarly, we urge Hamas
to return the remains of two Israeli soldiers to their
families. I met with Leah Goldin, the mother of one
of those soldiers, in June, and I have to say that I
was deeply moved by her account of the unnecessary
suffering caused by that outrageous act. It is really a
matter of basic human decency. Mrs. Goldin’s son’s
remains should be returned to her family to bring
her closure.
We are deeply concerned by the violence perpetrated
by Israeli settlers in the West Bank against Palestinians
and their property. Reports of masked men terrorizing
a village in Hebron, destroying homes and injuring
children on 28 September and similar acts elsewhere
in the West Bank are abhorrent. We appreciated the
strong and unequivocal condemnation of that violence
by Foreign Minister Lapid, Defence Minister Gantz
and others in the Israeli Government. We call upon the
Israeli authorities to investigate those incidents fully,
including the response by Israeli security forces.
That kind of violence diminishes the freedom.
dignity, security and prosperity of Palestinians and
Israelis alike. It stands in the way of peace.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank Special Coordinator Tor Wennesland, as well as
Mr. Levy and Ms. Ashrawi, for their briefings.
France welcomes the renewed unity of the Security
Council in support of the two-State solution, which
is the only solution to date that meets the legitimate

21-2950213/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

aspirations of Israelis and Palestinians to live in peace
and security while respecting the rights of both. That
is why the Council has endorsed the parameters of that
solution in several resolutions, including resolution
2334 (2016). Our responsibility today is to work to
preserve that perspective, as well as the possibility of
achieving peace and ensuring lasting stability across
the entire region.
France calls on the parties to refrain from all
unilateral measures. We urge Israel to reverse its plans
for settlement expansion, particularly in sensitive
areas such as E1 and Givat Hamatos, which directly
undermine the viability and contiguity of a future
Palestinian State. Those plans call into question the
two-State solution on the ground, in addition to being
contrary to international law.
France reiterates its concern about the record
increase in violence and demolitions, as well as the
eviction procedures underway in Silwan and Sheikh
Jarrah. Our expectations in that regard are well
known. All parties must unambiguously reaffirm
their commitment to the status quo of the holy sites in
Jerusalem, as any doubt surrounding that status quo
could lead to an escalation and reignite tensions in
the region.
France welcomes the resumption of high-level
contact between Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
which opens the way to a new dynamic with deeper
cooperation in all areas in the interest of all, first and
foremost the peoples. More needs to be done to preserve
a ceasefire in Gaza and I welcome Egypt’s action in
that regard.
Following the welcome easing of some restrictions
on Gaza by Israel, it is essential that goods required for
reconstruction and humanitarian personnel are allowed
into Gaza, where international law must be respected.
Additional measures to support economic recovery will
also be needed.
We will condemn any attack on Israeli territory.
Further economic cooperation is also needed to
stabilize the situation in the West Bank. We hope that the
ministerial meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
for the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians in November will provide an opportunity
to make progress, including on the fiscal front.
My final point concerns respect for the rule of
law and the strengthening of Palestinian democratic
14/26

19/10/2021

institutions. Our expectations of the Palestinian
Authority with regard to respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms are well known. In particular, it
must shed full light on the assassination of Nizar Banat.
Finally, France is determined to support all
initiatives that contribute to restoring the process of
dialogue. We are actively working on that alongside
our German, Egyptian and Jordanian partners. I would
like to take this opportunity to reiterate our support for
the work of the Special Coordinator, Tor Wennesland.
France will also play its full part in the conference in
support of United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East in November, as its
action is essential to the stability of the region and to
meeting the needs of Palestinian refugees.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Let me begin by thanking Special Coordinator Tor
Wennesland, Mr. Daniel Levy, President of the U.S./
Middle East Project, and Ms. Hanan Ashrawi, political
and civil society leader, for their briefings. I thank our
colleagues, representatives of the State of Palestine and
Israel, for their statements.
For decades, the international community has been
witnessing the Israeli occupation of Palestine. Every
month, we come to the Council and state our positions
in line with international law and the relevant Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions, but that
does not seem to move the needle. Our words do not
stop the erosion of Palestinian statehood, the killing
of Palestinian children or the attempted erasure of a
people and their homes.
Cynically and paradoxically, such observations
have, in the not-too-distant past, spawned arguments
that we must do away with international law and
the two-State solution. Such an approach rocks the
foundation of our rules-based international order. The
refusal of Israel and its international backers to come
to terms with the requisite of an independent Palestine
and a secure Israel remains our biggest hurdle. In these
new, perilous times that humankind faces, we must
do better. We must, as Mr. Levy suggested, disengage
from autopilot and implement resolution 2334 (2016) in
the interest of a political solution and political justice.
Recent developments with respect to Israeli
settlements are of particular concern. The recent
announcement of approvals for advancing the
construction of thousands of homes in E1 is a flagrant
21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

violation of international law and further undermines
the peace process and the two-State solution.
We renew our call on the Israeli authorities to
urgently reverse those latest decisions as a matter of
urgency. Yet again, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
denounces the continuing and increasing demolition
and confiscation of Palestinian houses and structures
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.
The situation in Sheikh Jarrah, East Jerusalem,
which remains under threat of forced eviction of
Palestinian families from their homes, is also troubling.
We call on Israel to immediately halt all forced evictions
and to cease its systematic policy of settlement
expansion, demolition of Palestinian structures and
obstructing Palestinian development.
We are also deeply concerned about allegations
of the use of excessive force by Israeli security forces
against Palestinian civilians. That includes the killing
and wounding of Palestinian civilians, including
children. Therefore, we reiterate our call on Israel to
observe international humanitarian law, as set out in
the Geneva Conventions of 1949.
Turning to the recent developments surrounding
the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, we call on
all to respect the historic and legal status quo at that
holy site in the interest of peace and stability.
While noting that the Israeli authorities have
eased some of the restrictions in Gaza, much more
needs to be done to prevent an even more grim future
for Palestinians. Continued humanitarian access
and funding services to the Palestinian population
in Gaza remain critical. We call attention once more
to the illegal Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip. The
blockade must end to facilitate rapid and unimpeded
passage of humanitarian relief for Palestinians in
need and the reconstruction of Gaza. Moreover, we
call on the international community to make tangible
investments to resolve the critical funding shortfalls
for the reconstruction efforts in Gaza and programmes
run by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
Before concluding, my delegation welcomes the
United States’ plans for the re-establishment of a
United States consulate in Jerusalem. Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines recalls once again that there is no
substitute for a two-State solution between Israelis and

S/PV. 8883

Palestinians. Time is running out on us; we need to
work collectively to promote genuine dialogue between
the parties. Only through dialogue and negotiations can
there be lasting peace in Israel, Palestine and the wider
Middle East.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): It is a privilege to
see you, Mr. President, in the chair among us again
today. As always I sincerely thank Tor Wennesland
for his comprehensive briefing this morning. I would
like to welcome Ambassadors Mansour and Erdan
who are with us today. I want to extend a very special
thanks to Hanan Ashrawi, who has for so long been
such an eloquent and powerful voice for the Palestinian
people. And I want to recognize in particular her work
in recent years as a strong advocate for the younger
generation of Palestinian women and men. That is
much appreciated. I thank Daniel Levy for what was
a very valuable and thought-provoking contribution. It
was really good to hear from him today, and I thank
him for his long-standing contributions to IsraeliPalestinian discussions.
We are deeply concerned about the briefing we
had by Tor Wennesland this morning and what we
know about the rise in violence across the West Bank,
particularly the increase in settler violence and the use of
live fire by Israeli forces. We call on Israel to hold those
responsible accountable, to end the culture of impunity
around such incidents of violence and to ensure that
any response by security forces is proportional and in
compliance with international law.
Ireland condemns all acts of violence, including
rocket attacks from Gaza, which fuel tensions and put
civilian lives at risk. Once again, I repeat Ireland’s
call on Israel to halt all illegal settlement activity,
including in East Jerusalem and in the E-1 Area,
as well as demolitions, evictions and seizures of
Palestinian-owned structures. Israel should provide
permits for legal construction and the development of
Palestinian communities.
Ireland remains firmly committed to a negotiated
two-State solution, which provides a viable basis for a
resolution of the Israel-Palestine conflict. We condemn
all acts that threaten to erode that prospect.
We call for the status quo at the holy sites in
Jerusalem to be upheld in both word and practice,
recognizing the special role of Jordan.

21-2950215/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Last month, during Ireland’s Security Council
presidency, two young women addressed this same
debate (see S/PV.8869).Ms. Mai Farsakh underscored
the terrible impact of illegal settlements on Palestinian
women and girls. Ms. Meredith Rothbart clearly
illustrated for us the essential and constructive role
of civil society in local peacebuilding. Through
them, we saw clearly that the occupation has had a
disproportionate impact on women and girls. Ireland
commends civil society in the occupied Palestinian
territories and in Israel for their efforts to develop an
approach of community-based women’s empowerment.
Through those young women last month, we saw that
they have the capacity to shape a more hopeful future
for their societies. We believe that it is imperative that
the Security Council, the parties to the conflict and the
international community listen to their voices.
We strongly condemn recent targeting of Palestinian
activists and civil society organizations. Ireland calls
on all duty-bearers — Israeli and Palestinian alike — to
protect and uphold the rights of civil society and human
rights defenders.
Ireland commends the vital work of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), which is of critical
importance to millions of Palestine refugees in the
occupied territory and across the region. Ireland once
again appeals to donors, including its Gulf partners, to
enhance support for UNRWA.
Despite some recent welcome steps, we remain
deeply concerned about access into Gaza and obstacles
to reconstruction efforts, five months after the end
of the conflict. As noted in the rapid damage and
needs assessment, there are significant mental health
consequences faced by Gazans from prolonged
exposure to violence, the loss of family and loved
ones, and the frustrations over the lack of control from
worsening poverty, unemployment and insecurity in
the Gaza Strip. We renew our call on Israel to end the
blockade of Gaza.
We welcome the announcement by the Palestinian
Central Elections Committee that municipal elections
will be held in December. Ireland reiterates its belief
that Palestinian legislative elections across all of
the occupied territory, with the full participation of
women, are necessary to give a democratic voice to all
Palestinians, to help progress towards intra-Palestinian
16/26

reconciliation and to
national institutions.

renew

19/10/2021

the

legitimacy

of

Finally, Ireland reiterates its call on the Middle
East Quartet to enhance its efforts to work towards
the resumption of a political process. We welcome
ministerial-level contacts between the Israeli
Government and the Palestinian Authority that have
taken place in recent weeks.
As we approach the thirtieth anniversary of
the Madrid Conference, it is imperative that the
Security Council, partners in the region and the wider
international community remain engaged and working
for a solution to the Israel-Palestinian conflict. There
can be no doubt that we need to rekindle the hope
that took hold in Madrid. We need to work to build
confidence to enable a political path for an end to the
occupation that began in 1967, so that Palestinians’
rights, as well as those of Israelis, can be guaranteed.
Ireland stands ready, both through the Security
Council and nationally, to assist in whatever way it can.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. I also thank
Mr. Levy and Ms. Ashrawi for their insightful statements.
Estonia remains committed to finding a longlasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
based on the two-State solution, international law and
the relevant Security Council resolutions. We continue
to support all efforts to create favourable conditions for
the resumption of direct, meaningful negotiations on
all final-status issues.
We welcome the recent engagement between the
Israeli and Palestinian leaders and encourage them to
expand that dialogue further. We also urge the parties
to engage in more practical cooperation, including in
the economic, financial and other areas, which would
serve as confidence-building measures and would be in
the interests of the people of both sides.
Regarding Gaza, it is vital to continue stabilizing
the fragile situation. We support the international and
regional efforts aimed at reducing tensions and holding
the ceasefire in Gaza. We call upon Hamas and other
terrorist organizations to refrain from firing rockets
and incendiary devices into Israel and urge Israel to use
its right to defend itself proportionally, protecting the
civilian population.
21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

It is also essential that international and regional
efforts for reconstruction continue, with the aim of
improving the dire humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation in the Strip. In that context, we welcome the
recent proposals to advance the economy and improve
the socioeconomic situation of Palestinians.
Turning to the West Bank, we are worried about the
continued incidents of violence, including the clashes
between Palestinians and the Israeli security forces. We
call on all parties to refrain from violence, incitement
and acts of provocation.
The demolition of and evictions from Palestinian
property by Israel are worrying. We call upon Israel to
refrain from those activities as well as from advancing
any settlement plans, as such acts are contrary to
international law. We also reiterate that the status quo
of the holy sites must be fully respected.
Finally, I would like to stress the important
role of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in providing
help to the Palestinian refugees and stabilizing the
region, including through humanitarian response and
reconstruction in Gaza. The upcoming conference
hosted by Sweden and Jordan will be an important
opportunity to find ways towards more sustainable
funding of the Agency.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Coordinator
Wennesland for his very thorough although slightly
concerning briefing today. I also thank Daniel Levy and
Hanan Ashrawi for their very valuable contributions.
Let me begin by reiterating Norway’s enduring
commitment to a broad political solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The conflict is often
overshadowed by seemingly more urgent crises on the
Council’s agenda, yet it is critical that we keep focusing
on the need to address the underlying issues here as
well. We reaffirm our support for a negotiated twoState solution on the basis of the 1967 lines; the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including resolution 2334
(2016); international law; and internationally agreed
parameters, where Israelis and Palestinians can live side
by side in peace, within secure and recognized borders.
The current relative calm in Gaza, as well as
the recent increase in imports and the number of
work permits issued, is a positive development. The
distribution of cash assistance to tens of thousands of
vulnerable families has also been successful. However,

S/PV. 8883

as the Special Coordinator has highlighted, that
situation is not sustainable. The closure of Gaza must
be lifted. To improve the lives of Palestinians living
in Gaza, we must spur economic growth by allowing
many more Gazans to seek work in Israel and in the
West Bank; generating good jobs in Gaza itself; and
easing import and export restrictions.
We call on all actors to contribute to keeping the
calm and averting further hostilities, and we support
all efforts to secure a long-term and stable ceasefire.
Calm is a prerequisite for true progress in rebuilding
Gaza better.
Norway welcomes the signals from the Israeli
Government that it will support improving living
conditions in Gaza. The Palestinian Authority (PA) will
remain our partner for development efforts in Palestine,
including in Gaza.
We are deeply concerned about Israeli plans to
implement the E-1 settlement plan. Such settlements
would cut off East Jerusalem from the rest of the West
Bank and undermine the viability of a contiguous
Palestinian State. Israeli settlements on occupied
territory constitute a violation of international law.
We urge Israel to halt settlement activities, house
demolitions and evictions. Those actions have not only
inflamed the recent escalation around Gaza; they go
against international efforts to stabilize the situation
and resolve the conflict.
We are also deeply worried about the increased
violence, including settler violence, in the West
Bank. We remind Israel of its responsibility to protect
civilians, especially children, and call on it to stop the
use of live ammunition against Palestinian protesters.
We call also on the Palestinian Authority to uphold
human rights and to refrain from limiting the civilsociety space.
Norway welcomes the renewed high-level dialogue
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority, and we
were encouraged to hear from Tor Wennesland that
there have also been recent contacts in the Quartet. We
stand ready to assist in further strengthening dialogue.
Norway will host a meeting of the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee for the Coordination of the International
Assistance to Palestinians on 16 and 17 November in
Oslo to address the deteriorating fiscal situation of the
PA and consider how to strengthen the Authority.

21-2950217/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

19/10/2021

The meeting will also provide an opportunity for
the parties, donors and development partners to agree
on concrete steps forward on both on the economic
and political aspects of Palestinian State-building. The
two-State solution is the only solution that will ensure
long-term stability, which will benefit not only Israelis
and Palestinians but also the region as a whole.

status quo. We note that Israeli authorization to enter
and conduct non-Muslim acts of worship on the
Esplanade of the Mosques was reversed by competent
authorities. In accordance with the resolutions of the
Security Council, Mexico urges that measures that
alter the status and the geographical, demographic and
historical character of Jerusalem be avoided.

Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I welcome the participation of the Special
Coordinator, Tor Wennesland, and I thank Ms. Ashrawi
and Mr. Levy for their valuable briefings. We also
welcome the delegations of Israel and Palestine to this
Security Council meeting.

Thirdly, Mexico urges the Palestinian Authority
to continue organizing municipal elections and call
parliamentary and presidential elections. We insist
on the importance of guaranteeing the full, equal and
substantive participation of women and young people
in the political and civil life of Palestine. We also
welcome Egypt’s continued mediation efforts in favour
of intra-Palestinian reconciliation.

We have once again heard accounts of the
prevailing tension and violence within the region. The
conflict persists; violations of human rights continue;
and there has been no progress towards the desired
goal that would allow for a solution that many of us
had hoped and believed to be the definitive one: the
creation of a sovereign, independent Palestinian State
that is politically and economically viable, living in
peace with Israel within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
Against that backdrop, and in view of what we
have heard this morning, I will focus on three points:
settlements and violence, the status quo in Jerusalem,
and Gaza and intra-Palestinian reconciliation.
First, concerning settlements and violence, the
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements
on occupied Palestinian territory runs counter to
international law. Moreover, it is an obstacle to the
implementation of any prospect for peace.
Beyond the numbers, which, so far this year, are
not small — 682 structures have been demolished,
including some funded by the international community,
as well as others needed for health services and
drinking water — the construction of new housing
units in settlements such as Givat Hamatos, Atarot
and Pisgat Ze’ev impede the geographic contiguity of
the Palestinian State. The construction of units in this
context must cease, as must the transfer of settlers, the
demolition of homes and the displacement of civilians.
Measures to reverse negative trends on the ground must
be promoted, in accordance with resolution 2334 (2016).
Secondly, we note with concern the growing
tensions in the Old City of Jerusalem, resulting from
actions and pronouncements aimed at changing the
18/26

The cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority on civil and security matters — and in
particular the high-level contacts that are taking
place — are welcome and encouraging signs. We hope
that these will deepen and expand towards a political
understanding for peace negotiations. We commend
efforts to revive the Palestinian economy, in particular
those aimed at boosting the economy in Gaza. We
reiterate the need to lift the Israeli blockade and
guarantee the consistent and regular entry of essential
goods and materials for the reconstruction of the Strip.
In conclusion, the Palestinian question is probably
one of the longest-standing items on the Council’s
agenda. Regrettably, after seven decades, we are still
in the cycle of managing the conflict. We call for direct
negotiations to begin as soon as possible and without
preconditions, with the support of the international
community, in particular the Middle East Peace
Quartet. We truly believe that this is the way forward.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I welcome Mr. Kamau to the Security Council to
preside over today’s meeting and thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing. We also
thank Ms. Ashrawi and Mr. Levy for their briefing.
China is deeply concerned about the humanitarian
situation in the occupied territory of Palestine. Nearly
five months after the Gaza conflict, the security and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory remains grim. In the Gaza Strip, the conflict
in May damaged a large number of public facilities and
civilian houses, worsening the already severe economic
and humanitarian situation. Of the 110,000 displaced
people in Gaza, 8,250 still have not yet returned to their
21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

homes. More delay in the recovery and reconstruction
of Gaza will cause greater suffering of the people
already affected by the conflict.
China appreciates the efforts aimed at alleviating
the plight of the local population, such as the issuance
of cash assistance by Qatar and the United Nations and
the work done by the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, in
spite of difficulties. We call for the early reconstruction
of Gaza to let people return to normal life. The
international community should increase its support
for this reconstruction. Israel should open additional
suitable ports in Gaza to clear the obstacles for the entry
of humanitarian and reconstruction materials there.
China has strongly called for the easing of tensions.
In the West Bank, Israeli military and police operations
continue to cause Palestinian casualties, aggravate the
conflicts between the two sides and escalate tension. The
violence by Israeli settlers has intensified, exemplified
by the attack on 28 September that injured several
Palestinians, including a three-year old sleeping child.
As Special Coordinator Wennesland has repeatedly
emphasized, Israel, as the occupying Power, must fulfil
its obligations under international humanitarian law by
guaranteeing the safety of the people in the occupied
territory, thoroughly investigate the attacks and bring
those responsible to justice.
China urges Israel to stop its actions that
undermine the prospects of the two-State solution,
such as the expansion of settlements. Recently, Israel
approved building a new settlement in Givat Hamatos
in Jerusalem. Palestinian residents in communities
such as Sheikh Jarrah are still at risk of being evicted.
The construction of settlements violates international
law and undermines the prospects for a two-State
solution. Israel must abide by the relevant United
Nations resolutions, stop expanding settlements, cease
demolishing Palestinian houses and refrain from
evicting Palestinian people. The historically established
status quo of Jerusalem’s holy site should be maintained
and respected.
The fundamental way to solve the Palestinian issue
lies in the implementation of the two-State solution.
Two weeks ago, the Permanent Observer of Palestine
stated in a letter to the President of the Security Council
that the international community should not replace
the just settlement of the Palestinian issue with crisis

S/PV. 8883

management and control (S/2021/856). China fully
agrees with this.
Only by realizing the two-State solution and
restoring the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
can the cycle of violence be broken, and Palestine and
Israel live side by side and coexist in peace. We hope
that Palestine and Israel will take the recent highlevel contact as an opportunity to continue to build
momentum, gradually re-establish mutual trust and
resume equal dialogue at an early date.
We support Egypt and other countries in the region
in playing an important role in promoting reconciliation
among Palestinians, and we call for strengthening the
authority of the Palestinian National Authority and
empowering it to exercise sovereignty functions in
security, finance and other fields. We urge countries
with important influence to uphold an objective and
fair position and avoid partiality and double standards
on the issue of Palestine.
The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security and must take effective actions to resolve the
Palestinian issue. We reaffirm our readiness to host
direct negotiations between Palestine and Israel in
China, and we call for the holding of an international
peace conference led by the United Nations, with the
participation of the permanent members of the Security
Council and the various stakeholders in the Middle East
peace process.
China has always attached great importance to
the humanitarian situation in Palestine and has taken
concrete actions to support the Palestinian people in their
fight against the pandemic. On many occasions, China
has sent humanitarian assistance, such as emergency
cash assistance and pandemic supplies and vaccines,
to Palestine. China will donate an additional 1 million
doses of vaccines and will join forces with Egypt to
send 500,000 vaccine doses to people in the Gaza Strip.
We will also provide 200,000 doses of vaccines to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.
As a sincere friend of Palestine, China supports the
just cause of Palestine in pursuing its national rights and
the establishment of a fully sovereign and independent
Palestinian State based on the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital. We will continue to
work with the international community to promote an

21-2950219/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

early, comprehensive, fair and just settlement of the
Palestinian issue.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Wennesland, Mr. Levy and Ms. Ashrawi
for their briefings.
A month ago, the announcement of a rehabilitation
plan for the Gaza Strip, the meeting in Ramallah
between the Palestinian President and the Israeli
Defence Minister and the visit to Egypt by the Israeli
Prime Minister were developments that we welcomed,
while calling for the judicious use of those encouraging
signs towards détente in relations between Israel and
Palestine. In addition, aware of the fragility of the
calm restored since the ceasefire of last May, we also
recalled the need for both sides to strengthen measures
that could contribute to consolidating the calm and
restoring trust between Israelis and Palestinians in
order to foster the conditions for a resumption of the
peace process.
However, in view of the situation observed in
the region for some time, the prospect of peaceful
coexistence between those two peoples and the return
of peace continue to be severely tested, leaving the
threat of instability and violence still looming.
The increased attacks and persecution by Israeli
settlers against the Palestinian population, including
farmers and even young schoolchildren, the continued
demolition of Palestinian structures, including
agricultural land, the confiscation of Palestinian
land and private property, the approval by the Israeli
authorities of a plan to build several housing units in
Palestinian areas in Jerusalem, as well as the desecration
of Muslim cemeteries and violations against Islamic
holy sites, including the Al-Aqsa Mosque, are all
serious and condemnable acts that reflect this reality
and must stop.
Coming back to those recent attacks on Muslim
shrines, I would like to stress that such practices shock
and offend the feelings of Muslims in Palestine and
the rest of the world. Such practices will only increase
hatred, fanaticism, radicalization and violence, all
of which will only complicate an already difficult
situation and hamper the path towards the return of
peace and peaceful coexistence between the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples.
For that reason, the Niger condemns those odious
and unacceptable acts against Muslim holy places in
20/26

19/10/2021

the strongest terms and calls on Israel to do everything
possible to put an end to them. The Niger recalls that it
falls to the Israeli authorities to ensure the protection
of the faithful, respect for the holy places and the
historical and legal status of Jerusalem, a holy city for
the three monotheistic religions.
My country remains convinced that, in order to
achieve such peace, which we have been seeking for
nearly 70 years in the Middle East, the Palestinian
cause cannot be circumvented forever, and Israel’s
flagrant disregard for international law and United
Nations resolutions cannot continue indefinitely. The
Palestinian cause will continue to serve as a stark
reminder of the right of peoples to self-determination.
Creating the conditions for this peace, for which we
hope and pray for the peoples of the region, lies mainly
in stopping the unbridled settlement policy carried out
by Israel for several decades in the occupied Palestinian
territories and in the resumption of direct talks between
Israelis and Palestinians with a view to achieving the
only valid solution to their dispute: the establishment of
a viable Palestinian State within its 1967 borders, living
side by side at peace with Israel. That solution must be
safeguarded at all costs.
In that regard, the Niger believes that the Security
Council, by virtue of its obligations, must be able
to enforce its resolutions, which must no longer be
options, but an imperative, compliance with which is
the guarantee of peace and security for each and every
Member that has committed to the ideals of the Charter
of the United Nations.
It is equally important that the international
community, the Quartet and the members of the Council,
as well as regional actors with influence on the parties,
continue to exert the necessary pressure to avoid
further escalation and to work for the revitalization of
the peace process with a view to successfully ending
this conflict.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to express
its concern about the humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories due to the coronavirus
disease pandemic, exacerbated by the fragility of the
health system, extreme poverty and food insecurity,
among other things. We are also concerned by the
shortage of funds faced by the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA), which continues to threaten the
survival of thousands of Palestinians, mostly women
21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and children. We therefore call on the international
community to show more compassion and generosity
to this hard-pressed population by supporting the
funding of the Gaza recovery plan and the vital
programmes for thousands of Palestinian families that
UNRWA provides.
We also call on Israel, as the occupying Power, to
fulfil all its obligations under international humanitarian
law by ensuring the well-being and survival of the
population under its control.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
May I welcome you, Mr. President, back to New
York. I also thank the Special Coordinator for his
briefing and our two civil-society briefers, Mr. Daniel
Levy and Ms. Hanan Ashrawi, for their thoughtprovoking contributions.
I would like to start by welcoming the increased
engagement between the Government of Israel and
the Palestinian Authority over recent months. We are
confident that this dialogue will continue, and it is
our hope that it will deliver tangible results to tackle
immediate and long-term threats to peace and stability.
The parties have our full support in that.
The United Kingdom also welcomes the increased
calm in Gaza and the recent steps taken by Israel to
loosen constraints on access for goods and people into
and out of the Gaza Strip. We now ask Israel to set out
a full and transparent plan to improve movement and
access in Gaza, in line with international humanitarian
law, to allow for reconstruction and development
to advance.
Notwithstanding a number of positive signals,
we continue to see negative trends in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. As we have heard, rates of
demolitions and evictions of Palestinians from their
homes have continued to rise, and this year may see
the worst rate of demolitions in five years. We urge
the Government of Israel to ensure that Palestinian
families living in the occupied territories can remain
safely in their homes.
Violence in the West Bank, including settler
attacks against Palestinian people and property, is now
on the rise. The shocking attack, on 28 September,
on the Palestinian village of Umm Mufaqarah, in the
south Hebron hills, resulted in a 3-year-old Palestinian
child being hospitalized. We call on Israel to provide
appropriate protection to the Palestinian civilian

S/PV. 8883

population, to ensure all such incidents are investigated
thoroughly and to bring to justice those responsible.
We welcome the Government of Israel’s commitment to
addressing settler violence, as well as Foreign Minister
Lapid’s condemnation of the Umm Mufaqarah attack.
We are also concerned about the Israeli security
forces’ use of excessive force. We continue to urge Israel
to uphold the principles of necessity and proportionality
when defending its legitimate security interests.
The dire fiscal situation of the Palestinian
Authority (PA) carries the risk that it will be unable to
pay salaries or its suppliers in full, starting next month.
Rapid action is needed to improve the situation. The
United Kingdom will continue to work with the PA to
help it implement necessary reforms, and we urge our
international partners to do the same.
Lastly, as we celebrated the International Day
of the Girl Child last week, we were reminded of the
impressive educational attainment rates for girls across
the occupied Palestinian territories. We must celebrate
that success and ensure that the vital provision of
education, including to girls, is protected from the
threat of instability.
In conclusion, the lack of progress in the Middle East
peace process continues to impact negatively the lives
of everyday Israelis and Palestinians, and the ongoing
conflict is in need of a just and lasting resolution. We
continue to urge all parties to renew their commitment
to peacebuilding and to work to deliver it. The United
Kingdom continues to believe that a two-State solution
offers the only meaningful prospect for durable peace.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I welcome you, Mr. President, as you preside
over this meeting. I also thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland,
for his detailed briefing. We also value the efforts of
the Secretary-General, the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, the Commissioner-General
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and
all United Nations staff in the occupied territories
for alleviating the suffering of the Palestinian people
and promoting opportunities for peace in the Middle
East. We also commend the role of the civil society in
supporting those efforts and thank Ms. Hanan Ashrawi
and Mr. Levy for their briefings,

21-2950221/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the face of historical injustice to which the
Palestinian people have been subjected for decades and
the continued systematic violation by the occupying
Power of their most basic legitimate rights, the
international community has been demanding a just,
comprehensive and lasting solution to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict, an end to the occupation and enabling
the Palestinian people to establish their independent
and sovereign State along the 1967 borders, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
Despite the international support for the legitimate
demands of the Palestinian people and the two-State
solution, the occupying Power continues to flout
international law and Security Council resolutions,
most recently resolution 2334 (2016), by imposing a
de facto policy on the ground, further implementing
its expansionist settlement plans, forcibly displacing
Palestinians and confiscating their homes and land
while attempting to change the historical, demographic
and legal status of Jerusalem and committing other
serious violations, in addition to repeated settler
attacks against Palestinians in the West Bank — all in
the absence of any accountability.
In that context, Tunisia reiterates its categorical
rejection of attempts to change the status quo of
Jerusalem’s holy sites and renews its support for the
historical Hashemite guardianship of those sites.
In the light of the violence and attacks on the
Palestinian civilian population, including women and
children, Tunisia also calls for their protection, as
guaranteed by international law.
The continued situation in the occupied territories
risks further escalation, especially in the absence of
any real prospects for resolving the conflict on the basis
of the resolutions of international legitimacy and the
agreed terms of reference. That has led to feelings of
injustice, despair and hopelessness among Palestinians,
especially among youth.
As a result of its responsibility to maintain
international peace and security, the Security Council
is required to undertake what is needed to ensure
the implementation of its resolutions concerning the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, in particular a halt to
settlements and the push towards breaking the deadlock
in the Middle East peace process.
Under the powers granted by the Security Council to
the Middle East Quartet, we look forward to the Quartet
22/26

19/10/2021

intensifying its efforts to help resume negotiations as
soon as possible. In that regard, we reiterate our support
for the proposal of holding an international peace
conference under the auspices of the Quartet. Given
the deterioration in the humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip, particularly in the light of the aftermath of
the recent military aggression, the continuation of the
blockade for more than 14 years and the consequences
of the coronavirus disease pandemic, we stress the
importance of facilitating humanitarian access, lifting
restrictions on the freedom of movement and trade and
refraining from obstructing reconstruction efforts.
We also call on international donors to increase
the level of humanitarian assistance and response in
the occupied Palestinian territories and to support
relevant United Nations efforts. In that context, we
emphasize the urgent need to ensure additional funding
to cover the deficit in UNRWA’s budget. We also call
for predictable and sustained funding for its budget. We
look forward to the holding of the donors conference
that Jordan is planning to organize jointly with Sweden
to support UNRWA.
In conclusion, we reiterate that achieving security
and stability in the Middle East region inevitably
includes a just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the
Arab-Israeli conflict, in accordance with international
law, resolutions of international legitimacy and the
Arab Peace Initiative.
Tunisia will remain steadfast in supporting just
causes, at the forefront of which is the Palestinian
question until the Palestinian people regain all their
legitimate rights — to which there is no statute
of limitations.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I welcome your presiding
over today’s meeting, Mr. President. I thank Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing. I also
thank Ms. Hanan Ashrawi and Mr. Daniel Levy for
their insights, and I welcome the participation of the
Ambassador of Israel and the Ambassador of Palestine
in our meeting.
India’s position on the Palestine issue is consistent
and well known. We firmly believe that only the
establishment of a sovereign, viable and independent
State of Palestine, within recognized and mutually
agreed borders, living side by side with Israel in peace
and security, taking into consideration the legitimate
security concerns of Israel, can deliver a durable and
lasting solution to the conflict.
21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I reiterate India’s long-standing position that the
Palestine issue should be resolved through a peacefully
negotiated settlement that promotes a two-State
solution. The maintenance of peace and stability is a
prerequisite for that to go forward.
Consolidating the ceasefire in Gaza and expediting
its reconstruction should continue to be a priority of
the United Nations and the international community.
We call on all parties to the conflict to respect the
ceasefire, continue their cooperation and coordination
with the United Nations, and take concrete steps
that would improve the economic and humanitarian
situation of the civilians in Gaza. I also reiterate the
urgent need to address the underlying causes that have
resulted in the deterioration of the situation in Gaza.
I reaffirm India’s call for regular and predictable
transfers of aid and other essential items to Gaza to
ease the humanitarian situation and facilitate early
reconstruction, as well as for appropriate use of such
aid. It is also important that the international donor
community support the reconstruction of the Gaza
Strip through the Palestinian Authority.
We also encourage the parties to remain engaged on
the prisoner exchange discussions and work towards a
positive outcome, that being a humanitarian imperative.
We appreciate the role of Egypt in facilitating
those talks.
We condemn all acts of violence against
civilians, as well as all acts of provocation, incitement
and destruction. We call for parties to desist from
provocative action and inflammatory rhetoric in the
interest of peace and stability. We underscore the need
to respect and maintain the historic status quo in the
holy sites of Jerusalem.
We are concerned by the Palestinian Authority’s
precarious fiscal situation, which has been further
exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic. The international community needs to
support the Palestinian socioeconomic recovery, with a
focus on social protection, in line with the priorities of
the Palestinian Authority.
We appreciate the recent announcements to
improve the economic and administrative relationships
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority. Those
announcements have to be translated into action.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East plays an important

S/PV. 8883

role in providing humanitarian and development
assistance. India has continued to support the Agency’s
core budget through annual voluntary contributions.
India has been consistently supporting Palestinian
nation-building efforts under the India-Palestine
development partnership. In addition to our ongoing
projects in the health, education and technology sectors,
we are also implementing quick impact projects that
would benefit the local communities. Those programmes
have continued despite the COVID-19 pandemic.
We also call upon the international community, the
Middle East Quartet in particular, to take concrete steps
towards resuming and facilitating peace negotiations.
In that regard, we welcome the continued high-level
exchanges between the Israeli Government and the
Palestinian Authority. Those exchanges will help build
confidence between the parties and create a favourable
environment for the resumption of peace negotiations.
Such measures should run parallel to efforts to restart
direct negotiations, which remain the best pathway to
reach the two-State solution.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Coordinator Tor
Wennesland for his briefing. We listened attentively
to the civil society representatives, Mr. Daniel Levy
and Ms. Hanan Ashrawi. We welcome the personal
participation in this meeting of Mr. Kamau.
The achievement of lasting peace and security in
the Middle East and North Africa remains among the
top priorities on the agenda of the Security Council. We
note with regret that no progress has yet been seen in
resolving the myriad regional crises. We are also troubled
by the fact that most conflicts are not only compounded
by external intervention, but are also exacerbated by
the attempts of actors to promote unilateral solutions,
while ignoring the opinions of local residents, tribal,
ethnic, religious and denominational groups.
It is clear that one of the foundations for the
establishment of long-term stability in the region
is progress in the Middle East settlement process,
including the core element of a fair solution to the
Palestinian problem. Unfortunately, tensions on the
West Bank of the Jordan river and in the Gaza Strip
continue unabated, exacerbating the problems of
maintaining a ceasefire, providing humanitarian
assistance to the affected Palestinians and reviving the
peace process.

21-2950223/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Against that backdrop, unilateral actions, which
are fraught with dangerous consequences, continue.
Such actions include the confiscation and destruction
of Palestinian property, the construction of settlements,
including construction plans in the occupied Syrian
Golan, arbitrary arrests, violations of the status of
the holy sites and violence. At the same time, we note
the importance of taking Israel’s security interests
into account.
In that regard, we reiterate the call to abandon
provocative actions and unilateral steps. International
cooperation and concerted measures must accompany
the progress in achieving a Middle East settlement.
In our view, the provision of urgent humanitarian
assistance to all those affected and in need in the Gaza
Strip is the main objective in the upcoming period. The
work of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as well as the
international community’s support for the Agency, are
as important as ever.
At the same time, we note again that the entire
range of final status issues must be addressed in direct
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Those negotiations should be launched without delay.
As a permanent member of the Security Council and
a participant in the Quartet of international mediators,
the Russian Federation assiduously strives to achieve
a settlement on an internationally recognized
basis — United Nations resolutions, Madrid principles,
the Arab Peace Initiative — that provides for the
creation of an independent, sovereign and territorially
contiguous Palestinian State within the 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We call on our partners in the Quartet — the
United Nations, the European Union and the United
States — to step up cooperation to that end. On
14 October, we held another virtual meeting with
special representatives. We emphasize the importance
of convening ministerial-level meetings of the Quartet,
including in the lead-up to the thirtieth anniversary of
the Madrid Conference on the Middle East. We are also
ready to engage in dialogue with key regional players
and to involve them in the efforts of the Quartet.
We note that a number of States in the Middle
East region have chosen to normalize relations with
Israel. We believe that such efforts will have a positive
impact on the situation in region only if their focus
is on finding a solution to the Palestinian issue on an
24/26

19/10/2021

internationally recognized legal basis. As the recent
outbreak of tensions around the Gaza Strip has shown,
there is no other way forward.
The Russian Federation is actively cooperating
with various Palestinian stakeholders in the interest of
overcoming the internal division. We are facilitating the
efforts our Egyptian friends to that end. We welcome,
in particular, the recent holding of the PalestinianJordanian-Egyptian summit in Cairo and express the
hope that it will be a first step towards a fundamental
change in the status quo, which is at an impasse.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Special Coordinator
Tor Wennesland for his informative briefing. I also
thank Mr. Daniel Levy and Ms. Hanan Ashrawi for
their insights. I welcome the participation of the
representatives of Palestine and Israel in today’s meeting.
We are concerned over the continued violence in the
occupied Palestinian territory. Since the announcement
of the cessation of hostilities in May, tensions and
violence between the parties have, unfortunately, not
subsided in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem.
Clashes continue to cause a rising number of Palestinian
casualties, and settler-related violence remains a major
concern during the olive-harvest season.
We are particularly troubled by the fact that
children have long been exposed to violence. As the
occupying Power, Israel has an obligation to ensure
the safety and security of the Palestinian population,
especially children. The Israeli authorities must cease
the excessive use of force against civilians and carry
out impartial and prompt investigations into all violent
attacks. The culture of impunity must be ended. We
also urge all parties to exercise restraint and refrain
from any action or rhetoric that may fuel tensions.
The seemingly endless violence that we have
witnessed only underscores the importance of a just,
lasting and comprehensive settlement to the conflict.
As long as the occupation, settlement activities and the
demolition of Palestinian properties continue, there
will be no sustainable peace.
The trends on the ground are not encouraging. We
remain concerned by reports that settlement projects
are being advanced in the West Bank, including in
Jerusalem. We reiterate that all settlements are illegal
under international law and undermine the prospects
for achieving a viable two-State solution.
21-29502

19/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In line with resolution 2334 (2016), we call on the
Israeli authorities to permanently end all settlement
activities and the demolition of Palestinian property
in the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. That
would be an important step towards building trust and
returning to negotiations.
Once again, we reiterate our strong support for the
two-State solution, including the establishment of a
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
that peacefully coexists alongside the State of Israel,
with secure and internationally recognized borders
on the basis of the pre-1967 lines and a negotiated
settlement, in accordance with international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant United
Nations resolutions, especially resolution 2334 (2016).
We welcome the recent engagement between
senior officials from the Government of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. That is an important and positive
step towards strengthening cooperation in the areas of
security and economic policies. We encourage further
direct engagement and call on both sides to work
together to facilitate the reconstruction of Gaza and
boost the Palestinian economy.
Concrete steps towards that end will contribute to
creating an atmosphere of trust between the parties and
paving a path towards broad and significant dialogue and
negotiations. We welcome all efforts by international
actors to facilitate the building of that momentum.
We note the recent steps to ease access restrictions
into and out of the Strip. All humanitarian and
reconstruction efforts should be further facilitated,
since the situation in Gaza remains volatile. We
appreciate the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) and other United Nations agencies in
ensuring the delivery of critical aid to Palestinians
in Gaza. However, humanitarian staff from the
United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations must be able to enter and exit Gaza on a
regular basis. Crossings should be open to commercial
and humanitarian goods and reconstruction materials.
In the long term, the blockade of Gaza must be
fully lifted.
In that connection, we urge the international
community to heed the Secretary-General’s call for an
increase of $6.1 million, including 43 additional posts,
for UNRWA to support education, health care and
general assistance to Palestine refugees.

S/PV. 8883

In conclusion, we would like reiterate Viet Nam’s
unwavering support for the legitimate struggle of the
Palestinian people and their inalienable rights.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the Foreign Affairs Principal Secretary of
Kenya.
Since 1948, the Security Council has addressed
the situation in the Middle East and the Palestinian
question on numerous occasions. Every month the
Council gets to hear of developments and observations
and recommendations stemming from the important
work of the Special Coordinator’s Office and various
briefers engaged on this issue. I thank Mr. Wennesland,
Ms. Ashrawi and Mr. Levy for their interventions
this morning.
I would also like to recognize the presence of the
representatives of Israel and Palestine at this debate.
As the body entrusted with the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, we need to ask: what else can we do
to sustainably answer the Palestinian question? Kenya’s
interest has always been and will remain to support an
end to this lasting threat to peace and security in the
Middle East. Threats to peace and security in the Middle
East have a damaging domino effect that reaches many
parts of the world, including the subregion and even our
own neighbourhood. Let no one believe, even for one
fleeting moment, owing to the character of the debate
today that Kenya does not remain gravely concerned
with the situation in the Middle East outside of Israel
and Palestine. Kenya, though distant from the Middle
East, has tragically seen Kenyan blood and lives lost to
terrorists inspired by the politics and the situation in
the Middle East.
The Council has called for and ordered ceasefires,
the latest one being four months ago, following the 11
days of hostilities between Israel and Hamas. It has
submitted draft resolution after draft resolution with
recommendations and principles, including resolution
2334 (2016), to frame a negotiated peaceful settlement
for that protracted conflict.
Indeed, Kenya has called for the reinforcement
of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as have many
Member States present here today. It has called for a
cessation of Israeli settlement activity in the West Bank
and East Jerusalem, and of demolitions, including those

21-2950225/26

S/PV.8883

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that pose a risk to the actualization of the two-State
solution and undermine the territorial contiguity of a
viable Palestinian State based on the 1967 lines.
We have highlighted the importance of secure
borders and of safety and security for both Israelis
and Palestinians, the protection of the status quo of
Jerusalem and the important work of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force in contributing to the
stability of the subregion.
We have regularly taken note of the progress made,
particularly when it comes to cooperation between
the Israeli and the Palestinian authorities and regional
mediation efforts.
Kenya in particular has repeatedly condemned
the terrorist attacks and acts conducive to terrorism
perpetrated by Hamas, the Palestinian Islamic Jihad and
other affiliated militant groups against Israeli civilians
and civilian infrastructure. We have condemned those
who call for the application of international human
rights law and international law but still violate the
same among their own communities.
As intractable as the conflict may seem, in the
past, there have been political breakthroughs that have
come despite the most serious challenges and the most
insurmountable barriers. What then is the missing link
to resolving this protracted situation in a sustainable
manner? I suggest to the Council that however much it
may have done or wish to do, in the end, the answer lies
in the hands and the minds of Israeli and Palestinian
people and their leaders. We should no longer prescribe
peace; rather, we should allow Palestinians and Israelis
to chart the course for peace and harmonious coexistence
through genuine and truly inclusive dialogue that is
rooted in their communities. We are persuaded that
the leaders of both parties must intentionally embrace,
scale up and actualize mutual peace by empowering
those among them that are working for peace. And it is
this grass-roots tier that I would like to speak about for
the rest of my statement.
At the formal peace talk stream, what we call
“official channels”, there has been a tendency to frame
and discuss this conflict and peace process around

26/26

19/10/2021

legal and political frameworks that seem far removed
from important elements that Israeli and Palestinian
communities at the grass roots, which currently coexist
side by side, consider to be important and with which
they are grappling on a daily basis. The result of this
Track One approach has proved that the “solutions” or
“conclusions” offered at this level are geared primarily
to macropolitical and/or macroeconomic issues, while
the layered sociopolitical-theological tensions and other
dimensions of society continue to bubble underneath.
A few weeks ago, during the briefings of the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (see
S/PV.8869), one of the young female civil society
briefers reminded us that the conflict we are dealing
with today is partly the result of the approach taken 20
years ago and which is still being used. This approach
prioritizes “official channels” over diverse grassroots-based organizations and the channels that the
grass roots themselves create. These organizations
embody years of directly and boldly grappling with
sociopolitical-theological concepts, whether they be
related to the Muslim, Jewish or Christian faiths — to
define, interpret and contextualize the historical and
immediate political experiences and realities of the
people’s daily lives.
Let us therefore hear more from them and revisit,
reframe and reassess the Security Council’s efforts in
the same courageous vein embodied by both Israeli
and Palestinian young and grass-roots leaders, who are
daily coexisting, as I said, and constructively building
interethnic and intercultural peace, who are calling
things as they are and who are seeking accountability
for those things where it is needed.
We make these observations not to make any false
equivalences but to urge actual movement away from
the current endless conversation that has seized the
Security Council to rapid yet nonetheless longer-term
solutions and tangible outcomes to this situation.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.

21-29502
