S/PV.8238

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8238

th meeting
Thursday, 19 April 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Meza-Cuadra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Peru)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Dah
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Ms. Samson
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Ms. Pierce
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2018/279)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-11481 (E)
*1811481*

S/PV.8238

Colombia

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency
Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue,
Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire to the
United Nations
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before we
proceed to the item on our agenda, it is with great
shock that I wish to inform the members of the Security
Council of the sudden passing yesterday of our dear
colleague and friend, the Permanent Representative of
Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue.
There are no words to express our feelings of
sorrow at this sad news. On behalf of all members of
the Security Council, I express our deepest condolences
to the wife and family of the Ambassador, as well as
to the Government and people of Côte d’Ivoire for
the loss of a great diplomat who always participated
in Council discussions with independence and in a
constructive manner. He was committed to the Charter
of the United Nations, the maintenance of international
peace and security, and the need to put an end to the
suffering of millions of people affected by conflicts
and humanitarian crises, especially in his own dear
continent of Africa. We will remember him with great
respect and appreciation.
I therefore ask that we all now rise and observe
a minute of silence in memory of our dear colleague,
Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue.
The members of the Security Council observed a
minute of silence.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (5/2018/279)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in today’s meeting.
2/21

19/04/2018

On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome
His Excellency Mr. Óscar Adolfo Naranjo Trujillo,
Vice-President of Colombia, and Minister for Foreign
Affairs María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar and their team.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jean Arnault,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/279, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Arnault.
Mr. Arnault (spoke in French): Allow me to
begin by expressing my personal condolences to
the Government and the Permanent Mission of Côte
d’Ivoire on the passing of Ambassador Bernard TanohBoutchoue. His resolute support for our work has been
a great source of encouragement for the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia.
(spoke in English)
It is a privilege to share once again the floor with
Vice-President Óscar Naranjo Trujillo in the presence
of Foreign Minister María Ángela Holguín. Both have
been firm pillars of the peace process during both the
negotiation and the implementation phase, and we are
grateful for the close and supportive relation they have
maintained with the Mission.
On 11 March, millions of Colombians turned out
to vote in congressional elections that were a clear
step forward in the country’s transition from conflict
to peace. The elections were also a milestone in the
transition of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común (FARC) from weapons to politics. The
presidential election is now five weeks away, and
against a background of polarization, the campaign
so far has continued the trend towards a reduction of
electoral violence.
Among legislative developments since the
publication of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/279), let us also note that a couple of weeks
ago the Constitutional Court endorsed the Law on
the Status of the Opposition — a piece of legislation
18-11481

19/04/2018

Colombia

derived from the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace that
had previously been on the agenda of Congress since
the adoption of the current Constitution in 1991. In
particular, it provides opposition parties with access
to media, additional funding and representation in the
Senate and the Chamber of Representatives for runnersups in the presidential and vice-presidential elections.
In addition, last night, the same Court unanimously
declared constitutional the political participation of
FARC, including the 10 seats in Congress provided for
in the Peace Agreement. This is a particularly important
ruling at this juncture.
With regard to the socioeconomic reintegration of
FARC members, the Superintendent of Banks issued
the expected decree to facilitate the opening of bank
accounts for FARC cooperatives. It confirms that
entities under the supervision of the Superintendent
can provide banking services to former members of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in the process of
reintegration on an equal footing with the rest of the
population, and that, with the exception of individuals
on international sanctions lists, the entities cannot deny
those services to persons on account of their being
former combatants.
With respect to security guarantees, a significant
development was the approval two days ago, after many
months of consultations with a large array of civil
society organizations, of a programme for the security
and protection of communities, organizations, social
leaders and human rights defenders. The programme
was one of the main commitments in the Peace
Agreement. It supplements the current focus of the
National Protection Unit on the protection of individual
leaders with a more collective approach to the security
of communities, which is in line with challenges
that have been identified in the countryside by State
institutions, social organizations and the Mission
itself. The programme also provides for a ground-up
approach to security on the appropriate premise that
local authorities and communities are best placed
to identify threats and protection measures. We will
provide maximum support for its implementation.
The last couple of weeks have also brought new
challenges to the peace process. The arrest of one of the
leaders of FARC on drug trafficking charges reverberated
in a country that remains divided around the peace
process. From the FARC leadership, and particularly

S/PV. 8238

from the party’s President Timoleón Jiménez, calls for
calm and statements of resolve to continue to pursue the
path of the Peace Agreement have been very important
in addressing misgivings and mistrust among former
combatants in the reintegration areas. In addition, the
Government has stated its commitment to accelerating
the implementation of the Peace Agreement, particularly
with regard to reintegration. We welcome the fact that
the Special Jurisdiction for Peace is able to take on its
responsibilities in relation to this case, in accordance
with the Peace Agreement.
We also agree wholeheartedly that there is a
need for a sustained drive to put the reintegration of
former combatants on a more solid basis before the
end of the Government’s mandate. Weakness in this
effort can only increase the risk of the drift of some
ex-combatants to criminal groups, such as those
responsible for the tragic killings and kidnappings of
Ecuadorian nationals operating in the border area with
Ecuador. As mentioned by the Secretary-General in
his report, the ingredients for a such a breakthrough
in reintegration are well-known — viable productive
projects, functional cooperatives and the availability of
land — and much of the legal and technical preparation
has already been done. We look forward to the prompt
approval of the decree allowing access to land to former
combatants.
I mentioned earlier the new programme on the
protection of communities. I should note that with
its adoption, implementation of the most important
commitments of the Peace Agreement with regard to
security matters is under way: the National Commission
on Security Guarantees, the Special Investigation Unit
of the Office of the Attorney General, the Police Elite
Corps, the strengthened early warning system of the
Office of the Ombudsman, and the National Protection
Unit’s special protection measures for FARC are in
place. Furthermore, the decree on the Comprehensive
Security System for the Exercise of Politics was passed
and endorsed by the Constitutional Court.
The Secretary-General reported on the activation
of the National Commission on Security Guarantees,
on whose leadership we continue to count to focus
the attention of institutions on bringing much-needed
security to the countryside and address the threats and
attacks against community leaders and human rights
defenders. In this respect, the Special Investigation Unit
of the Office of the Attorney General has now expanded
its investigations to cover killings of those leaders

18-114813/21

S/PV.8238

Colombia

after initially focusing primarily on the assassination
of FARC members. As of this month, it has assumed
58 such cases of community leaders and human rights
defenders. It is currently giving priority to those with a
view to achieving results as soon as possible.
While it is obviously too early to take stock of a
peace process that has set ambitious and long-term
goals, we have already observed that it has achieved
a notable reduction of violence in the context of the
congressional elections. Similarly, it has created a
series of institutions dedicated to overcoming patterns
of social, economic and political violence in the
conflict areas. That is a substantial change, and the next
few months provide an opportunity to bring together
Government institutions, local authorities and social
organizations to press forward with that agenda.
As mentioned in the Secretary-General’s report,
negotiations between the Government of Colombia and
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional have resumed. The
Catholic Church and the Mission, which supported the
implementation of the temporary ceasefire at the end of
last year, have presented their recommendations to both
parties to support their effort to reach a more reliable
ceasefire. The two parties have reiterated their interest
in United Nations support in the implementation of a
future ceasefire. The Security Council will obviously
make the appropriate decisions in due time. Meanwhile,
we will do our best to ensure that the design of the
ceasefire is as robust as possible.
Throughout the implementation phase of the
Peace Agreement, circumstances have occasionally
tested the commitment of the two parties to stay the
course. They have stayed the course. The unanimous
support consistently voiced by the Council has helped
sustain that resolve. It will continue to be a source of
confidence and strength.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Arnault for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council wishing to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): It is an honour to
have Their Excellencies the Vice-President and the
Foreign Minister of Colombia with us today.
On behalf of the British people and Government, I
too would like to begin by expressing my condolences
to our colleagues of Côte d’Ivoire, to the family and
friends of Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue, and to our friends
4/21

19/04/2018

in Côte d’Ivoire and its Government and people. It is
indeed a great loss and we send them all our condolences
and sympathy.
Turning to Colombia, it is very good to have the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia with us again. He and I have known each
other for a very long time. I would like to thank him for
his work and that of his entire team on the ground. This
is a historic peace agreement. I think Colombia is to be
congratulated on taking this tremendously important
and historic step that ended 50 years of conflict. It is a
huge achievement and serves as a global inspiration for
others. It shows what can be done for peace when there
is bold leadership.
From its experience with Northern Ireland, the
United Kingdom knows that the implementation of
such agreements is very challenging. I think that it has
proved to be no less challenging for Colombia. The
United Kingdom is proud to stand with Colombia in
support of the implementation process and the country
can rely on us to do so in the months and years ahead.
I was very interested to hear from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General about some of
the remarkable progress that has been achieved over the
past three months, in particular his remarks with regard
to the ruling and the banks. Those were an important
steps forward. We also welcome the congressional
elections in March, which saw the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) participate in
Colombia’s democratic process for the first time. We
believe that this is indeed a key point in FARC’s political
transformation and a truly remarkable achievement,
given the short time since the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace in 2016. We also welcome
the progress that has been made in implementing the
Agreement, notably on structures for truth, justice
and reparations for the victims of the conflict and the
activation of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace and the
Special Unit for the Search for Persons — two very
important steps.
On the resumption of talks with the National
Liberation Army, we welcome the return to dialogue,
but I would also like to mention the very real
challenges that remain for the implementation of the
Final Agreement. Those challenges include continued
insecurity in some of the areas affected by the
18-11481

19/04/2018

Colombia

conflict, and they can include violence and threats
against former members of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP). The protection measures, including FARC
participation and close protection of its leaders, are
key steps in helping address that, and it is vital that
the Government’s strategy for security guarantees is
properly resourced and coordinated with the police, the
Office of the Attorney General and judicial authorities.
I was reassured by what the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General had to say about the arrest of
the FARC leader. We would like to echo those calls for
calm and for ensuring that the provisions of the Peace
Agreement continue to be followed.
One of our other concerns is the levels of violence
against community leaders and human rights defenders.
It is very good that the Special Investigation Unit of
the Office of the Attorney General will be able to
investigate those attacks.
The launch of plan Horus represents a bold and
comprehensive response to security challenges in
vulnerable areas and we look forward to seeing an
ongoing approach to stabilization that is coordinated
with police and civilian agencies. I think that will be
vital for long-term stability.
Turning to the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights, we would like to thank its staff, and
Mr. Todd Howland in particular for his leadership at the
Office. We welcome the appointment of his successor,
Mr. Alberto Brunori. The Office has played a key role
in supporting the peace process and we will continue to
watch its work very closely.
In the next weeks and months, it is vital that
reintegration projects are active in all 26 areas for
training and reintegration. That will help prevent further
former FARC-EP members from joining dissident
groups. We look forward to seeing resources unlocked
and timelines accelerated for crop substitution, rural
development and the reintegration of former combatants.
The United Kingdom encourages further progress
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement over
the coming months to support continued progress
towards a sustained peace in Colombia. Colombia can
definitely count on the United Kingdom’s continued
and deep support.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): On
behalf of the Chinese Mission in New York and me

S/PV. 8238

personally, I express our deepest condolences with
regard to the untimely passing of Ambassador TanohBoutchoue to his family and to the Permanent Mission
and Government of Côte d’Ivoire. Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
was a senior diplomat and our close colleague and
friend. His passing is extremely tragic.
I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s meeting. I also welcome His Excellency
Mr. Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President of Colombia, for
his presence and Her Excellency the Foreign Minister
of Colombia for attending the meeting. I thank Special
Representative Arnault for his briefing.
The Colombian peace process is crucial to
achieving comprehensive peace and development in
Colombia. It is also instrumental to maintaining peace
and stability in the whole region. China commends
the commitment and relentless efforts made by the
Colombian Government, President Santos Calderón,
and all other parties concerned.
A comprehensive implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace signed between the Government and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) is central to the
Colombian peace process. Currently, the implementation
of the Peace Agreement is facing some challenges. We
hope that the parties concerned in Colombia can meet
each other halfway, overcome difficulties and continue
to consistently facilitate the peace process in order to
maintain the positive momentum of the Colombian
peace process and establish conditions conducive to the
full implementation of the Peace Agreement between
the Government and FARC-EP.
The Colombian peace process is irreversible, based
on a high-level consensus among all parties in Colombia
and the international community. The Security Council
and the international community must continue to play
close attention to and support the peace process, respect
the ownership of the Government and the people of
Colombia with regard to the process and provide
constructive assistance to the overall implementation
of the Peace Agreement.
China commends the important role played by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Arnault, and the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia in facilitating the Colombian
peace process. We hope that the Mission will continue
to enhance its communication with the Government and

18-114815/21

S/PV.8238

Colombia

the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común and
do more to build trust and facilitate the implementation
of the peace agreement.
China applauds the Ejército de Liberación Nacional
(ELN) for honouring its commitment to a unilateral
ceasefire during the parliamentary elections this year.
We hope that the Verification Mission will continue
to leverage its role in urging the ELN to reach a new
ceasefire agreement with the Government as soon as
possible.
Together with other members of the Council,
China is ready to make a greater contribution to the
ongoing facilitation of the peace process and the early
achievement of overall peace and security in Colombia.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Let me say how heartbroken
we are to learn of the passing of our dear friend and
brother, Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, the Permanent
Representative of Côte d’Ivoire to the United Nations.
We thank you, Sir, for arranging the minute of silence
in his memory and for your remarks on our behalf.
The departure of our friend was so sudden,
untimely and completely unexpected. For three or
four weeks, he had not been himself. He had become
unduly introspective. Nonetheless, he never ignored
his absolute loyalty to friends in whom he confided his
innermost feelings. One could not find a better person
at a time when good people are sorely needed. It is a
time when standing up for the truth and what is right
has become indispensable to regional and international
peace and security. He has left us extremely heartbroken.
We express condolences to his family, colleagues and
fellow countrymen.
Turning to today’s subject, we thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Arnault,
for his briefing on the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
(S/2018/279). We are honoured and pleased to see His
Excellency the Vice-President of Colombia here with
us today. We also acknowledge the presence of Her
Excellency the Foreign Minister of Colombia.
The congressional elections held on 11 March send
a positive message to all those who closely follow the
implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
It sends a positive message, not only because it was
concluded in a peaceful manner, but also because it is
of symbolic significance, opening a new chapter in the
6/21

19/04/2018

country’s encouraging political trajectory following
five decades of conflict. We congratulate both the
Government of Colombia and the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común on their commitment, as
well as on that tremendous achievement.
For reasons that are most obvious, we follow
and care about the success of the Colombian peace
process. For us in Africa, it is a source of inspiration.
The Colombian Peace Agreement has rekindled a
sense of hope and optimism for peace and stability in
the country. The patience and perseverance shown in
facing the challenges in the implementation process has
begun to show results. The Council should continue to
provide the necessary support to the Colombian parties
in the speedy implementation of the agreement.
We are conscious of the sensitive issues that still
require careful handling, including the expeditious
approval by Congress of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, the social and economic reintegration of former
combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) into civilian
life, access to land ownership, the provision of personal
and collective security and protection measures, the
absence or inadequate presence of State institutions
in places left by FARC-EP combatants, the continuous
killings of community leaders, former FARC-EP
members and their relatives, as well as other issues
highlighted in the report of the Secretary-General that
could potentially create political complications.
We raise those matters because we care about the
process. As I said earlier, we draw great inspiration from
events in Colombia. While we commend the continued
political will being demonstrated by the Government
with regard to legal guarantees, more must be done to
accelerate the full implementation of the amnesty law
and resolve all other outstanding issues.
With regard to the negotiations between the
Colombian Government and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional (ELN), we recall the Council’s condemnation
in January of renewed attacks by the ELN. We are
encouraged by reports that the two parties have now
resumed the fifth round of negotiations to broker an
improved ceasefire agreement. We urge the parties
to engage in constructive discussions in good faith in
order to reach a new ceasefire and a permanent peace
agreement. We commend Special Representative
Arnault, as well as United Nations personnel in
Colombia, on all their efforts in support of the peace
18-11481

19/04/2018

Colombia

agreement. We also reiterate our appreciation to
countries of the region and other international partners
that continue to closely support and accompany the
implementation of the peace agreement.
Lastly, we take this opportunity to reaffirm our
continued support for the full implementation of the
Colombian Peace Agreement and stand in solidarity
with the people and Government of Colombia in their
exemplary efforts to transition to sustainable peace.
In conclusion, I would like to stress the fact that the
continued success of the process is critical not only to
the people of Colombia but to the entire world. We hope
that Colombians will continue to rally behind the Peace
Agreement and support the sustainable implementation
of the accord. The successful holding of the presidential
elections in Colombia, whose first round is scheduled
for 27 May, will be vital to ensure continued progress.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I believe
we all sit here today with a heavy heart because we
have lost our brother and friend. Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
was kind and caring. He always had a smile on his face
and his laughter was contagious. I do not know how we
come to terms with the fact that we lost him so soon. I
have no doubt that he is telling jokes in heaven. I would
like to extend our condolences to the people of Côte
d’Ivoire and to let them know that we feel their sorrow
and pain. He represented them well. With that, I will
say that we have lost the sweetest among us. I think
that he would always want us to remember the reasons
we are here and our goal. I think that that would be the
greatest tribute we could pay to his memory.
I would like to thank Special Representative
Arnault for his briefing. I would also like to welcome
the participation of the Vice-President of Colombia and
presence of the Foreign Minister in the Council.
After a week in which the Council had six separate
meetings in an effort to stop the bloodshed in Syria,
preserving and cultivating an existing peace agreement
takes on special meaning. The Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace, which ended five decades of war in Colombia,
has created the conditions for the just and lasting peace
that Colombians deserve. It was a historic achievement,
but peace in Colombia remains an unfinished project.
All of us have a role to play in ensuring that it succeeds.
First, we should give credit where credit is due. We
have seen significant and visible progress in the early

S/PV. 8238

phases of the implementation of the Peace Agreement.
In just over six months, the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) handed over thousands of weapons and
explosives. It has also transformed itself into a political
party and participated in elections.
For its part, the Government has begun
reincorporating thousands of ex-combatants into
civilian life. It has established transitional justice
institutions. The challenge remains for the Government
to expand its presence throughout the country. We
cannot allow areas formerly controlled by FARC-EP
to fall into the hands of criminals and illegal armed
groups. That would undo much of the progress of
the peace accord. We encourage the Government to
continue efforts to eliminate Colombia’s ungoverned
spaces. The United States also urges the Government to
continue the full implementation of the comprehensive
peace plan, which includes efforts to reintegrate former
combatants into civilian life.
The peace accord provides an important opportunity
to address historical land issues that have driven conflict
and violence in Colombia. We welcome President
Santos Calderón’s landmark decree meant to formalize
land ownership for more than 2.5 million farmers.
Improving access to land is essential to transforming
rural livelihoods. Criminal groups and narcotraffickers
have dominated rural areas of Colombia for decades.
With secure land titles, the Colombian people can
provide for their families without feeling beholden
to those groups. It will also help achieve sustainable
solutions to reducing coca cultivation, prevent violence
against human rights defenders, and build a strong
foundation for lasting peace in Colombia.
But peace is a two-way process, and the Fuerza
Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) has
significant responsibilities too. For peace to succeed,
FARC must honour its commitments under the
agreement. It must provide compensation to victims of
the conflict. Restoring trust in Colombia’s institutions
after so many years of conflict will be extremely
difficult. In fact, it will be impossible if FARC does not
cooperate. FARC must participate fully and honestly
in the transitional justice process. During my trip
to the region in February, I saw the tremendous role
that Colombia is playing to combat drug trafficking
in Central America. That is another good sign for the
peace process. The success of the Peace Agreement

18-114817/21

S/PV.8238

Colombia

is inseparable from our shared efforts against
drug trafficking.
The United States and Colombia have set a goal
of reducing cocaine production and coca cultivation
in Colombia by 50 per cent in 2023. We encourage
the Government to recognize drug trafficking for the
damage it does to the social, economic and security
well-being of the country. The Government must
accelerate its counter-narcotics effort. FARC should
also live up to its obligations to end its involvement
in drug trafficking and share any information it has
on drug-trafficking routes. Drugs fuelled the conflict
in Colombia and eroded its Government and civic
institutions. The United States stands ready to continue
to assist in the recovery.
Finally, we would like to thank the Government
of Colombia and the Vice-President for all they have
done to help the Venezuelans flooding into the country
to escape the oppressive Maduro Moros regime. At
a time when Colombians have had their hands full
consolidating the peace of their own country, they
have stepped up to the challenge of helping others.
We are grateful not just for their kindness but for the
leadership Colombia is showing. The United States
is fully committed to supporting Colombia and the
implementation of the peace accord. The challenges are
real, but the outlook is bright. We look forward to our
continued friendship and partnership with a stronger,
safer Colombia in the years to come.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Today is a sad day for
the Security Council family. The sudden and untimely
death of Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue last evening
has left us all stunned and speechless. On behalf of
Kazakhstan, I offer our sincerest condolences to the
Government, the nation and the people of Côte d’Ivoire
for having lost one of their outstanding diplomats,
whose life we honour today in the Council.
Bernard was one of us, and his loss is irreplaceable
for he exemplified all that is finest in diplomacy,
dignity and the best of humanity and compassion.
With a distinguished life dedicated to the service of
his country, he reflected an immense depth of political
acumen and wisdom that touched us deeply. His
presence on the Council gave us invaluable insights
into how a country emerging from the ravages of war
can undergo a remarkable transformation to take a seat
on the apex organ of the United Nations and contribute
to peace and security. An excellent diplomat of quiet
8/21

19/04/2018

grace and inner strength, a true gentleman, loyal friend
and beautiful soul, he will continue to live in our hearts
and memories.
Turning now to the topic that convenes us today, I
would like to welcome Colombian Vice-President, His
Excellency Óscar Naranjo Trujillo, and Foreign Minister
María Holguín Cuéllar to the Security Council. I would
also like to thank Special Representative Arnault for his
briefing today and for the tireless efforts of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia towards
ensuring a peaceful future for the country.
My delegation commends the leadership of
Colombia for its firm dedication and strong commitment
to the peace process, irrespective of the huge challenges
it faces. We also commend the United Nations role in
accompanying the peace process, including the visits
of the Secretary-General in January, the Department of
Political Affairs partners’ field visit in February and
the President of the General Assembly’s trip in March
to Colombia.
It has been three months since the Colombian
peace process entered its second year. During these
three months, we have observed remarkable positive
developments in the ongoing peace process. In that
context, I would like to underline the first parliamentary
elections held in Colombia last March after a historic
peace deal was achieved in 2016. According to the
Secretary-General’s latest report (S/2018/279), these
were the most inclusive elections in decades.
In view of the upcoming presidential elections
in Colombia, we believe that the new President and
Government will continue to show the same political
will and commitment to implementing the ongoing
peace process and putting the victims of the armed
conflict at the centre of the Colombian political
agenda. Kazakhstan highly appreciates the efforts
of the Colombian Government and former rebels of
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) in the overall peaceful
conduct of the elections.
We also note the launch of Colombia’s transitional
justice tribunal — the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
That mechanism, together with the Commission on
Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition and the Special
Unit for the Search for Persons, is the core of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace. Its role is essential to the
successful continuation of the peace process. We look
18-11481

19/04/2018

Colombia

forward to the other peace-related pending legislation
being approved soon, guaranteeing the peace accord’s
full implementation and securing its irreversibility for
the benefit of all Colombians.
Kazakhstan
joins
others
in
particularly
commending the signing of the landmark decree
that will formalize the land ownership of 2.5 million
Colombian farmers. That was provided in the peace
deal and the implementation of that promise opens
the door to improving the quality of life of Colombian
peasants. Moreover, given the fact that land ownership
was the root cause of the more than half-of-a-century
armed conflict, we believe that the legalization of land
titles is key to peacebuilding.
Colombia still has a complicated journey ahead in
order to achieve long-lasting peace. We need to address
the alarming trends that, inter alia, have resulted in the
killings of social and community leaders and human
rights defenders, triggered in part by a power vacuum
in the territories that were abandoned by the excombatants, which is of particular concern and might
call the effective implementation of the peace process
into question.
It will therefore be crucial to strengthen the nexus
linking security and development, enhance efforts to
achieve the socioeconomic reintegration of former
FARC-EP rebels, ensure employment and adequate
living standards and promote health care and educational
and productive projects for those victims most affected
by the conflict, including women, children and ethnic
and indigenous communities. We urge the Government
of Colombia to maintain its focus on providing concrete
avenues to reintegration for former combatants in rural
communities and on preventing increases in insecurity
by expanding the State presence and State services. At
the same time, the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común should also live up to its obligations and
contribute to the peace process.
We welcome the constructive and wise decision of
the Colombian Government to restart peace talks in
Quito with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN),
which were frozen in January after a spate of ELN
attacks. Kazakhstan hopes that the fifth cycle of talks,
which were resumed on 15 March, will contribute to
achieving a new bilateral ceasefire, which could pave
the way for a permanent peace agreement with the
ELN. Kazakhstan reiterates its firm commitment to
the Colombian peace process and calls on all interested

S/PV. 8238

parties to do their best to foster reconciliation. From
now on, the success of the peace process will entirely
depend on the commitment of all parties to the concept of
the peace deal, and will come to fruition only if they are
united in their will to eliminate conflict and effectively
live in peace. We therefore encourage all Colombians to
work hard in order to overcome challenges and facilitate
and expedite the establishment of lasting peace in the
country. Kazakhstan strongly supports the Government
of Colombia and stands ready to join multilateral and
regional efforts to accelerate the momentum of the
peace process that will ultimately bring about stability,
progress and prosperity for all Colombians.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We
are all in a state of shock following the death of our
colleague and friend Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue. On
behalf of France and on a personal level, I want to
once again express our heartfelt condolences and deep
sympathy to his family, friends and all the members
of the Permanent Mission of Côte d’Ivoire. The United
Nations has lost a great professional, Côte d’Ivoire an
excellent representative, and France a friend whose
limitless kindness will continue to inspire us.
I thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Jean Arnault for his very informative briefing,
as well as for his commitment and exemplary effort.
I also thank the Vice-President and the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia for their presence
here today and their tireless work in negotiating and
implementing the Peace Agreement concluded with
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP).
On behalf of France, I would like to once again pay
tribute here to the political courage of the Colombian
authorities, which took the initiative of launching the
historic peace process with FARC-EP. Colombia’s
commitment to peace is a source of inspiration for us
all, as the Ambassador of Ethiopia so eloquently said
earlier. The United Nations, in general, and the Security
Council, in particular, have played their full roles in
providing the necessary support for the disarmament
and political transition of that armed group. Since
September 2017 that support has been manifested
through ensuring the monitoring of the reintegration
of former combatants, which is a crucial step towards
the lasting implementation of the peace agreement.
With regard to the mandate for the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, the Organization’s

18-114819/21

S/PV.8238

Colombia

second Mission to that country, I will briefly underscore
three points.
First, France congratulates the Colombian
authorities on the organization and successful holding
of the 11 March congressional elections, which the
Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del Común (FARC),
the new political party that resulted from the peace
process, participated in. Colombian institutions and
the Peace Agreement have been strengthened by
that democratic exercise, as a result of which former
combatants will become members of the Senate and the
Chamber of Representatives. The opening of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace to the public also represents a
significant step towards the political reintegration
of former combatants. We encourage the current
Government and, more generally, all of the country’s
political groups, to consolidate the progress made and
move forward towards the full implementation of the
Peace Agreement between Colombia and FARC-EP.
Particular attention should be given to the issue of
amnesty for prisoners, as provided for in the Agreement.
My second point concerns the security of the
women and men who are working to bring peace to the
conflict-affected areas. We welcome the steps taken
by the Colombian Government to end the high level
of violence in those areas, in particular the murders
of civil-society leaders, human rights defenders and
people involved in coca substitution programmes.
Despite the commitment of the authorities, the
situation remains worrisome. The local populations
have not seen much evidence of the peace dividends.
We therefore encourage efforts to deploy State services
to those areas, whether through security forces or civil
institutions. It will also be crucial to combat impunity
for crimes committed within the context of the
conflict, including extrajudicial executions, whether by
investigating the perpetrators of such crimes or those
who ordered violent acts.
Lastly, I would once again like to draw attention to
a critical point related to reintegration and the future of
the peace process, which is access to land and sources of
income. Once the issue of access to land, including the
restitution of land that was seized during the conflict
and is under legal proceedings, has been settled, it is
economic projects that will provide former combatants
with the prospect of a future within the Colombian
national community. Such economic reintegration will
be key to the lasting success of the peace process. It will
continue to enjoy broad support from the international
10/21

19/04/2018

community, including France and the European Union,
through various financial instruments. Ensuring peace
in territories that have been ravaged by conflict for
more than 50 years depends on it.
France, which supported President Santos
Calderón’s efforts to achieve peace from the beginning,
hopes that the Peace Agreement between the Colombian
Government and FARC-EP will be recorded in history
as the end of a conflict and the beginning of a new era
in Colombia in which former combatants will have
their place in Colombian society and other groups
will follow the example of FARC. We hope that the
Colombian Government and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional will reach a new ceasefire as soon as possible
and that negotiations will enable the achievement of a
historic peace in Colombia that will send an exemplary
message of hope to the world.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I would like to
join you, Mr. President, and our colleagues around the
table in expressing my shock and deep sadness at the
sudden death of Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue. We would
like to express our heartfelt condolences to his family
and his colleagues at the Permanent Mission of Côte
d’Ivoire and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and our
thoughts are with them at this tragic time. Bernard had
a distinguished career in the service of his country, and
that was very much reflected in his approach on the
Security Council. He always made time for dialogue
with us. He was keen to hear other perspectives and
ready to share his own experience. His contributions
to our deliberations were always thoughtful, considered
and insightful, and our discussions here will be all the
poorer as a result of his absence. Côte d’Ivoire has lost
one of its finest diplomats, and we have lost a dear
friend and colleague.
Let me now turn to Colombia. I too would like
to thank Special Representative Jean Arnault for his
valuable briefing to the Council. I want to assure him
of Sweden’s continued firm support for his efforts and
the work of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia. I also acknowledge and welcome the
presence of Mr. Óscar Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President
of Colombia, and María Holguín Cuéllar, Colombia’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank them and President Santos
Calderón for their personal commitment to the
peace process.
18-11481

19/04/2018

Colombia

We commend both parties’ firm commitment to
peace, as well as their efforts to overcome challenges
in the implementation of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace between the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the
Government of Colombia. Last year saw the successful
laying down of arms and the conversion of FARC-EP
into a political party. The congressional elections held
on 11 March this year were the most inclusive and least
violent in decades, demonstrating how peace is already
benefiting Colombia and Colombians.
Recognizing and addressing the legacy of conflict
is essential to reconciliation and to building a peaceful
future. We welcome the fact that the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace has begun its crucial work. It was designed and
agreed on with the priority objective of guaranteeing
truth, justice, reparation and no relapse into conflict.
We hope that its procedures will be rapidly agreed on.
According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/279), threats, violence and killings of human
rights defenders, community leaders, FARC-EP
members and their families have continued. Needless
to say, this is deeply worrying and underscores the
importance of ensuring that the State can fill the power
vacuum and safeguard the rule of law and respect for
human rights throughout the country.
The full political, legal and socioeconomic
reintegration of former FARC-EP members is vital.
That includes ensuring progress on the application
of amnesty provisions, productive projects and the
key issue of access to land for reintegration. In that
regard, we hope that the decree allowing former
combatants access to land to will be approved as soon
as possible. A sustained effort from all parts of the
Government in support of the wider Peace Agreement,
including comprehensive rural reform, is needed so
that the Agreement can begin delivering tangible
peace dividends for all Colombians as soon as possible.
Ensuring a stronger presence of civilian authorities
and agencies providing goods and services to conflictaffected communities will be helpful in that regard.
Women played an important role in making peace
in Colombia. The gender perspective must now be
mainstreamed in all aspects of the implementation,
and not least in the areas of reintegration and security.
We call on the parties to ensure that protection
efforts cover the specific challenges regarding the

S/PV. 8238

protection of women, including measures for enhanced
prevention and responses to gender-based violence, as
recommended in the Secretary-General’s report.
We welcome the resumption of talks between the
Government and the Ejército de Liberación Nacional,
and reiterate that the United Nations and the Security
Council must stand ready to assist the parties in
monitoring a renewed ceasefire. Sweden, as a member
of the group of countries for support, accompaniment
and cooperation at the negotiating table, will assist the
process as much as it can.
Colombia also demonstrates how a united Security
Council can contribute to peace. At this critical time
in the implementation of the Peace Agreement, the
United Nations and Colombia’s international partners
must continue to lend their full support to the parties.
Colombia’s Peace Agreement represents the culmination
of a historic process that has brought an end to more
than 50 years of conflict and violence. It shows that
even the most entrenched conflicts can be brought to
an end through dialogue and diplomacy, setting an
irreversible course for peace. By remaining committed
to the Peace Agreement, the parties are keeping faith
with the hopes and aspirations of the Colombian people
for the future of their country. We must continue to do
all we can to support them in that.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On behalf of Russia, I would first like to
express our condolences to the nearest and dearest of
our colleague and friend Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue,
the Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire, on
his untimely passing. We will greatly miss his sense
of humour, constructive attitude, professionalism and
enthusiasm for the issues on the Council’s agenda. He
has done a great deal for his country and for the people
of Côte d’Ivoire. We share their pain and sorrow. This
is a severe blow to the United Nations diplomatic corps.
May his soul rest in peace.
To return to this morning’s topic, I want to welcome
Óscar Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President of Colombia, and
María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar, Colombia’s Minister for
Foreign Affairs, to our meeting.
We are here today to discuss the situation in
Colombia since the holding of parliamentary elections
on 11 March. That was an important and significant
event, considering that the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) took part in the elections for the first

18-1148111/21

S/PV.8238

Colombia

time, after decades in opposition. Despite the modest
results, that political force will represent the interests
of its supporters. We congratulate Colombia and the
Colombians on that achievement. Thanks to the sense
of national responsibility they have demonstrated, the
country has been able to take another very important
step towards a sustainable peace.
We thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his presentation of the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/279). Both the
briefing and the report confirm that a lot of work
remains to be done. We should have no illusions about
that. Despite the fact that the country’s situation has
changed for the better by comparison to the war years,
some chronic problems contain to present obstacles
to strengthening sustainable peace, which is why we
wholeheartedly endorse the support that the United
Nations presence provides to Colombians under the
leadership of Mr. Arnault. It was the support of the first
special political mission, which completed its work last
September, that helped Colombians to secure major
gains in the peace process. In the wake of the ceasefire
ending many years of conflict and the signing of the
Final Peace Agreement at the end of 2016, the United
Nations Mission in Colombia ensured the completion
of the surrender of weapons by FARC-EP. Former
combatants began to arrive in the reintegration zones,
in spite of some problems with setting them up, as the
Head of the Mission reported.
These successes enabled the Council to start
discussing the shift to the second phase, that of the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
Issued six months after the start of the Verification
Mission’s work, the Secretary-General’s report has
pointed to a number of serious problems, particularly
the bureaucratic obstacles that the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) encountered during
a crucial stage of its electoral campaign. Unfortunately,
the number of murders of former combatants and
communal leaders has also increased exponentially.
Against that backdrop, illegal armed groups have taken
control of lands that had previously been liberated by
FARC-EP, despite the announcement of the Horus plan,
which is meant to ensure Government control in such
areas. Furthermore, another topic that has provoked a
significant reaction in Colombian society was missing
from the report — the arrest on 9 April of Jesús Santrich,
one of the negotiators of the Final Peace Agreement
and a member of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
12/21

19/04/2018

del Común party who, as we know, was supposed to
take up his parliamentary seat. We were pleased with
Mr. Arnault’s information that the key agreements of
the parties remain in force. Together with the United
Nations Mission, we will carefully monitor the process
and the applicability, in this situation, of Colombia’s
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, a key component of
the Final Peace Agreement and therefore a guarantee
of peace.
All of these issues will require careful attention
from the Government, the United Nations Mission
and the international community, which rightly see
Colombia as an example of post-conflict rebuilding. Not
to mention how attentively the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional is watching the development of events.
All of that places a special responsibility on the
Verification Mission, which should be fully mobilized
and focused on fulfilling its mandate on schedule.
That is especially important in the run-up to the
presidential elections.
We believe that all parties must continue to adhere
strictly to the outcome of the Peace Agreement in its
current form by all parties, regardless of whatever
changes await the country’s Government. In that context,
we will be paying close attention to the statements of
the candidates. It is important to remember that the
authority of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral is invested in the success of the peace process.
For our part, we once again affirm our readiness
to continue to support the people and the Government
of Colombia in building lasting peace and sustainable
post-conflict development.
Ms. Samson (Netherlands): At the outset, on
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would
like to express our deep condolences to the family,
loved ones and colleagues at the Permanent Mission
of Côte d’Ivoire on the sudden passing of Ambassador
Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue. He will be sorely missed
as a colleague and friend who was truly committed to
the values of the United Nations and the work of the
Security Council.
Turning to Colombia, I would like to start by
thanking Mr. Arnault, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his clear and detailed briefing.
We commend him and the United Nations Verification
Mission for the excellent work that they are doing and
assure them of our full support. I also want to express our
18-11481

19/04/2018

Colombia

sincere appreciation for the presence of Vice-President
Naranjo Trujillo and Foreign Minister Holguín Cuéllar
with us here today. Their presence demonstrates the
ongoing commitment of their Government to continuing
to pursue peace.
The peace process is transforming Colombia. The
participation of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común (FARC) political party in the peaceful
democratic parliamentary elections held on 11 March
was a milestone, and we congratulate all stakeholders
on the progress achieved. I would like to make three
points today. The first is on the need to improve the
security situation; the second is on the need for the
inclusive reintegration of former members of the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and the full and
effective participation of women in the peace process;
and the third is on the importance of a new ceasefire
between the Government and the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional (ELN).
First, I would like to highlight the importance of
improving the security situation in former conflict
areas. Significant progress has been made so far.
However, sustainable peace can be achieved only once
the civilians living in those areas can benefit from the
peace dividend. The Kingdom of the Netherlands is
concerned about new armed-group activity in those
areas. We welcome the Horus plan and encourage its
further implementation in coordination with other
national efforts to restore State authority. That includes
strengthening civilian institutions and the provision of
services. Improving the security situation is a first step
towards the sustainable development of such areas and
a peaceful future for its inhabitants.
The problematic security situation in former
conflict areas has also led to an increase in threats and
acts of violence against community and social leaders
and human rights defenders. Their protection should
be a key priority, particularly given the upcoming
elections. We appreciate the Colombian Government’s
increased efforts to ensure that, which should translate
into an improved security situation on the ground.
However, those responsible for the threats and violence
must also be held to account.
My second point is that inclusivity is a condition for
the success of the peace process, and ensuring it is an
important way to address the root causes of the conflict.
The political, socioeconomic and legal reintegration of

S/PV. 8238

former FARC-EP members must remain a priority. That
includes progress on the amnesty provisions, access to
land and productive projects. In particular, the Kingdom
of the Netherlands calls for women’s full and effective
participation in the peace process. That includes the
implementation of the specific gender provisions
regarding security guarantees and the reintegration of
female former combatants. In that light, we welcome
the forum for gender focal points to be organized by
the United Nations Verification Mission, to which the
Netherlands has contributed.
Our third point is a message of support for the
resumption of negotiations between the Government
of Colombia and the ELN. We hope that the recent
challenges will be overcome and that the negotiations
will continue. We encourage all parties to commit
to a ceasefire agreement and to give peace a chance.
The Netherlands stands ready to support Colombia,
including as a member of the Global Partnership for the
Prevention of Armed Conflict.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
supports the peace process in Colombia, as well
as the people of Colombia. We therefore call on all
stakeholders to continue their efforts to implement and
uphold the Peace Agreement now, during the months
ahead and in the years to come. Together, they can
change the future of Colombia.
Mr. Dah (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): Today
is a particularly sad day for my country, Côte d’Ivoire,
which has just lost its Permanent Representative to
the United Nations, Ambassador Bernard TanohBoutchoue, who died yesterday afternoon. I would like
to thank all United Nations delegations for the many
messages of support and solidarity they have conveyed
to my country and to my delegation in particular,
which continues to be deeply affected by this sudden
passing. Bernard, as his Security Council colleagues
affectionately called him, was passionate about his
work. He was a kind man who was always smiling and
attentive to his colleagues and co-workers. I am sure
that the Security Council will miss him. As co-workers,
we already miss him.
As the poet has said, there are tears that never stop
flowing, voids that are never filled, memories that
nothing can take away and people who can never be
replaced. Smiles return, but only to cover the grief.
Everything has been said but words can change nothing.

18-1148113/21

S/PV.8238

Colombia

The sun has set over a fulfilled life but it will continue
to shine in the garden of our memories.
Returning to today’s meeting, my delegation thanks
the Peruvian presidency for holding this briefing on
the peace process in Colombia. We would also like to
commend Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his excellent briefing. On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to welcome the
Vice-President of Colombia, who has been kind enough
to grace today’s meeting with his presence.
Côte d’Ivoire has been following the evolving
sociopolitical situation in Colombia with great
interest since the start of an intra-Colombian peace
process two years ago. Our statement will focus on
the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
the challenges in implementing it and the role of the
international community, particularly the United
Nations, in supporting the peace process. With regard
to the implementation of the Peace Agreement, Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the significant progress that has
been made at various levels.
On the political front, my delegation welcomed
the peaceful holding on 11 March of the first inclusive
Colombian legislative elections, in which 73 candidates
from the political party of the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) participated. Beyond their results, the
legislative elections represent an important step in the
intra-Colombian reconciliation and peace process. My
delegation hopes that the presidential election scheduled
for May will further strengthen such achievements. In
that context, Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the decision
of President Juan Manuel Santos Calderón to resume
the negotiations with the Ejército de Liberación
Nacional that were suspended in the wake of several
attacks perpetrated by that group. Their resumption
could clearly help to de-escalate the conflict.
On the judicial front, it is important to welcome the
effective start of the work of the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, which continues to be an essential component
of the transitional justice system, to implement of the
Peace Agreement of November 2016.
With regard to security, my country welcomes
the establishment by the Colombian authorities of
appropriate mechanisms to provide an institutional
response to the deterioration of the security situation.
My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
14/21

19/04/2018

emergence of a national consensus between Colombian
institutions and civil society with regard to the
protection of the lives and roles of the social leaders
who are working to promote land restitution and to
protect resources and the environment. My delegation
congratulates the Colombian Government on the work
it has accomplished and encourages it to continue to
strive to remove all obstacles. Despite the that progress,
the implementation of the Peace Agreement faces many
challenges, including in the areas of socioeconomic
reintegration, security and justice.
At the socioeconomic level, my country calls on
the Government of Colombia to continue the reforms
initiated by taking concrete measures to reintegrate
former FARC-EP members and allowing access to land
ownership and the development of productive projects
and cooperatives. We urge the Government to take all
the measures likely to improve the living conditions in
ex-combatant assembly centres and to facilitate their
successful socioeconomic integration.
In terms of security, Côte d’Ivoire remains
concerned about the resurgence of violence, as well as
by the killings of some former FARC-EP leaders. We
welcome the determination of the Colombian authorities
to pay close attention to these issues in order to ensure
the safety of all Colombians without exception.
In view of the complexity of the ongoing peace
process, my delegation reiterates the need for the
Security Council to fully support the peace and
reconciliation efforts of the Government of Colombia.
My country commends the commitment and work done
in Colombia by the Verification Mission and the United
Nations country team. We welcome in particular the
actions undertaken in the areas of peacebuilding,
gender equality, child protection and ethnic and
cultural integration. My delegation also welcomes the
close cooperation between the Verification Mission and
the United Nations country team, which was deemed
necessary in consolidating and sustaining the efforts of
the Colombian authorities for lasting peace.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire would like to assure the
Colombian authorities of its support and determination
to work with them to ensure the success of the peace
and reconciliation process in Colombia.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): On behalf of my people
and my Government, as well as on my own behalf, I
wish to join the other members of the Security Council
18-11481

19/04/2018

Colombia

in expressing my sadness at the tragic and unexpected
loss of our good friend, Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue.
We extend our condolences to his family and friends,
the Côte d’Ivoire mission staff and to the people and the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire. We have all lost a good
friend, a great colleague and an excellent diplomat.
I personally mourn because I feel that I have lost a
brother.
Turning to the subject of today’s meeting, Bolivia
welcomes the presence of the Vice-President of the
Republic of Colombia, Mr. Óscar Adolfo Naranjo
Trujillo; the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Ms. María
Ángela Holguín Cuéllar; and our sister Ms. Mejía Vélez,
Permanent Representative of Colombia. Likewise,
we wish to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission in Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault, for sharing
with the Council the quarterly report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia (S/2018/279). We also wish to thank
Mr. Arnault for his excellent work, his commitment,
his dedication to this issue and for his professionalism.
We also welcome the presence at this meeting of the
many ambassadors and representatives from my region
of Latin America and the Caribbean. Their presence
demonstrates the unwavering commitment of my entire
region to the peace process.
In the various missions carried out by the Security
Council during the past two administrations, Bolivia
has seen the peace process in Colombia held up as an
example by several leaders from around the world.
The determination and commitment of both parties
throughout that time has shown that it is possible to
achieve results that many deemed impossible. They
ended half a century of war and gave hope to millions of
Colombians living in fear. They made it possible for the
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) to surrender
their weapons and become a political party; and they
have turned Colombia into a point of reference for other
countries going through similar situations.
The participation of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) in the 11 March
legislative elections despite the obstacles is a historic
event and a significant step forward in the transition
of Colombia from conflict to peace. The peace process
today is perhaps confronting the most difficult
challenges since its start. Frustration, a sense of
uncertainty and hate speech are on the rise in the face

S/PV. 8238

of the upcoming elections and issues that neither the
Government nor FARC have been able to confront.
In spite of all that, hearing the President of Colombia
and the leader of FARC reiterate their unshakeable
commitment to the process sustains the hope of all
those who trust that Colombia has embraced a path to
peace from which there is no turning back.
There are disagreements that will not disappear
overnight. The war has left consequences that cannot
be easily resolved and that do not allow the people that
have lived in conflict to flourish fully. However, after
seven attempts at dialogue over many years, Colombia
finally reached a Peace Agreement that satisfied
the needs of both parties and turned to the Security
Council to support its implementation. The trust placed
in the Council demonstrates the importance of this
United Nations organ for the world. If the peace process
does not move ahead, it will not be not only a failure
for Colombia but for all of us. It will be a failure for
negotiation, which is one of the most important political
tools that make it possible for humankind to peacefully
resolve their disputes. That is one of the fundamental
values on which the Organization is based.
Six months ago, we began the most complicated
phase of the implementation of the Final Agreement
for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and
Lasting Peace, which is the political, economic and
social reintegration into society of former FARC-EP
combatants. We commend the measures devised by
the Government to overcome pending issues in the
areas of legal, security and socioeconomic guarantees.
However, it is important to step up efforts to accelerate
the implementation of those measures.
First and foremost, Bolivia is of the view that to
guarantee appropriate reintegration into civilian life,
it is essential to comply fully with what is set out in
the agreement in terms of legal reintegration. We urge
progress in certifying and applying amnesty measures
for the approximately 400 former FARC-EP members
who remain imprisoned. We also underscore the start
of the activities of a Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
It is important to uphold the scope of the Special
Jurisdiction so that the victims at the centre of these
efforts can access justice and truth.
Secondly, it is essential to strengthen security in
the areas that have been most affected by the conflict.
The increase during the reporting period in the
number of murders of social leaders, former FARC-

18-1148115/21

S/PV.8238

Colombia

EP members and their family members are alarming.
Most of the killings have taken place outside the areas
previously controlled by FARC-EP, which means that
it is important that the authorities provide security
guarantees to surrounding zones.
Thirdly, it is important to implement concrete
measures to make progress in comprehensive rural
reform. We believe that formalizing access to land is
essential to guarantee stable and lasting peace. That
could bolster the trust of the former combatants in the
reintegration process.
With regard to the process of negotiations with
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional, we would like to
express our support for the resumption of dialogue.
That should lead to the establishment of a definitive
cessation of hostilities and a process that makes it
possible to achieve just and lasting peace.
In conclusion, we would like to highlight the
commitment, dedication and work being carried
out daily by Special Representative Arnault and the
entire Mission team. We would also like to reiterate
the wholehearted support of Bolivia for the peace
process led by the Government of Colombia and
FARC. We underscore the conviction and commitment
demonstrated by President Juan Manuel Santos
Calderón and the leaders of FARC to consolidate peace
in Colombia. The peace that is being built is not only
the birthright of the Colombian people; it has become
the heritage of the entire world.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to join other colleagues who
preceded me to convey my condolences for the passing
of our colleague and friend Ambassador Bernard TanohBoutchoue, Permanent Representative of Côte d’Ivoire.
We will truly miss him. He was always a smiling
and loving friend. We will miss his presence today
and in future. Bernard served his country with high
professionalism. He was a distinguished diplomat whom
I knew for more than 20 years at the United Nations. In
my name and on behalf of my colleagues in the Kuwaiti
Mission, and on behalf of the Government of the State
of Kuwait, allow me to express our condolences to the
family of Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, his
colleagues in the Permanent Mission, his friends as
well as the Government of Côte d’Ivoire.
Turning to the topic at hand, I would like at the
outset to welcome the participation of the Vice-President
and the Foreign Minister of Colombia in this meeting.
16/21

19/04/2018

Their presence here today is a clear indication of the
interest shown by the Colombian Government in
achieving a durable and stable peace in Colombia. I
also thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, for his valuable
briefing and comprehensive presentation on the most
prominent achievements made as well as the challenges
that face the peace process in Colombia. We take this
opportunity to renew our support for the Colombian
peace process, which will be an example to draw upon
in order to resolve other conflicts before us.
I would like to focus on three main aspects:
first, the current political developments; secondly,
the reintegration of former members of the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del
Pueblo (FARC-EP); and, thirdly, the role of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia.
With regard to current political developments, the
results of the parliamentary elections held last month
are a clear indication of how serious the Colombian
Government and parties to the conflict are about
achieving a durable and stable peace in Colombia.
That has always been one of the aspirations of the
Colombian people. The success of the elections, with the
participation of the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común (FARC) political party, previously FARCEP, and the increase in participation by 5.2 per
cent — or approximately 3.6 million voters — constitute
an important stage in the reintegration of the party into
the political scene after its members had directed their
weapons against the Government for over 50 years.
This is an additional step in the transition of Colombia
from conflict to peace and stability.
We call on all political parties to participate in the
presidential elections next month in order to consolidate
sound and comprehensive political practices. We also
value and encourage the resumption of the peace
talks that started on 15 March 2018 in Quito between
the Colombian Government and the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional.
As for the reintegration of former members of
FARC-EP, now the Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria
del Común, we stress the important role played by
the Colombian Government in cooperation with
United Nations agencies, such as the United Nations
Development Programme, UN-Women and the United
Nations Mine Action Service, as well as international
18-11481

19/04/2018

Colombia

non-governmental organizations, in implementing the
Peace Agreement and build capacities. The Colombian
Government has issued a number of decrees on the
Special Jurisdiction actions and the creation of a
Special Unit for the Search for Persons Deemed as
Missing, estimated to number 60,000 people, due to the
conflict. All those important steps will help enhance
trust between the relevant parties.
It is now essential that needed measures be taken
in relation to security, legal, social and economic
guarantees to protect and reintegrate former FARCEP members into civil society as stated in the Peace
Agreement, given that violence has again erupted
in the most affected areas. Three members of the
Ecuadorian press were killed recently. We stress that
there is an urgent need to protect media personnel and
humanitarian workers.
In conclusion, we would like to commend the great
efforts of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, led by Mr. Jean Arnault, in coordination
with national, regional and local authorities, civil
society organizations, the private sector and the
international community. The Mission has played
a positive role in enhancing dialogue with women’s
associations in cooperation with UN-Women, and has
provided protection to children through a reintegration
programme for children associated with former FARCEP members.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): We have received the
news of the sudden and completely untimely passing
of Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue with
deep sadness and disbelief. On behalf of Poland,
our Permanent Representative, Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka, and our entire delegation, let me express
our heartfelt condolences to the family of Ambassador
Tanoh-Boutchoue and the entire team of the Côte
d’Ivoire Mission. We will remember Bernard as a great
diplomat and a cordial friend and colleague. He served
Côte d’Ivoire with grace, wisdom and dignity. We will
miss him deeply.
I now turn to the topic of today’s discussion. I would
like to warmly welcome His Excellency Mr. Óscar
Naranjo Trujillo, Vice-President of Colombia, and
Her Excellency Ms. María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. I would also
like to thank our briefer, Mr. Jean Arnault, for a very
informative briefing.

S/PV. 8238

With parliamentary elections completed and the
presidential elections just around the corner, we are
approaching a decisive point in the Colombian peace
process, which has been an undeniable success for that
country’s society, the Colombian authorities as well
as for the United Nations community. Poland fully
supports the implementation of the Peace Agreement
and commends every effort made by the people
involved in the process — from the former guerillas
now establishing farms in Pondores to the brave police
officers on the streets of Medellín to the officials
in Bogotá.
The legislative elections that took place on 11 March
were Colombia’s most peaceful in over 50 years.
Voting and political participation reached new heights
in virtually every department, showing the visible
positive impact of the disarmament of over 90 per cent
of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de ColombiaEjército del Pueblo (FARC-EP). In addition, the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional has upheld a temporary
unilateral ceasefire with the Government. Thanks to
the Peace Agreement, 10 seats in Congress will now be
taken by the representatives of the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común (FARC) political party.
FARC’s political transition should soon bear fruit.
Unfortunately, despite the fact that less than a
year has elapsed since the disarmament of FARC-EP,
there is growing mistrust on the part of ex-combatants
that the Government will fail to completely fulfil its
commitments to them. We should be aware that the
positive momentum may be gradually fading away.
While awaiting appropriate legislative action, no
land has been transferred to the collective agricultural
projects. More than 600 FARC-EP members remain in
prison due to bureaucratic delays in the implementation
of the amnesty law. Development programmes
and productive projects in the countryside should
be approved, implemented and funded in a more
coordinated way and without further delays. We
reiterate the need to adopt a national reintegration
plan linking reintegration to development. We strongly
believe that the landmark decree enabling access to
land ownership to former combatants will offer after
its adoption the strongest incentive for a majority of
former FARC-EP members, vastly helping them in the
process of reintegration.
We welcome the recent progress made in the
implementation of the Peace Agreement, in particular

18-1148117/21

S/PV.8238

Colombia

the setting up of the special transitional justice
courts and the Commission on Truth, Coexistence
and Non-Repetition. Police and military casualties
have dropped, and the number of internal internally
displaced persons has fallen significantly. At the same
time, homicide rates remain largely unchanged, and
violence in former FARC-EP strongholds increased
dramatically in the first months of 2018.
It is also worrying that the cultivation of illicit
crops is steadily increasing. Many families have
joined the crop substitution process, but little progress
has been made in strengthening local markets for
alternative products or in rural road construction. We
cannot ignore the lack of coordination between the crop
substitution programme and the Government’s forced
eradication efforts. Those issues are undermining trust
between the Government and local communities.
As we have stated before, current reintegration
efforts lack a gender perspective and comprehensive
initiatives made especially for FARC-EP women.
Durable peace can be achieved only when all
people — women and men — are equally and in a
meaningful way involved in the peace process.
In conclusion, Poland supports the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, which continues to
play a vital role in supporting the Peace Agreement. We
also commend the role of the United Nations country
team and every United Nations agency for being
present on the ground. We note in particular the role of
the United Nations Mine Action Service, which aims
at bringing an end to the suffering of Colombians as
a result of the widespread presence of landmines and
explosive remnants of war.
We believe that the stakes for peace in Columbia
are higher than ever. Poland strongly supports the
Colombian Government’s efforts to make the peace
process a success.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): I would like to begin this statement by
remembering my brother and friend, Mr. Bernard
Tanoh-Boutchoue. I had the good fortune of sitting
next to Bernard during these three and a half months
of our presence in the Security Council, during which
time we served each other glasses of water and cough
drops and relayed jokes and thoughts about the high and
complex responsibility we shared as representatives
of our respective countries on the Security Council. I
was able to measure and assess the very high quality
18/21

19/04/2018

of Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue as a person. He was jovial,
friendly, simple, humble, a great professional diplomat
and a person who, once one knew him, one had the
impression of having known him for years. His sudden
physical disappearance is a great blow to the diplomatic
community of the United Nations in general and to
the Group of African States and the African members
of the Council in particular. We express our deepest
condolences to his bereaved family, his compatriots and
the Government of Côte d’Ivoire. May the Almighty
Lord take him to his breast. May my dear friend and
brother rest in peace.
I wish to welcome His Excellency the Vice-President
of Colombia, Mr. Óscar Adolfo Naranjo Trujillo, and
Her Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Ms. María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar, and to
thank them for being present at this meeting. Their
presence is a testament to the great importance they
attach to this issue.
Our delegation appreciates the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia (S/2018/279), which
has just been presented to us by Special Representative
Mr. Jean Arnault. We commend him for the important,
clear and detailed information he has just given us,
but also for the arduous and difficult work he and his
team are undertaking in Colombia in the framework the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia for
the political, economic and social integration of former
members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP), as well as to
guarantee their security and that of the communities
affected by the conflict in Colombia.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea commends the
progress achieved in the Colombian political process,
including the holding of legislative elections on
11 March, which represented an important step in the
transition of Fuerza Alternativa Revolucionaria del
Común from weapons to politics and in Colombia’s
transition from conflict to peace. The success in terms
of participation is an endorsement by the Colombian
people of the peace process and a statement that the
process is irreversible. We hope that the same spirit
will prevail in the upcoming presidential elections,
and that political actors will demonstrate maturity
and good political sense and help to consolidate that
political process.
18-11481

19/04/2018

Colombia

The development of events in Colombia is a good
example of how frank, direct and inclusive negotiations
can lead to resolving a problem when there is a sincere
will to move forward and leave 50 years of conflict
behind. The international community’s support in that
process has been and continues to be very important.
Challenges remain, such as the security of former
FARC-EP combatants in some areas of the country,
their socioeconomic reintegration and reinsertion,
the lack of a functioning legal framework providing
them access to land, the murders of community and
social leaders and so forth. Those aspects must be
taken into account, as they could delay the permanent
strengthening of the process.
The Government of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea commends the Colombian authorities on the
measures they have taken to secure the process, such as
strengthening security measures in the most affected
areas, the investigation of the murders of former
combatants and community leaders by the Office of the
Attorney General and the adoption of legal measures
regulating access to land, which are all steps in the
right direction. The resumption of talks with the
Ejército de Liberación Nacional is a very positive step,
which should lead to the complete restoration of peace
in Colombia. That would undoubtedly help the country
to explore and develop its full economic potential.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea calls on the
Security Council and the international community to
continue to fully support the peace process in Colombia
and to respect the leadership of the Government
and the people of Colombia in that process with
constructive assistance.
In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
reiterates its support for the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia and all Colombian actors and
encourages them to continue their efforts to fully
achieve irreversible peace in the beautiful country that
is Colombia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Peru.
We thank Mr. Jean Arnault, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, for his
briefing. We reiterate our full support for the important
work he is doing with his team. I would like to welcome
in particular the participation of Vice-President

S/PV. 8238

Óscar Adolfo Naranjo Trujillo, Minister for Foreign
Affairs María Ángela Holguín Cuéllar and Permanent
Representative María Emma Mejía Vélez, and
underscore their commitment and the important role
they are playing in supporting peace.
Peru reaffirms its determined support for the peace
process in the sisterly Republic of Colombia. We would
like to note the courage of its Government in resolving
the long-standing conflict with the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) through a negotiated solution, which
enjoyed international support during negotiations and
the Security Council’s commitment in implementing
the Peace Agreement.
Building peace in Colombia is of course a complex
process, and as such it faces major challenges. We
therefore highlight the Government’s efforts to adapt
national legislation to the Peace Agreement; to ensure
security; to entrench the State’s presence throughout
its territory and to promote the socioeconomic
reintegration of former combatants, especially in rural
areas. We also want to encourage the authorities and
the people of Colombia to persevere in those efforts, to
speed up the implementation of the Peace Agreement
and to remain united in building sustainable peace.
Democracy and participation are key elements
of peacebuilding. We welcome the massive turn-out by
citizens in the parliamentary elections last month, which
serves to underscore and confirm their democratic
traditions. We are hopeful about the preparations for
the upcoming presidential elections. We welcome the
resumption of dialogue between the Government and
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional and encourage the
continuation of talks.
As already stated, the process is complex and
replete with challenges. In spite of significant progress
made and the political will of the Government to
implement the Peace Agreement, there are concerns
about the murders reported outside of the training
and reintegration areas. We underscore our strong
condemnation of the murder of three Ecuadorian
journalists, who were kidnapped by FARC-EP
dissidents. We extend our condolences and solidarity
to their relatives and to the sister nation of Ecuador.
We believe that it is crucial to stand up resolutely to the
enemies of peace. The validity of the rule of law is a
core pillar of sustaining peace. We therefore underscore
that fact that the Peace Agreement guarantees access to

18-1148119/21

S/PV.8238

Colombia

justice for all parties to the conflict in Colombia and
does not in any way encourage impunity.
We believe that Colombians can be optimistic about
the future. Peace has led to a considerable increase in
investment and tourism and a significant decrease in
the murder rate. Colombia is now a vibrant country
that is lucky to be given a second chance. According
to a Colombian tourism advertisement, the only risk is
wanting to stay.
We would like to conclude by voicing our support
for the Verification Mission and for Mr. Arnault’s
work, as well as to underscore the unity of the Security
Council with regard to the Colombian peace process.
We reiterate Peru’s commitment to sustaining peace in
that sister country and the consolidation of the Latin
America and the Caribbean as a zone of peace.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the Vice-President of Colombia.
Mr. Naranjo Trujillo (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): Before I proceed, on behalf of the Colombian
people, I would like to extend our condolences on the
death of the Ambassador of Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. Bernard
Tanoh-Boutchoue, who was a unconditional friend of
peace and a pillar of support for Colombia. We deeply
regret his passing.
I would like to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on
your efforts and those of your delegation during your
presidency of the Security Council. Similarly, I thank
all of the members of the Council for their unwavering
support for peace in Colombia. That support has been
confirmed through the holding of today’s meeting.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his balanced
and objective report (S/2018/279). I also thank his
Special Representative, Mr. Jean Arnault, for his
committed, professional and admirable leadership, for
which the Colombian people and the entire region will
be forever grateful.
Peace in Colombia also means peace in the
continent, our Latin American region. Rather than be
discouraged about the underlying challenges to building
peace, we reiterate our willingness to persist. Now is
not the time to give up. Now is the time to continue to
build peace. We have always said that seeking peace is
a complex and difficult task. It took decades to create
an environment conducive to negotiations. We also said
20/21

19/04/2018

that building peace through a negotiated solution to the
conflict was also a complex and difficult challenge,
but we achieved it. We now declare that building peace
requires maximum energy and national will to ensure
that it is not just a phenomenal value but an indelible
one. Such peace is built day by day.
To that end, with the leadership of the President of
Colombia, we reiterate before the Council today, based
on the situation on the ground and on the conclusions
of the Secretary-General when he underscored in his
report that considerable progress had been made — for
example, the laying down of weapons and the move
towards legality by those who had posed a threat to
Colombian institutions in the past — as well as when
he pointed out the remaining challenges, that those
challenges are being addressed as a matter of priority.
During today’s meeting — and we very much appreciate
such impartiality — several problems that could be
viewed through the prism of the glass being half empty
were raised. What we still must do to consolidate
peace begins with safeguarding the lives, integrity
and freedom of our country’s community leaders and
human rights defenders throughout our territory.
That situation highlights a major contradiction in
Colombia. We note that, although we have achieved the
lowest murder rate in the past 42 years, there has been
an increase in the number of leaders being killed. Now
the conflict has ended, they have called for respect for
the rule of law and speak out against illegal activities
conducted during the armed conflict. It is sad to see
the rural leaders who promote crop substitution being
threatened by drug-related transnational crime. That is
why I would like to reiterate that, instead of lowering
our guard, undermining institutional capacity in an
attempt to control the entire country and continuing to
combat crime, Colombia is building capacity with the
help of its long-standing allies. We do so because we
understand that the principle of shared responsibility
can work to rid the region of organized crime.
However, we face challenges that go beyond
security itself and that pertain to those who laid
down their weapons and chose democracy. Political
participation is at the very core of consolidating
peace. That is why we support many of the statements
made by Ambassadors here in the Council today.
They underscored the fact that, for the first time, an
organization that has become a political party and
laid down its weapons after half a century of fighting
is taking part in elections and playing by the rules
18-11481

19/04/2018

S/PV. 8238

Colombia

of democracy. It is true that the Fuerza Alternativa
Revolucionaria del Común, the political party, in its
first elections, received fewer votes than expected
but, at the same time, it is also true the institutional
participatory framework has broadened considerably
and has led to unprecedented parliamentary elections,
with more than 2 million additional votes, as compared
to previous elections. That points to a genuine and
inclusive democracy, in particular with regard to those
who laid down their weapons and embraced democratic
values and principles. The Government will continue
to provide such guarantees for political participation.
However, the report on the Mission also underscores
the need to move forward so that the conditions exist
for employment, social and economic reintegration.
Another key issue is that of land. I would like to state
here that we are moving towards the issuance of a
final decree that states that those who reintegrate into
society after laying down their weapons will be on
equal footing with members of communities that were
most affected by the conflict in order to have access
to land and receive support for productive ventures as
former fighters-cum-farmers. We are making progress
to ensure that this transition to lawful order is a
resounding success.
In that regard, today we can say that approximately
12,000 former combatants of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) have opened bank accounts, received their
basic monthly income and signed up for the national
health-care, social and pension systems. Five thousand
of those ex-combatants have laid down their weapons
to take up paper and pen as they commence training
and schooling processes. That means that we already
have a significant group undergoing a real process of
transformation.
We are moving forward in that, irrespective of the
succeeding Government in a democracy, today, with our
elections forthcoming, regardless of the Administration
that succeeds us, it will have a clear and sound road map
towards entrenching an irreversible peace in Colombia,
the benefits of which will extend to the entire region.
We cannot deny that we face challenges and difficulties
of a historic magnitude — I am referring to the great
tragedy that our nation suffered as it endured the
scourge of drug-trafficking. For almost 40 years, we
witnessed how the mafias undermined institutional

stability, compromised the safety and security of
communities and instigated, supported and promoted
illegal crops and requisitioning.
Before the Council, I would like to say that
Columbia has channelled its capacities, which were
previously limited to containing the war machine
during the conflict with FARC-EP, to make organized
crime a joint priority. That is how we are able to reach
areas that, over decades, had no Government presence
and expel the ruthless drug traffickers who have caused
so much damage. In that regard, I would like to reaffirm
our commitment in solidarity to our neighbouring
and friendly countries that they can rest assured that
Colombia fully assumes its responsibility to not allow
or tolerate such crime.
Furthermore, we are making strides in
peacebuilding, which means bridging the gap between
the rural parts of the country and its urban parts, for a
strong Colombia that was, as I mentioned, confined by
the armed conflict, leaving in its wake gaps of inequality
that we need to bridge. For that reason, to build peace in
Colombia today it is not enough to only comply with the
peace agreements, but we must also adopt an agenda
of reform and change, led by President Juan Manuel
Santos Calderón, that would enable the Colombian
people, with their silent revolutions, to succeed. For
example, presently 30,000 young people — from the
humblest of backgrounds but also the brightest of our
country — have received full scholarships to the best
universities in our country. That revolution has also
seen 5 million Colombians lifted out of abject poverty,
as we have been negotiating and building peace over
the years. We believe that peace should translate to
greater equality, prosperity and education.
In that connection, I would like to express my
appreciation for the various forms of support we have
received. I reiterate that we hope to be able to continue
to count on a Council that, in the face of difficulties,
understands those difficulties and that does not rest on
its laurels but, rather, encourages us to continue moving
forward in overcoming challenges.
The President (spoke in Spanish): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now
invite Council members to informal consultations to
continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.05 p.m.

18-1148121/21
