A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/151
7 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 94
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/49/752)]

49/151.

Importance of the universal realization of the right
of peoples to self-determination and of the speedy
granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples for the effective guarantee and observance of
human rights

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its faith in the importance of the implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples
contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Reaffirming the obligation of Member States to comply with the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of the
United Nations regarding the exercise of the right to self-determination by
peoples under colonial and foreign domination,
Recalling the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, adopted by the
World Conference on Human Rights on 25 June 1993, 1/
Reaffirming the national unity and territorial integrity of the Comoros,
1.
Calls upon all States to implement fully and faithfully all the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations regarding the exercise of the right
to self-determination and independence by peoples under colonial and foreign
domination;
2.
Reaffirms the importance of the universal realization of the right
of peoples to self-determination, national sovereignty and territorial
integrity and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples as a condition for the full enjoyment of all human rights;

1/
95-76537

A/CONF.157/24 (Part I), chap. III.
/...

A/RES/49/151
Page 2
3.
Calls upon those Governments which do not recognize the right to
self-determination and independence of all peoples still under colonial
domination, alien subjugation and foreign occupation to do so;
4.
Fully supports the Secretary-General in his efforts to implement
the plan for the settlement of the question of Western Sahara by organizing,
in cooperation with the Organization of African Unity and in accordance with
relevant Security Council resolutions, a referendum for the self-determination
of the people of Western Sahara;
5.
Notes the contacts between the Government of the Comoros and the
Government of France in the search for a just solution to the problem of the
integration of the Comorian island of Mayotte into the Comoros, in accordance
with the resolutions of the Organization of African Unity and the United
Nations on the question;
6.
Strongly condemns the continued violation of the human rights of
the peoples still under colonial domination and alien subjugation;
7.
Calls for a substantial increase in all forms of assistance given
by all States, United Nations organs, the specialized agencies and
non-governmental organizations to the victims of racism and racial
discrimination;
8.
Demands the immediate and unconditional release of all persons who
have not committed crimes against humanity and who are detained or imprisoned
as a result of their struggle for self-determination and independence, full
respect for their fundamental individual rights and compliance with article 5
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2/ under the terms of which no
one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment;
9.
Expresses its appreciation for the material and other forms of
assistance that peoples under colonial rule continue to receive from
Governments, organizations of the United Nations system and other
intergovernmental organizations, and calls for a substantial increase in that
assistance;
10.
Urges all States, the specialized agencies and other competent
organizations of the United Nations system to do their utmost to ensure the
full implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples and to intensify their efforts to support
peoples under colonial and foreign domination in their just struggle for
self-determination and independence;
11.
Decides to consider this question at its fiftieth session under
the item entitled "Right of peoples to self-determination".
94th plenary meeting
23 December 1994

2/

Resolution 217 A (III).
