Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

first session, in 1964, and contained in annex A.T.2 of
the Final Act of the Conference ;21
2. Requests that the Convention on Transit Trade
of Land-locked States be signed by 31 December 1965
and ratified or acceded to as soon as possible in order
to promote the economic and social development of
the land-locked countries through international trade;
3. Requests the Secretary--General of the United
Nations and the Secretarv-General of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development to be
guided by the terms of the present resolution and the
nbove-mentioned Convention in assisting the landlocked countries to overcome their difficulties regarding
transit trade.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2087 (XX). Financing of economic development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1318 (XIII) of 12 December
l 958 entitled "Promotion of the international flow of
private capital" and 1710 (XVI) of 19 December 1961
fntitled "United N ::itions Development Decade: a programme for international economic co-operation",
Taking into account the recommendations contained
in anneX: A.IV.2 of the Final Act of the United Nations
Conference on Trade nn<l Development, 22
Having considered the recommendations on the promotion of private foreign investment in developing
countries, contained in annex A.JV.12 of the Final Act
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, 23
Noting with interest the fourth and fifth reports of
the Secretary-General on the promotion of the international flow of private capital,2 i
Rea.ffirming that private foreign investment may contribute to the economic diversification and development
of private-capital-importing developing countries and to
the accelerated transfer of technical and managerial
know-how to these countries, where such investments
are made in terms that are satisfactory both to thr
capital-exporting countries ;md the capital-importing
countries,
1. Asks Governments to give serious consideration
to the recommendations contained in annex A.IV.12
of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development;
2. Calls upon Governments to give due consideration
to the measures and actions for the promotion of private
foreign investment in developing countries recommended by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, always taking into account the relevant laws and regulations of each country, and the
need of respect for the sovereignty of the host countries ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to keep in view
the above-mentioned measures and actions in the preparation of his further studies on the promotion of the
international flow of private capital, as. called for under
the annex mentioned in paragraph 1 above, as well as
under General Assembly resolution 1318 (XIII) and
21 Ibid., p. 25.
22 Jbid., p. 43.

49.
Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Thirty-seventh Session, Annexes, agenda item 10, documents
E/3905 and Add.1; ibid., Thirty-ninth Session, Annexes, agenda
item 8, documents E/4038 and Add.I.
23 Ibid., p.

24 Official

27

Economic and Social Council resolution 922 (XXXIV)
of 3 August 1962;
4. Looks forward to the early publication of the
~eerrt:1ry~General's findings in this field.
1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2088 (XX). Accelerated flow of capital and technical assistance to the developing countries
The General Assembly,
Recallin_r; its resolution 1938 (XVIII) of 11 December 1963, which requested the Secretary-General to
review the conceptual and methodological problems in
the measurement of capit.11 flow and aid and to submit
proposals for making the presentation of the relevant
data as meaningful and purposeful as possible,
Tahng into account the recommendation contained
in annex A.IV.2, section ITT, of the Final Act of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development2" that each economically advanced country should
endeavour to supply financial rrsources to the developing countries of a minimum net amount approaching as
nearly as possible 1 per cent of its national income,
having regard, however, to the special position of
certain countries which are net importers of capital,
Taking also into accri11nt the recommendations contained in annex A.TV.4 of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development26 setting forth the objectives to be met in removing the diffirnltie~ experienced by the developing countries under
aid programmes of government-to-government transfer
of capital through lwns and in the availability of supplier,;' credits to developing countries, owing, inter alia,
to short periods of repayment, high rates of interest,
limitations on the tying of credits to specific projects
and to purchases from countries providing the capital,
N otinq the recommendations contained in annex
A. T\'.S °of the Final Act of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 27 relating to the
prohlc>m of debt service in developing countries and the
fact that the servicing of external debt constitutes an
increasing burden on their resources,
Takinq note of Economic and Social Council resolution 10~8 A (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965, which recommended that the Governments of developed Member
States give early and sympathetic consideration to
making their lending terms substantially more favourable to the developing countries by such methods as
extending the period of repayment, reducing interest
rates and providing a period of grace for both interest
and repayment of principal,
Taking note also of Economic nnd Social Council
resolution 1088 B (XXXIX) of 30 July 1965 regarding
the financing of economic development and, in particular. the problem of concepts and methodology in
the measurement of the flow of capital and nid to
developing countries,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1089 (XXXIX) of 31 July 1965, which, in paragraph 1, urged the States Members of the United
Nations and members of the specialized agencies and
of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and particularly thP developed countries:
~ See Proccedi11_q:; /1( the United Nations Conferenre on
Trad£' and Development, vol. I, Pinal Act and Report (United
'-rations publication. ~a!Ps No.: 64.II.B.11), p. 43.
26 Ibid., p. 44.
27 Ibid., p. 46.

General Assembly-Twentieth Session

28

( a) To take all possible steps i111mediately to increase the effective flow of international capital to developing countries to the level indicated in the recommendation contained in annex A.IV.2 of the Final Act
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, in all cases where that level has not yet
been reached,
( b) To devise such terms and conditions that the
servicing of this expanded flow of capital does ~10t
impose an unduly heavy burden on the developm_g
countries and thereby jeopardize the prospects of their
further growth,
Bearing in inind the inadequacy of the data on capital
flows and economic assistance gathered by international
organizations for .carrying out the type of analysis of
foreign financing that would be required to provide
a regular appraisal of the factors influencing economic
growth in the United Nations Development Decade,
Having considered the Secretary-General's reports
entitled "International flow of long-term capital and
official donations, 1961-1964", 28 and "Measurement of
the flow of long-term capital and official dvnations: concepts and methodology", 29
l. Expresses concern at the fact that the net flow
of international assistance and long-term capital to the
developing countries has failed to attain the necessary
increase in recent years, thereby retarding the progress
towar·ds the attainment of the target of 1 per cent laid
down in the recommendation contained in annex
A.IV.2, section III, of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
2. Reiterates its request to the developed countries
to take urgent measures to accelerate and ensure the
flow of international assistance and long-term capital
to the developing countries so as to attain the abovementioned target;
3. Urges the developed countries, in framing their
policies with regard to the terms of lending to the
developing countries, to bear in mind the objectives
set forth in annex A.IV .4 of the Final Act of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop•·
ment in order to secure more meaningful and progressive financial co-operation with the developing countries
and to ensure greater efficiency in aid programmes ;
4. Requests the competent United Nations bodies
and/or other international financial institutions to take
urgent steps to implement the recommendations con-•
tained in annex A.IV.5 of the Final Act of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development relating
to the problem of servicing the external debt of the
developing countries ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue the
study requested of him in its resolution 1938 (XVIII)
and to submit his proposals to the Economic and
Social Council at its forty-first session and to the
General Assembly at its twenty-first session.

1404th plenary meeting,
20 December 1965.
2089 (XX). Establishment of the United Nation!!
Organization for Industrial Development

The General Assembly,
Considering that the declaration contained in General
Assembly resolution 1940 (XVTIT) of 11 December
1963 on the need to carry out changes in the existing
2BE/4079/Rev.l and Add.1.
211 A/~7'J2.

United Nations machinery so as to provide an organization capable of i11teusifyiug, concentrating and c:-..pediting United Nations efforts for industrial development received decided support at all meetings whid1
have been held since then nn this subject hv varirnts
United Nat ions bodirs,
Bearing in mind the recommendation made by the
Committee for Industrial Development at its fourth and
fifth sessions that a specialized agency for indnstria 1
development should be promptly established,
Taking into account the proposal contained in the
report of the Advisory Committee of Experts 30 regarding the establishment of a United N atiom industrial
<lrve lopment organization,
Taking also into account the recommrndatiou contained in annex A.TIT. 1 of the Final Act of the Unitrd
Nations Conference on Trade and Development 31 that
thr General Assembly should take suitable ac~ion wi_th
a view to establishing a sprcialized agency for md11st nal
development,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1081 F (XXX1X) of 30 July 1965, in which the
Council noted with appreciation the report prepared
hv the Secretary-General on the scope, structure and
fimctions of a specialized agency for industrial development,32 and Council resolution 1030 B (XX.XVTT) nf
13 August 1964,
Taking note of the widespread desire for a comprehensive organization for industrial devrlopment,
1. Decides to establish within the United Nations
an autonomous organization for the promotion of industrial development to be known as the United Nations
Organization for Tndustrial Development :
2. Decides that the administrative and research activities of this organization shall be financed from the
United Nations regular budget, and its operational
activities shall be financed from voluntary contributions
to it by Governments of the States Members of tlw
United Nations and members of the specialized agencies
and of the International Atomic Energy Agency, as well
as through participation in the United Nations Development P,ogramme on the .snme has is as other
participating organizations:
3. Decides that the principal organ of the organization shall be the Industrial Development Board;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to make arrnngements, in accordance with Article 101 of the Charter
of the United Nations, for the immediate establishment
of an adequate, permanent and full-time secretariat,
as a part of the organization, which will avail itself of
the other appropriate facilitirs of the Secretariat of
thr United Nations;
S. Decides that the secretariat of the organization
shall be headed bv an Executive Director, who shall he
appointed by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and whose appointment shall be confirmed hy
tlw General Assembly:
6. Decides to set up an Ad H oc Committee on tlw
United Nations Organization for Industrial Development, composed of thirty-six States M rmbers of the
United Nations aml members of the specialized agrncif's
30 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Cn,mril.
Thirty-sixth Session, S11pplemr11t No. 14 (E/3781), annex Vll l.
3 1 See Proceedings of the United Nations Co11fere11CP 011
Trade and Development, vol. T. Final Act and Report (Pnit, cl
Nations publication, Sales No.: 64.U.B.11), p. 'J4.
~2 Official Rrcords of thl' General AssPmbly, Twrntirl/, ',,•scion. Annr:res, agenda item 40. doc11ment A/5826.
0
