UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
PROVISIONAL
S/PV.3286
4 October 1993
ENGLISH

PROVISIONAL VERBATIM RECORD OF THE THREE THOUSAND
TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SIXTH MEETING
Held at Headquarters, New York,
on Monday, 4 October 1993, at 4 p.m.

President:

(Brazil)

Cape Verde
China
Djibouti
France
Hungary
Japan
Morocco
New Zealand
Pakistan
Russian Federation
Spain
United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
United States of America
Venezuela

Mr. BARBOSA
Mr. LI Zhaoxing
Mr. DORANI
Mr. LAMASSOURE
Mr. ERDÖS
Mr. HATANO
Mr. SNOUSSI
Mr. KEATING
Mr. MARKER
Mr. VORONTSOV
Mr. YAÑEZ BARNUEVO

Members:

Mr. Sardenberg

Sir David HANNAY
Mrs. ALBRIGHT
Mr. TAYLHARDAT

________________________________________________________________________________
This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and
interpretations of speeches in the other languages. The final text will be
printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They should be
sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned, within one
week, to the Chief, Official Records Editing Section, Office of Conference
Services, room DC2-794, 2 United Nations Plaza, and incorporated in a copy of
the record.
93-86740 (E)

S/PV.3286
2
The meeting was called to order at 4.20 p.m.
STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT
The PRESIDENT:

I should like at the outset of the meeting

to acknowledge the presence at the Council table of the Minister
for European Affairs of the French Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Alain Lamassoure, to whom, on behalf of the Council, I extend a
warm welcome.
At our last meeting, I announced that in accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior consultations, the
Security Council would meet at 4 p.m. on Tuesday, 5 October 1993,
to take a decision on the draft resolution contained in document
S/26518.

It has, however, been possible to advance the scheduling

of that meeting to this afternoon.
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA
The agenda was adopted.
UNITED NATIONS PROTECTION FORCE (UNPROFOR)
REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-GENERAL PURSUANT TO SECURITY COUNCIL
RESOLUTION 743 (1992) (S/26470 AND Add.1)
The PRESIDENT:

I should like to inform the Council that I

have received letters from the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Croatia, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda.
In conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

S/PV.3286
3
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and
Herzegovina) and Mr. Granic (Croatia) took places at the Council
table.
The PRESIDENT:

I welcome the Deputy Prime Minister and

Minister for Foreign Affairs of Croatia, His Excellency
Mr. Mate Granic, to the Security Council.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda.

The Council is meeting in accordance with the

understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them the further report of
the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution
743 (1992), contained in documents S/26470 and S/26470/Add.1.
Members of the Council also have before them document S/26518,
which contains the text of a draft resolution prepared in the
course of the Council’s prior consultations.
I should like also to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the following documents:

S/26464, letter dated

17 September 1993 from the Chargé d’Affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Yugoslavia to the United Nations addressed to
the Secretary-General; S/26468, letter dated 19 September 1993 from
the Secretary-General addressed to the President of the Security
Council; S/26491, letter dated 24 September 1993 from the Permanent
Representative of Croatia to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council; and S/26517, letter dated
30 September 1993 from the Permanent Representatives of China,
France, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America to the United
Nations addressed to the Secretary-General transmitting the text of
the statement issued on 30 September 1993 by the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the five permanent members of the Security
Council following a meeting with the Secretary-General.

S/PV.3286
4
(The President)
It is my understanding that the Security Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.

Unless I

hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolution to the vote
now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:

Brazil, Cape Verde, China, Djibouti, France,
Hungary, Japan, Morocco, New Zealand, Pakistan,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela

The PRESIDENT:

There were 15 votes in favour.

The draft

resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution 871 (1993).
I shall now call on those members of the Council who wish to
make statements following the voting.

S/PV.3286
5
Mr. LAMASSOURE (France) (interpretation from French):

It

has not been easy to negotiate this resolution, for it is not a
routine extension of the mandate of the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR).

The Council has had to take into account the

concerns of the parties and new operational needs.
Last Monday the Council heard President Tudjman submit to it a
series of requests.

The French Government understands the

disappointment and impatience of the Croatian authorities and
people.

UNPROFOR has now been deployed for a year and a half, and

yet there has been hardly any progress on the political situation
in Krajina.

Croatia still has to deal with many refugees and

displaced persons within its territory.

At the same time, we must

emphasize that the presence of UNPROFOR has made it possible to
prevent the recurrence of large-scale fighting - its first task;
and fighting would have undoubtedly recurred had the Blue Helmets
not been present on the ground.
Could the Council respond as fully as possible to Croatia’s
requests without running the risk of promising more than it could
deliver?

That is precisely what the Council has attempted to do.

The resolution we have just adopted establishes a balance between
the legitimate concerns of the Croatian Government and the means
available to the Council and to UNPROFOR.
The Croatian authorities have had the wisdom to understand
that the hoped-for improvement in the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the eventual establishment in that country of a
large-scale peace-keeping operation would have a positive impact on
the situation in their own country.

That would also enable the

international community to take a comprehensive approach to the
various stages necessary for the resolution of the conflicts in the
former Yugoslavia.
From an operational standpoint, the Secretary-General has
proposed extending to Croatia provisions relating to close air

S/PV.3286
6
(Mr. Lamassoure, France)
support which already apply to Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Given the

requirements, which we are told are purely technical, the Council
has of course not been able to take a decision on this matter
today.

However, we understand that it will be able to take action

next week.

In this connection we note the commitments given the

Council by the countries that will be involved, along with us, in
providing such protection.
Mrs. ALBRIGHT (United States of America):

Let me

congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for
this important month.
guidance.

We look forward to working under your wise

Let me also congratulate the Permanent Representative of

Venezuela for the extremely good way he led us last month, during
which there was so much work to be done.
The United States considers this action to extend the mandate
of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) essential to the
international community’s efforts to minimize the conflict in the
former Yugoslavia, to prevent it from spreading, to provide
humanitarian relief and, most important, to facilitate negotiated
solutions to all aspects of the conflict.
Although much attention today has been focused on the
operations of UNPROFOR in Croatia, it is important to emphasize
that UNPROFOR’s mandate and the effects of its extension apply with
equal importance to Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
In considering this resolution we have paid careful attention
to the views of the Government of Croatia, especially its concern
that the Vance plan has not been put into effect.
concern.

We share this

We view this resolution as an attempt to energize the

parties to begin the difficult process of implementing the plan,
and we will exert our energies to this end.

S/PV.3286
7
(Mrs. Albright, United States)
However, we must remind all of the parties to the conflict
that they bear a heavy responsibility for the failure to make
progress on the peace plan, just as they will earn the credit for
its successful implementation.

My Government cannot subscribe to

and will not accept gratuitous criticism of UNPROFOR in Croatia for
its alleged failure to implement the plan.
What is important is to look to the future, as this resolution
does, and begin the difficult work of implementing the plan in good
faith.

As a part of this process, the United States calls

specifically on the Croatian Serbs and on Serbian authorities to
show by their actions that they are prepared to work for a peaceful
resolution, in keeping with the territorial integrity of the
Republic of Croatia and the rights of all its citizens.
clear:

Let me be

the Serbian authorities must stop their interference in the

internal affairs of Croatia and must end their military, political
and other support for the Croatian Serbs.
Finally, I wish to make it clear that while this makes
UNPROFOR (Croatia) one of the subordinate commands within the
integrated command structure of UNPROFOR as a whole, the resolution
establishes no precedent for the command and control arrangements
for any peace-keeping force led by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) that might be employed to implement a peace
agreement in Bosnia.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the United

States for her kind words addressed to me.
Mr. LI Zhaoxing (China) (interpretation from Chinese):

I

should like to join my colleagues in congratulating you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month.

I am convinced that your outstanding talent and rich

experience will provide excellent guidance to the work of the
Council during this month.

I also wish to thank your predecessor,

S/PV.3286
8
(Mr. Li Zhaoxing, China)
Ambassador Taylhardat of Venezuela, whose efficiency and fruitful
work have left a very deep impression on us.
For various reasons, the United Nations Protection Force
(UNPROFOR) in the Republic of Croatia has yet to carry out its
mandate fully.

It has, none the less, played its role in

preventing the escalation of conflict and safeguarding the safety
of civilians in United Nations protected areas and areas nearby.
The Secretary-General in his report noted that the deployment of
UNPROFOR in Croatia is still helpful in containing the tension in
that region and that complete withdrawal of UNPROFOR would lead
inevitably to the escalation of conflict.

The Secretary-General

has therefore recommended that the mandate of UNPROFOR be extended
once again.

We support the recommendation of the Secretary-

General.
With regard to the deployment of United Nations peace-keeping
operations and the extension of their mandates, the precondition is
to obtain the prior request or consent from the host countries or
the parties concerned.

We have noted that the Croatian Government

has agreed to the extension of UNPROFOR’s mandate, and the
resolution just adopted reflects its request in that regard.

In

view of the foregoing, the Chinese delegation voted in favour of
the resolution.
His Excellency Mr. Qian Qichen, Vice Premier and Foreign
Minister of China, recently visited Croatia and exchanged views
with the Croatian leaders on some major issues, including that of
United Nations protected areas.

In seeking a solution to the

conflict between the Croatian Government and the local Serbian
authorities, there are two important points to be borne in mind:
first, full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Croatia and, secondly, a political solution within the framework
of the principles set out by the International Conference on the

S/PV.3286
9
(Mr. Li Zhaoxing, China)
Former Yugoslavia and the resolutions of the Security Council.

We

urge the Croatian Government and the local Serbian authorities to
settle their disputes at an early date through dialogue and
negotiations so as to ensure that UNPROFOR can soon fulfil its
mandate, in a comprehensive manner, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
China has always advocated the peaceful settlement of disputes
and opposed the use or threat of force.

UNPROFOR is deployed in

Croatia for the purpose of peace-keeping, and we are neither in
favour of invoking Chapter VII of the Charter in peace-keeping
operations, in an attempt to stop war by expanding the scope of
war, nor in favour of using sanctions as a means to resolve
conflicts.

Therefore, we have reservations on certain elements in

the resolution.

In addition, prudence should be exercised with

regard to the extension of air support to UNPROFOR in Croatia so as
to avoid further complicating the matter and adversely affecting
the political-settlement process.

S/PV.3286
10
Mr. ERDÖS (Hungary) (interpretation from French):

First I

should like to extend my delegation’s congratulations to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
Its activities, as we have seen, are off to a rather intensive
start.

By the same token, I should like to pay a tribute to the

competence with which our Venezuelan colleague, Mr. Taylhardat,
guided the work of the Council last month.
The Security Council took a decision a moment ago on the draft
resolution to extend the mandate of the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) in Croatia.

The resolution is the result of

laborious consultations and complex discussions.

The Council’s

action has resolved the problem of the immediate future of the
mandate, just as it has clearly illustrated the difficulties
arising from non-compliance with relevant resolutions of the
Council, and more particularly the serious shortcomings in the
implementation of the United Nations peace-keeping plan for
Croatia.
We fully understand the frustrations felt by the general
public and the Government of Croatia.

We are aware of the scope of

the extraordinary problems which are still pending and which have
continued to become more and more serious since the beginning of
the United Nations operation in Croatia.

Because of this, the

conditions prevailing in that country are matters for concern;
reason and restraint may break down even more, the danger of an
escalation of new armed conflicts is very real, and the
continuation of the status quo can only make more alarming an
already tense situation.

We are bound to note that one third of

Croatian national territory continues to be beyond the authority of
the Republic of Croatia, with all that that means for the daily
life of its people and for the infrastructure of the country.
With the approach of the expiration of UNPROFOR’s mandate the
Security Council found itself in a delicate situation, wishing on

S/PV.3286
11
(Mr. Erdös, Hungary)
the one hand to maintain the United Nations presence in Croatia and
on the other to meet the legitimate concerns of the Croatian side.
We welcome the fact that the Council was able to live up to the
task of the moment and to produce a text which, in the final
analysis, was mutually acceptable, both to the Security Council and
to the Republic of Croatia.
Hungary voted in favour of the resolution because in the
current circumstances it wished to maintain UNPROFOR operations on
the territory of Croatia and to do everything possible to prevent a
resurgence of armed hostilities along its southern borders.

It

gave its support to the resolution because it sees in it also a
faithful reflection of the special problems facing the Republic of
Croatia and the entire region concerned.

It hopes thereby to help

to create there the necessary conditions for a peaceful settlement
of all disputes on the basis of respect for the principles of
territorial integrity and the rights of ethnic communities.
It also expects that the Council’s action today on the
extension of UNPROFOR’s mandate might have a favourable impact on
the diplomatic process designed to achieve a just and equitable
solution in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Given the decision taken today by the Council to extend
UNPROFOR’s mandate for a longer period than in the past, we shall
expect, two months after the adoption of the resolution, a report
from the Secretary-General on developments affecting Croatia, from
which we will then have to draw conclusions as part of a review of
the mandate of UNPROFOR.

In this, as in the other parts of

Yugoslavia, the Security Council cannot shirk its responsibilities,
responsibilities incumbent upon it under the United Nations
Charter.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Hungary for

the kind words he addressed to me and to my predecessor.

S/PV.3286
12
Mr. YANEZ BARNUEVO (Spain) (interpretation from Spanish):
We congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council.

We feel sure that with your experience and

great abilities you will guide the Council’s work in a disciplined
and wise manner.

We assure you that you can always count on the

Spanish delegation’s full cooperation.
I should also like to express my delegation’s appreciation to
Ambassador Taylhardat of Venezuela for the effective and competent
manner in which he presided over our work in September.
The Spanish delegation voted in favour of the resolution the
Council has just adopted.

We are particularly glad that the

mandate of the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) has now
been extended with the unanimous support of the members of the
Council.
We welcome that because we firmly believe that UNPROFOR’s
mission within the territories of Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has been and
continues to be of crucial importance.
The continued hostilities, the dangers facing the constituent
units of UNPROFOR, and the restrictions on its freedom of movement
have limited UNPROFOR’s ability to act.

Despite this, UNPROFOR has

made a substantial contribution to the containment of volatile,
explosive situations and has also made it possible for the
humanitarian aid essential to the survival of the civilian
population to be provided.

Thanks to UNPROFOR we have been able to

a certain extent to ease the terrible fate that has befallen
millions of human beings.
I should like once again to pay tribute to the magnificent
work done by the men and women who have so well served - in some
cases even with their own lives - the cause of peace and mankind.
Spain, which is proud to be participating in UNPROFOR, would also
like to express its appreciation to the co-Chairmen of the Steering

S/PV.3286
13
(Mr. Yanez Barnuevo, Spain)
Committee of the International Conference on the former Yugoslavia,
Mr. Stoltenberg and Lord Owen, for their efforts to achieve a peace
agreement acceptable to all the parties to the Bosnian conflict.
The coming winter threatens to bring a humanitarian tragedy even
greater than the one already confronting that country.
It is primarily for the parties to solve all these problems,
and we urge them to engage in a gradual process of restoring mutual
confidence that could lead to a settlement of the conflict.
UNPROFOR’s objectives are necessarily limited, and a lasting
solution can be found only through political dialogue.
As for the situation in Croatia, my delegation wishes to say
that the United Nations protected areas are an integral part of the
Republic of Croatia, and its sovereignty and territorial integrity
must be respected.

This is without prejudice to any measures that

have to be taken to protect the legitimate interests of the
minorities and the human rights of all.
We understand the frustration felt by the general public in
Croatia at the non-implementation of the Vance plan, but we must
continue to try to attain the objectives set by the Security
Council.

It is for this reason that we support the resolution just

adopted; we share the Secretary-General’s view that the withdrawal
of UNPROFOR could only lead to further conflict, with unforeseeable
consequences.
We hope that in the next few months decisive steps can be
taken with a view to implementing the Vance plan and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Spain for

the kind words he addressed to me and to my predecessor.
Mr. HATANO (Japan):

I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on

your assumption of the presidency of the Council for this month.
should also like to express my deepest appreciation to

I

S/PV.3286
14
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
Ambassador Taylhardat, who presided over the Council in an
excellent manner during the busy month of September.
Last June the situation in Yugoslavia was fraught with
uncertainty.

The Security Council thus adopted resolution

847 (1993), which introduced a mechanism for maintaining close
contact between it and the Secretary-General and for allowing it to
adapt the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) to respond to
evolving circumstances.
Now, three months later, we note that there have been some
developments in the negotiations towards establishing a framework
for peace in Bosnia.

Japan continues to urge the leadership of the

parties concerned to further demonstrate the political will to
settle the outstanding questions so that the process can move
forward and culminate in a durable peace.

Upon the conclusion of a

peace accord the Council will be called upon to determine how it
might best assist in its implementation.

This will perhaps require

some adjustment of UNPROFOR’s mission and structure.

S/PV.3286
15
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
Turning to Croatia, we note the willingness demonstrated by
President Tudjman and other leaders of the Republic to continue
discussions with the members of the Council on the question of
UNPROFOR.

The cooperation of Croatia is indispensable to the

effective functioning of UNPROFOR, and we thus attach great
importance to continued dialogue with the Croatian leadership, but
I am afraid that there are few grounds for optimism.
The current situation in Croatia is a source of particular
concern.

There is a danger that the conflict could escalate and

spill across national boundaries.

Japan is convinced that the

presence of UNPROFOR should be maintained, and with a feasible
mandate.
The situation in the former Yugoslavia is unique in its
complexity.

The Council’s consultations and its adoption of

resolutions 869 (1993) and 870 (1993) indicate the various
difficulties underlying this question.

The resolution we have just

adopted reflects the sensitive aspects of UNPROFOR’s mandate,
namely, those surrounding the interrelationship of circumstances in
Bosnia and Croatia and the need for the Council to demonstrate once
again its readiness to take special measures to ensure the safety
of peace-keeping personnel.

Japan appeals to all the parties

concerned to heed the clear message contained in the relevant
paragraphs, and to refrain from any acts of violence or any action
that might impede the work of UNPROFOR.
I should also point out that part of the resolution relates to
the consequences of non-implementation of the Council’s previous
resolutions, and once again urge all the parties to cooperate fully
in discharging their responsibilities.
At the same time, it is essential for confidence-building
between the parties to be strengthened if there is to be progress
in the political negotiations and if, ultimately, a just and

S/PV.3286
16
(Mr. Hatano, Japan)
comprehensive settlement is to be achieved.

I am gratified that

the resolution has been carefully drafted with this end in mind and
that it sends a strong and unambiguous message.
The challenges before the Council are daunting, but they are
not insurmountable.

I believe that the Council, through the

renewed mandate of UNPROFOR, will be capable of addressing all the
complexities of the situation.

It can do so, however, only if it

has the understanding and cooperation of the people in the former
Yugoslavia.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Japan for

his kind words addressed to me and to my predecessor.
Mr. KEATING (New Zealand):

Mr. President, I too should

like to welcome you to the presidency of the Council and wish you
well during the month of October, and I should also like to join
other colleagues in thanking Ambassador Taylhardat of Venezuela,
who assumed the presidency at very short notice and proved an
excellent President.
It seems to my delegation that there is one very important
lesson to be drawn from our discussions over the past week, and
that is that the Council, and the Secretary-General’s Special
Representative, have been obliged to divert so much of their energy
to the crisis in Bosnia that the situation in Croatia has suffered
by comparison.

Given the intractable nature of the conflict in

Bosnia, this preoccupation is not surprising, but we have to do
better, and the resolution is a very good basis.
It was very helpful to my delegation, in discussions leading
up to the resolution, to be able to hear directly from the
Government of Croatia, in the person of President Tudjman, and for
the Council to have an exchange of views with him.

We can

understand the frustration of the Government of Croatia that
achieving what it regards as a legitimate national objective should

S/PV.3286
17
(Mr. Keating, New Zealand)
prove so elusive.

The Government and the people of Croatia have

had to be very patient.

We commend their willingness to act in

this way, and hope they will continue to do so.
The Council, likewise, has had to act carefully and take due
account of the political situation.

We should not act in any way

that might make the prospects for a political settlement, whether
in Croatia or in Bosnia, more difficult to achieve.
New Zealand supported the resolution because we value and
approve the mission of UNPROFOR in Croatia, in Bosnia and in the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

That commitment is also

evidenced by the inclusion of New Zealand personnel in the UNPROFOR
force.
The tasks that UNPROFOR undertakes may be seen by some as less
than adequate.

We do not agree with this view.

We think that

UNPROFOR is making a valuable political and humanitarian
contribution.

We should be loath to see those tasks curtailed in

any way.
Indeed, we extend our heartfelt thanks to all the personnel of
UNPROFOR, both civil and military, and other, associated United
Nations personnel, for continuing with this task in very dangerous
and sometimes difficult situations.
Finally, let me stress that there is a clear message to the
authorities in Belgrade that there can be no early relaxation of
sanctions if there is no cooperation in the full implementation of
the Vance plan for Croatia.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of New Zealand

for his kind words addressed to me and to my predecessor.
Mr. TAYLHARDAT (Venezuela) (interpretation from Spanish):
Mr. President, allow me first of all to thank you for the kind and
generous comments that you and other members of the Council have
made in connection with my term as President during September.

I

S/PV.3286
18
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
should also like to thank the other members of the Council for
their commendations.
I, in my turn, thank the members of the Council for the
support and very valuable cooperation I received during my term,
without which my work as President of this important body would
have been more difficult.
I should also like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
accession to the presidency, and to assure you that I personally,
and the delegation of Venezuela, are prepared to offer you all
possible cooperation in order to contribute to the success of your
presidency.
The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Protection
Force (UNPROFOR) in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and in the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has been approved in
exceptional circumstances in the context of the peace efforts of
the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia:

firstly,

despite the innumerable difficulties inherent in the complexity of
the conflict, negotiations on Bosnia and Herzegovina are
continuing, and we trust that they will soon come to a successful
conclusion; and, secondly, in Croatia we find ourselves faced with
a set of agreements which, because it has not been possible to
implement them, are affecting UNPROFOR’s credibility and its
ability to operate there.
Our delegation understands the problems created for the
Republic of Croatia by the difficulties UNPROFOR is facing in
implementing the peace plan.

Venezuela fully agrees that it is a

matter of urgency to restore the sovereignty of the Government of
Croatia in the United Nations protected areas.

S/PV.3286
19
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
We are also aware that, for Croatia, the lack of progress in
the implementation of UNPROFOR’s mandate poses a constant threat to
its territorial integrity.

However, we must also keep in mind the

Council’s obligation to prevent any resumption of hostilities in
Croatia, which would have inevitable consequences for peace and
security throughout the region, particularly for the civilian
population.
Our delegation would like to express its concern over the
frequent violations of the cease-fire, the flagrant violations of
the arms embargo and the increasingly constant attacks on United
Nations personnel and the personnel of other international
humanitarian organizations.

These violations are committed by all

parties to the conflict and are serious obstacles to the
implementation of the United Nations Protection Force’s mandate.
Only if there is respect for and full implementation of the
cease-fire agreements and the resolutions of the Security Council
will UNPROFOR be able to discharge its mandate and contribute to
the full exercise of sovereignty by the Croatian Government over
the United Nations protected areas and the "pink zones".
UNPROFOR has gradually become an extremely complex and
difficult operation as a result of the functions it has had to
assume in fulfilment of the resolutions of this Council.

From a

peace-keeping operation deployed in the United Nations protected
areas, it has gradually expanded its mandate, which now also
includes Bosnia and Herzegovina and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.

It is not only a multidimensional, complex and

extremely dangerous operation, but also an operation which is very
closely linked to the negotiating process and the humanitarian
crisis in the region.

When the Security Council extends the

mandate of this Force, it has taken into account all of these
elements, without forgetting that its main objective is to ensure

S/PV.3286
20
(Mr. Taylhardat, Venezuela)
that firm peace agreements are reached and that a period finally
begins for reconstruction of civilian society and of political
structures based on tolerance and respect for the rights of all
minorities.
The delegation of Venezuela has voted in favour of extending
UNPROFOR’s mandate as expressed in this resolution, which is the
result of a balanced, objective and careful analysis of the present
situation.

As a result of this resolution, the civilian population

will continue to have a minimum guarantee of security while
political and diplomatic efforts to restore peace continue.

I

would like to emphasize the reaffirmation of the Security Council’s
commitment to ensure the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Croatia and that of all the Member States where
UNPROFOR is deployed.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of Venezuela

for the kind words he addressed to me.
Sir David HANNAY (United Kingdom):

I would like to begin

by congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the office of
President of the Security Council, and to note that already this
month - particularly in the preparation of the resolution we have
just voted through - you have shown that characteristic which is so
essential for a President of this Council: patient perseverance.

I

would also like to thank the Ambassador of Venezuela for his
remarkable stewardship of this Council during the month of
September.
The British Government attaches the greatest importance to the
renewal of the mandate of UNPROFOR in Croatia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

We

believe that in each of those three places in its different way
UNPROFOR is playing a worthy role in coping with situations which
are often close to being out of control and liable to be even more

S/PV.3286
21
(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
serious threats to international peace and security than the
present situation.
It is a source of some regret to us that there is so much
criticism of UNPROFOR.

We feel that if you stop to think of what

the situation would be like if it were not there, you would get
some idea of the benefits that come with this huge deployment of
men, humanitarian effort and preventative action.
As to the renewal, we particularly value the continuing role
of UNPROFOR in Croatia.

We feel that if UNPROFOR was not in

Croatia the situation there would be all too likely to deteriorate,
and the possibility of hostilities in the protected areas and
elsewhere would become even more real than it is already.
But we do sympathize with the views expressed by the
Government of Croatia that the role of the United Nations cannot be
a static one, that it is there to seek to move forward to the full
implementation of the Vance plan.

In that context, we would like

to underline the importance that is played in implementation by all
parties concerned.

Nearly everyone has a major role to play - the

Government of Croatia, the inhabitants of the areas under United
Nations protection, and Governments such as the Government of
Serbia and Montenegro that are mentioned in this resolution for a
very good reason.

We feel it is right that they should be

mentioned because it is right that they should be asked to
cooperate fully with the implementation of that plan.

That is not

a threat; it is an invitation to remove a serious menace to peace
and security in the region.

Their cooperation in removing it will

in our view be to the benefit of all concerned.
Finally, I would like to say that we hope very much that the
two Co-Chairmen of the International Conference for Yugoslavia will
continue their efforts in all parts of the former Yugoslavia.
Their task is a pretty ungrateful one.

They, too, are often

S/PV.3286
22
(Sir David Hannay, United Kingdom)
subjected to a lot of criticism, but we feel that it is through the
peace process which they embody that solutions will have to be
found, and we hope that they will continue to work hard, both in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Croatia where there remains much to
be done and where, if they can get the full cooperation of all the
parties, we would hope to see during this extension of the mandate
some serious progress made.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the United

Kingdom for his kind words addressed to me.
Mr. VORONTSOV (Russian Federation) (interpretation from
Russian):

The Russian delegation would like to congratulate you,

Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month.

We will cooperate fully with you on all matters that

are before the Council.
We would also like to express our appreciation and admiration
for your predecessor in this post, the Permanent Representative of
Venezuela Ambassador Taylhardat, for his very effective guidance of
the Security Council in September.
The Russian delegation supported the resolution just adopted
by the Security Council, which provides for a six-month extension
of the United Nations Protection Force deployed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
We consider this decision to be a very important one.

At a

time when efforts to find a peaceful settlement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina have reached a critical stage, the United Nations
Protection Force plays a particularly important role in stabilizing
the situation and creating conditions for implementation of
agreements which we hope will nevertheless still be signed.
On the question of Croatia, Russia believes that the United
Nations Force should ensure full implementation by the Croatian
Government and by the Krajina Serbs of provisions of the United

S/PV.3286
23
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
Nations peace plan in Croatia.
We consider very timely the resolution’s call for immediate
conclusion by the parties of a strictly implemented cease-fire
agreement.

We were pleased to see that the letter from the Prime

Minister of the Republic of Yugoslavia, Mr. Radoje Kontic - I refer
here to document S/26464 - confirms that
"The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia supports the Vance
Plan and is interested in having it observed and implemented
by all parties." (annex, p. 2)

S/PV.3286
24
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
The letter continues:
"In this, as in the past, you can count on the full support
and assistance of the Government of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia". (ibid)
This is a positive position that is taken by the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, and it is consonant with the appeal contained in
paragraph 4 of the resolution that has just been adopted by the
Security Council.
It is perfectly clear that the United Nations forces must be
able, without hindrance, to implement their peacemaking mandate in
all the Republics of the former Yugoslavia.

Withdrawing them from

Croatia could have catastrophic consequences.

It could lead to a

sharp deterioration of the situation in the United Nations
protected areas and in the "pink zones", and could lead to an
escalation of the entire conflict in the former Yugoslavia.
Pursuant to the resolution that has just been adopted, the
Security Council will continue to review urgently the extension of
close air support to UNPROFOR in Croatia.

Here we proceed from the

premise that the mechanism to be provided for such air support will
be the same as is provided for in resolution 836 (1993) - namely,
that appropriate decisions will be taken
"under the authority of the Security Council and subject to
close coordination with the Secretary-General and UNPROFOR".
(resolution 836 (1993), para. 10)
It is very important that agreement be reached in Croatia on
confidence-building measures, which would not only make life easier
for the ordinary people there - Croatians and Serbians - but would
also improve the atmosphere.

This could be promoted by restoring

the water and electricity supplies and communications and by
satisfying other economic needs of the people.

S/PV.3286
25
(Mr. Vorontsov, Russian Federation)
In our opinion, the decision to extend UNPROFOR’s mandate will
contribute to implementation of all earlier Security Council
resolutions that deal with a settlement in the former Yugoslavia.
The PRESIDENT:

I thank the representative of the Russian

Federation for his kind words addressed to me.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Brazil.
I should like to express the Brazilian Government’s
recognition and appreciation of the admirable work being done by
the United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in the territory of
the former Yugoslavia, where its personnel have often been subject
to inadmissible threats, harassment and armed attacks.

The

Secretary-General has described those very difficult conditions in
his latest report, which tells of a situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and in Croatia much aggravated by instances of lack of
cooperation by the parties involved.
Under such adverse conditions, it should come as no surprise
that UNPROFOR’s ability to carry out its mandate has been seriously
hampered.

Notwithstanding those difficulties, we share the

assessment of the Secretary-General that UNPROFOR has played an
important role in preventing a very tense situation from
deteriorating even further.
When the future of any United Nations peace-keeping operation
is being discussed the views of the host country regarding the
operation itself are to be taken into account.

In this sense, we

note that significant efforts have been made to accommodate
concerns expressed by the Government of Croatia.
Brazil voted in favour of resolution 871 (1993) in the hope
that the renewal of the mandate of UNPROFOR will be beneficial in
easing the tensions and facilitating the attainment of a just and
lasting peace in the region as a whole.

In order for that decision

S/PV.3286
26
(The President)
to be meaningful, it is essential that both the Croatian Government
and the local Serb authorities cease their hostilities at once,
agree on confidence-building measures and cooperate fully with
UNPROFOR and with the co-Chairmen in their mediating efforts.
The decision of the Security Council to continue to review the
suggestion by the Secretary-General on a possible extension to
Croatian territory of the air-support scheme in place for the safe
areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina reflects the sensitivity of that
issue.

As a matter of principle, Brazil believes that any decision

that might entail authorization of the use of force must be handled
by the Security Council with the utmost caution.
The Security Council is to reconsider UNPROFOR’s mandate in
two months.

Let us hope that by then the situation may have

improved, both in Croatia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina, so that
UNPROFOR can fulfil its duties in a more favourable climate.
I now resume my functions as President of the Council.
There are no further speakers on my list.

The Security

Council has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized

of the matter.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.
