A/65/PV.9

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

9

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 22 September 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

Co-Chair:
Co-Chair:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . (President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session)
Mr. Joseph Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (President of the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session)

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
High-level Plenary Meeting on the Millennium
Development Goals
Agenda items 13 and 115 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/65/L.1)
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic):
The General Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Alan García Pérez, President of the
Republic of Peru.
President García Pérez (spoke in Spanish): Our
country, Peru, is proud to appear before this Assembly
to share the important advances and achievements we
have made towards the Goals established 10 years ago
in the Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2). They
have been sustainable advances, attained within a
democratic system, a system that strengthens
institutions in the face of political self-interest and that
recognizes the strength of the global economy, seizing
its opportunities instead of opposing it, and engaging
with the world rather than trusting in insular
development supported by unsustainable subsidies.

The United Nations has thus performed the role
of planner and organizer of goals, bringing order to the
social work done by our Governments. That is why we
must congratulate it and encourage it to continue in
that work and in publicly monitoring its performance
before our public opinion and before our peoples.
In Peru, the noble Goals set forth by the United
Nations have been incorporated as priorities into the
national agenda. They have guided various specific
public policies and focused social programmes — such
as “Together”, our direct monetary support programme
for the poorest; “Building Peru”, our programme to
provide jobs through social works; our “Water for All”
and rural electrification programmes; and our “Own
Roof” programme — in which representatives of the
State and society as a whole have participated. Those
were programmes established in order to ensure that
the benefits of economic growth are distributed among
all Peruvians.
But the best anti-poverty programme has been
our creation of 2.1 million jobs in four years and the
investment of the largest part of the State’s income in
infrastructure work. We have undertaken 130,000
infrastructure projects so far, all to benefit the poor.
These include road, electric light and potable water
projects, all productive works, as opposed to opting for
the easy but unsustainable approach of current
expenditures, public salaries and subsidies.
It is, of course, also our responsibility to speak of
pending challenges and to reaffirm our commitment

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-54527 (E)

*1054527*

A/65/PV.9

and desire to continue to make progress in achieving
goals that can overcome social gaps. We must also
promote new and more ambitious targets that we can
also achieve by 2015.
In recent years, we have proven that our societies
and Governments can organize themselves around
those social goals. We can make use of the years
remaining until 2015 to incorporate new and more
ambitious goals, such as early detection of cancer, the
reduction of transportation accidents that result in
millions of victims every year around the world, and
the reduction of per capita expenditure on weapons and
the military.
Few countries can boast of having grown, on
average, 6.5 per cent in the last five years, even in an
era of crisis, let alone that that growth has taken place
in the social sphere, in keeping with our country’s
national interest in focusing on promoting more jobs
and reducing poverty. In 2009, the worst year of the
crisis, Peru’s economic activity grew by 1 per cent and
employment by 2 per cent, and poverty was also
reduced by 2 per cent. For this year, we hope for 8 per
cent growth in the economy and infrastructure, which
will contribute to reducing poverty and destitution.
Peru has made, and continues to make, progress,
despite contractions due to difficulties in the developed
economies and the cutbacks in international
development assistance. We continue to make progress
because of our investments in infrastructure and our
public anti-poverty policies, organized around the
Millennium Goals.
In terms of the Goal of eradicating extreme
poverty and hunger, Peru has achieved a rate of
compliance of 99 per cent, as recognized in the United
Nations report on compliance with the Goals. It has
achieved the Target of reducing by half the percentage
of individuals living under the extreme poverty line. In
2003, 24 per cent of the population was in that group.
By 2008, that figure had gone down to 12.6 per cent,
and by 2009 to 11.5 per cent. In 2001, our country had
an overall poverty rate of 54.4 per cent; in 2004, it was
still at 48 per cent.
Today, thanks to the strength of the national
economy, that figure has fallen to 34 per cent, which
means that there has been a 14 per cent reduction in
five years. It also means that more than 3.5 million
Peruvians have emerged from poverty. The United
Nations report certifies that Peru has achieved 78 per

2

cent of its objectives. We trust that by 2011 we will
achieve our goal of 30 per cent, and our efforts will
continue. When we celebrate the bicentenary of our
independence in 2021, we hope to have achieved the
goal of lowering the poverty rate to less than 10 per
cent of our country’s population.
In the past four years, the public sector has
invested $24 billion in more than 130,000 projects,
tripling public investment in infrastructure, schools,
health centres, roads linking remote towns and the
basic services of potable water and electricity for the
poorest. But that public investment has been supported
and augmented through private investment of more
than $74 billion. More than 2 million jobs have been
created, largely in the formal economy.
In terms of access to water and sanitation
services, I can say that in the last five years the public
sector in Peru has benefited 4 million Peruvians who
previously had little or no potable water. It has also
built sewers for 3 million. If we continue at the same
pace, in the next 10 years we will be able to close the
gap between those who have potable water and those
who do not.
Furthermore, through our “Light for All”
programme, we have benefited 3 million Peruvians in
more than 7,000 towns that did not have electricity
before, and we are continuing to work on adding
another 5,000 towns. Next year, 12,000 towns will be
connected to electrical power and 80 per cent of homes
in Peru will have electricity.
Thus with water and light, more schools and
more electrical and highway infrastructure projects, we
will have built a more equitable country and will have
ensured more rights for all. Only in this way will more
Peruvians become part of the democratic life of Peru.
With regard to universal primary education, I can
say that in Peru that Goal has largely been achieved. In
the last 10 years, enrolment in primary schools grew
from 90 to 97.6 per cent, and the net rate of attendance
went from 90 to 94 per cent. We are now thinking of
establishing
compulsory
universal
secondary
education, with direct support for the poorest families.
We have also reduced illiteracy to 5 per cent of
the population. We began with 14 per cent of Peruvians
being illiterate. After adding 1.4 million citizens to the
ranks of the literate, we believe that by next year the
illiteracy rate will have dropped to below 4 per cent,

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

and Peru will thus be a country free of illiteracy by
2011.

Government will have to expend greater efforts in that
area.

With regard to promoting gender equality and the
empowerment of women, it is worth highlighting the
greater participation of women in education. I am
proud to say that women’s participation is now 10 per
cent greater than that of men in secondary and higher
education. Women’s participation in the labour market
and in the political life of the country has also
increased, especially in the legislative branch, where
the proportion of seats occupied by women in Congress
went from 14 per cent to 29 per cent today.

We have started a new system of compulsory
universal health insurance, which includes all service
providers in order to provide insurance coverage for
90 per cent of illnesses, medicine and surgery.
Coverage includes various types of cancers and other
diseases that were previously not covered. In these five
years, we have been able to provide cataract surgery
free of cost for 120,000 cases, and early detection of
the more frequent cancers has been doubled.

Concerning Goals 4, 5 and 6 — to reduce
mortality for children under five, to improve maternal
health, and to fight AIDS, malaria and other
diseases — what we have achieved so far is positive,
although not sufficient.
Chronic infant malnutrition was reduced from
25.4 per cent to 18.3 per cent in the last five years, and
the proportion of children with weight deficiencies or
general malnutrition dropped from 7.1 per cent to
4.2 per cent in 2009. Infant mortality — those under
one year of age — was reduced from 33 per thousand
in 2003 to 18 per thousand in 2008. Orderly
programmes have been instituted to eliminate parasites,
replace wood-burning kitchens with modern kitchens
and replace latrines in order to reduce gastrointestinal
infections and bronchopulmonary illnesses, which are
behind malnutrition in children. Mortality among
children under five years of age has also been reduced,
from 92 cases per every thousand born in 1990 to
31 per thousand in 2008. That means that we have
achieved the Goal set for 2015.
Maternal mortality dropped from 265 cases per
100,000 births in the base year 1990 to 103 cases
today, which means that the Goal set has been
achieved. The percentage of births assisted by
specialized health personnel has increased from 59 per
cent in 2000 to 82 per cent in 2009.
Expanding the vaccination campaigns for
children and adults has enabled us, according to the
World Health Organization, to eradicate measles and
rubella and reduce yellow fever and hepatitis B, thus
improving the life expectancy of the population.
The morbidity rates for malaria and tuberculosis
have also been reduced, but not sufficiently. We now
have cases that are resistant to an array of drugs, so the

10-54527

Those achievements have been made possible by
the investments of the State and the public sector.
However, we must recognize the important role played
by international cooperation of institutions and
countries, which has been essential. It has allowed us
to reach the most remote areas with social projects in
order achieve the Millennium Goals.
Today, we propose that the Assembly make use of
the lessons learned and of what has already been
achieved to set for ourselves bigger and more
ambitious objectives for 2015: the early detection of
and cure for intrauterine, prostate and gastrointestinal
cancer, which would allow us to save three million
lives in the next four years; the eradication of cataracts
through surgery at a very low cost, which would allow
the elderly to get their sight back in the next four years;
and the reduction of transit accidents in urban areas,
which is the easiest goal because it is a matter of
regulations, which would allow us to save from death
and disability two of every 6,000 people in the next
four years.
We know that there are still many concerns and
challenges that demand greater social investment, with
more social programmes involving monetary transfers.
We can succeed in that, fulfilling the Millennium
Goals, but above all fulfilling the great goals of the
General Assembly and of the United Nations: to live in
peace and defeat the build-up of arms — the worst
enemy of the Millennium Goals and the worst scourge
of the poor — ensuring that our countries free
themselves from the ominous obligation to buy
weapons and from the tragedy of enormous military
expenditures, which prevent the development of our
countries.
Living in peace, reducing the arms build-up and
ensuring that people who produce the weapons stop
producing them — the time has come to make these

3

A/65/PV.9

considerations a supreme goal of our peoples in this
Millennium. Weapons only bring confrontation,
scourges and misery to our peoples.
We come before the world to say that we have
made a great deal of progress, but much remains to be
done. We will continue to do this work within
democracy, realism and freedom.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic):
The General Assembly will now hear an address by the
Chair of the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
His Excellency Mr. Haris Silajdžić.
Mr. Silajdžić: It is an honour to participate in
this High-level Meeting on the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). Allow me to express my
gratitude to Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki for having ably
presided over the General Assembly during the past
year and to congratulate Mr. Joseph Deiss on being
elected President of the Assembly at its sixty-fifth
session.
Ten years ago, the Governments of the world
agreed to ensure a new vision in order to change
reality, creating a crucial platform for global
cooperation in the twenty-first century. At that historic
moment, by the adoption of the Millennium
Declaration (resolution 55/2), the key challenges that
humanity faced were set out and concrete measures
were defined for assessing progress in attaining the
interrelated goals and tasks associated with
development, governance, peace, security and human
rights.
Our gathering here today presents an opportunity
to answer two important questions. The first is: “What
is the status of the progress made toward fulfilling the
commitments we assumed at the Millennium Summit?”
And the second is: “Can we be satisfied with what we
have achieved?”
To be sure, the results achieved so far are not to
be underestimated, but they are still far from
satisfactory. Moreover, the results achieved are being
compromised by the new challenges and problems we
are facing: economic crises, conflicts, the effects of
climate change and other global issues.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is fully committed to the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals. As a
country that recently suffered major devastation from
war and thereafter received significant international
support for reconstruction, Bosnia and Herzegovina

4

now invests in efforts to achieve sustainability and to
fully assume its own responsibilities.
In order to overcome current problems and create
conditions for improving social circumstances, various
activities are being implemented and planned in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The Bosnia and Herzegovina
National Human Development Report on the
Millennium Development Goals included quantitative
estimates on MDG achievement by 2015. We also
established a framework for defining long-term
strategic priorities, as well as a framework for
harmonizing the Millennium Development Goals with
the social programmes of the European Union. Our
National Human Development Report focuses on MDG
priorities of high importance for Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
especially
poverty
reduction,
development humanization and development support
enhancement.
In 2003, Bosnia and Herzegovina incorporated
MDG indicators into its first Medium-Term
Development Strategy 2004-2007. The achievement of
the MDGs in Bosnia and Herzegovina thus became a
vital part of the development strategy and its
implementation. The final report on the implementation
of the measures planned in the action plans indicates
that the progress in the achievement of MDGs was
made in that medium-term period.
In this regard, we have developed two strategic
documents: the Bosnia and Herzegovina 2010-2013
Development Strategy and the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Social Inclusion Strategy. These documents have now
been finalized and are to be adopted. The purpose of
the two strategies is to provide for a more stable,
efficient and competitive economy; to reduce poverty;
and to achieve social inclusion in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as well as integration into the European
Union.
Both strategies have been drafted with the full
participation of all levels of Government and of the
civil society sector. The goals and priorities of the
strategies are in line with the MDGs. The
implementation of these strategies will be of great
importance for our future progress towards achieving
the MDGs.
The Bosnia and Herzegovina 2010-2014
Employment Strategy is currently in the consideration
of public comments phase. We have also adopted the
Decent Work Country Programme 2008-2010

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

document, which defines a set of policies targeted at
mitigating problems in the field of employment.
With regard to solving social issues related to
possible consequences of the energy sector reforms,
Bosnia and Herzegovina adopted the Social Action
Plan on the Memorandum of Understanding on Social
Issues in the Context of the Energy Community. The
goal of this Plan is to ensure the protection of our most
vulnerable citizens in the event of increases in the price
of electric power and to provide adequate measures for
the protection and care of a possible surplus of
employees in this sector.
In addition to these measures, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina disability policy created basic conditions
for creating solutions aimed at ensuring a higher level
of social inclusion for this especially vulnerable group
and enabling it to gain access, among other things, to
the labour market.
The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
adopted the decision on the ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
while the State Ministry of Human Rights and
Refugees is working on establishing a council for
persons with disabilities.
A project aimed at strengthening the system of
children’s social protection and social inclusion is
currently being implemented in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. It aims to create a model of integrated
child
social
protection
through
multisectoral
cooperation. With the support of Save the Children
UK, we are also currently implementing a project on
the standardization of services in the field of child
protection. These two projects will greatly contribute
to harmonizing regulations and improving practice in
the field of social and child protection.
A war of aggression was waged against Bosnia
and Herzegovina from 1992 to 1995, resulting in
genocide and mass ethnic cleansing and destruction.
Only a fraction of the refugees and displaced persons
who were forcibly expelled from their homes have
returned, and they feel that their basic rights are still
being violated. That remains a huge and difficult
challenge that must be addressed.
On the basis of a series of international
conventions and declarations, of the Law on the
Protection of the Rights of Persons Belonging to
National Minorities, adopted in 2003 at the State level,

10-54527

and of the document on the Decade of Roma Inclusion
2005-2015, Bosnia and Herzegovina developed an
Action Plan on the Educational Needs of the Roma,
who represent the biggest national minority in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. However, for various reasons, the
results are not satisfactory, and much still remains to be
done, particularly in the areas of education and
employment of Roma.
The Millennium Development Goals reflect the
essence of all the activities to which the United
Nations is committed. It is, therefore, vital for Bosnia
and Herzegovina to maintain the current positive trend
by including these Goals in our policies and strategies.
We are fully determined to continue working with our
partners in the international community in order to
strengthen local self-responsibility and stimulate longterm development on the path to full membership in
the European Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a country rich in
human and natural resources, especially in water,
agricultural resources and renewable energy. We have
not yet been able to fully realize our country’s potential
because our dysfunctional ethnoterritorial arrangements
hinder our efforts and prevent us from progressing at
the desired pace. In addition, we are currently
witnessing an escalation of open calls for secession of
one part of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which has a
destabilizing effect on the entire region. In order to be
able to fully utilize our potential, Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to carry out constitutional reforms
that will create a single economic space and make our
Government functional and rational, so that it can meet
the needs of our citizens. The support of the
international community in this reform process is
essential.
In conclusion, in order to make real progress, it is
necessary to improve the quality of support and
coordination among donors, including both financial
and technical support, to ensure full support by United
Nations organizations and to strengthen partnerships
among the public and private sectors and civil society.
If these things are done, I am hopeful that we can
achieve the Millennium Development Goals by 2015.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic):
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Batbold Sukhbaatar, Prime Minister of
Mongolia.

5

A/65/PV.9

Mr. Sukhbaatar: Over the past three days we
have discussed what has been achieved and what needs
to be done to bridge the gaps to ensure a full and
timely achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). Several messages, in my view, came
through loud and clear in our discussion. With
adequate resources, renewed commitment and
intensified collective action, the MDGs can and must
be achieved. It is encouraging that this shared
conclusion represents the main thrust of the draft
outcome document entitled “Keeping the promise:
united to achieve the Millennium Development Goals”
(A/65/L.1), to be adopted shortly by this Summit. My
Government aligns itself fully with this document and
stands ready to do its part.
It goes without saying that our journey ahead will
not be smooth or easy. The world has already been
grappling with multiple and interrelated crises,
including the financial and economic crisis, volatile
energy and food prices and ongoing concerns over food
security, as well as the increasing challenges posed by
climate change. Their combined effects have reversed
hard-earned development gains, thus heightening
vulnerabilities and inequalities in many developing
countries.
To withstand these and other emerging challenges
requires an effective and enhanced global partnership
for development that recognizes national ownership
and leadership, a partnership that delivers on
commitments already made, including those made at
Monterrey and Doha, a partnership that takes into
account the special needs of and challenges faced by
vulnerable countries, including landlocked developing
countries. In addition, concerted efforts in other areas
of Goal 8 ought to be vigorously pursued at the
international level, including further reform of the
international financial institutions, early conclusion of
the Doha Round with a comprehensive and
development-oriented outcome, strengthened regional
integration and trade and sustainable debt-relief
measures for developing countries, especially at times
of multiple crises.
As the past decade of MDG implementation
efforts around the world seems to reveal, sustained
economic growth per se is not sufficient. It must also
enable everyone, in particular the poor, to participate in
and benefit from economic opportunities and must lead
to job creation and be complemented by effective
social policy. Mongolia, for one, is endeavouring to

6

implement such a policy with a view to ensuring full
implementation of its MDGs.
Recently my Government concluded, via its third
national report on MDGs, a thorough analysis of our
progress and set its priorities for the next five years
and beyond. The report found that 66 per cent of our
MDGs are on track. I am pleased to note that Mongolia
succeeded early in achieving such targets as the ratio of
girls to boys in secondary schools, the percentage of
children covered by basic immunizations and the
reduction of infant and under-five mortality rates. The
overall progress we have made is the result of
mainstreaming MDGs into our long-term development
policy document and budgetary framework, and
establishing a single government agency responsible
for coordinating the implementation of MDGs and
creating a broad database for their assessment.
Nonetheless, the report also sends a warning
signal that the achievement of other targets is slow or
regressing. The most challenging among these are
poverty reduction, gender equality and environmental
sustainability. To effectively address these challenges
and ensure that economic growth benefits every one of
Mongolia’s citizens, my Government is taking a host of
policy measures. Let me cite here some of the most
pertinent ones.
Boosting productive employment, especially
among youth, through supporting job creation in
labour-intensive industries is a high priority. There are
a number of industries such as mining and road
construction where the labour market has potential
absorptive capacity for young people with a set of
technical skills. Last month, my Government took an
important decision to channel more investment,
starting this fall, into vocational schools to provide
training for thousands of rural young people to prepare
them for jobs in these industries.
In promoting the equitable distribution of income
and opportunities to more effectively reach those in
need, my Government will pay special attention to
improving the targeting of government interventions
aimed at strengthening health systems, providing better
educational opportunities, generating employment,
supporting nutrition and enhancing social protection,
including through conditional cash transfers.
Investment in rural development is crucial for
sustaining the livelihood of some 40 per cent of the
population that lives off nomadic livestock-breeding, a

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

highly climate- and weather-sensitive activity. Just this
past winter, harsh weather constituted a natural disaster
that exacted a heavy toll on thousands of herders,
leaving them without sources of income. This disaster
has critically exposed the country’s economic and
ecological vulnerability and has directly affected the
implementation of the MDGs.
Financing these policies will be a formidable
task. My Government will continue working with our
development partners and seeking their assistance,
especially to offset our vulnerability to external shocks
and the disadvantages of our landlocked location.
Domestic resource mobilization will, however, be
crucial. We therefore set up a human development
fund, whereby revenues and royalties from the mining
industry will be pooled to support health, education
and other social services, in addition to our efforts to
promote economic diversification. The recently passed
fiscal stability law is another tool that we will use to
manage the revenue inflows from our mining wealth in
a transparent and responsible way to mobilize
resources for combating poverty.
Serious problems of land degradation, especially
desertification and overgrazing, deforestation and
illegal logging, water scarcity, loss of biodiversity and
urban air pollution are causes for concern. The impact
of climate change on land conditions in Mongolia is
unmistakable. Desertification has affected more than
70 per cent of our land. Water scarcity is a growing
problem and, when coupled with natural disasters, it
directly threatens the human security of those affected.
As a result of our firm commitment to combating the
impacts of environmental degradation, especially
desertification, my Government held a special meeting
in the Gobi Desert late last month.
The challenges in meeting the MDGs are many,
so building enduring partnerships is essential for their
effective implementation. This should involve local
Governments, the national Government, the private
sector and civil society at home, and our international
development partners, both bilateral and multilateral.
Only by working together — while holding ourselves
mutually accountable — will we be able to deliver
tangible and sustainable results. And let me conclude
where I began, my Government stands ready to do its
part to achieve these results.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic):
The Assembly will now hear an address by His

10-54527

Excellency Mr. Wen Jiabao, Premier of the State
Council of the People’s Republic of China.
Mr. Wen Jiabao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
World leaders at the United Nations Millennium
Summit made a solemn commitment to make the right
to development a reality for everyone and free the
entire human race from hunger and poverty. The
progress towards the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) over the past decade has been uneven in
different regions and fields. Many countries have yet to
make visible headway in improving the health of
women and children, achieving gender equality and
protecting the environment. A considerable number of
developing countries have been hit hard by the global
financial crisis, natural disasters and volatilities in the
food and energy markets. And the global population
living in hunger has increased. Achieving the MDGs
therefore remains a long and uphill journey.
China, an active and sustained supporter of the
United Nations initiative, has made tireless efforts to
reach the MDGs. Since 1978, the number of Chinese
living in absolute poverty has been reduced by over
200 million, accounting for 75 per cent of the total
population lifted out of poverty in developing
countries. At the same time, we are keenly aware that
China is a country with a large population and a weak
economic foundation. We are confronted with the
problem of imbalances in development and we have
tens of millions of people living in poverty. We will
further step up poverty alleviation through
development and we are confident that the MDGs will
be achieved as scheduled in China.
Over the years, the Chinese Government has
provided sincere and selfless assistance in multiple
forms to other developing countries to the best of the
country’s ability. We will further strengthen and
improve foreign assistance and contribute our due
share to the early achievement of the MDGs
throughout the world.
First, let me address the issue of helping to
improve the livelihood of people in developing
countries. In the coming five years, China will take the
following steps in support of better livelihoods for
people in other developing countries: we will build 200
schools, dispatch 3,000 medical experts, train 5,000
local medical personnel and provide medical
equipment and medicine to 100 hospitals, build 200
clean energy and environmental protection projects,

7

A/65/PV.9

and increase assistance to small island developing
States in disaster prevention and mitigation to help
build up their capacity in countering climate change.
Here, I would like to announce that China will, within
the next three years, donate US$14 million to the
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
Secondly, with regard to reducing and cancelling
the debts of the least developed countries (LDCs), by
the end of 2009, the Chinese Government had
cancelled debts worth 25.6 billion RMB yuan owed by
50 heavily indebted poor countries and least developed
countries. We will cancel their debts associated with
the outstanding governmental interest-free loans that
mature in 2010.
Thirdly, with regard to deepening financial
cooperation with developing countries, China has
provided $10 billion in concessional loans to African
countries and $15 billion of credit support to some
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
countries to help them counter the international
financial crisis. We have committed to contributing
US$50 billion to the International Monetary Fund
resources increase with an explicit request that the
funds be used, first and foremost, to help LDCs. China
will continue to extend a certain scale of financing
support to developing countries in the form of
concessional loans and preferential export buyer’s
credit.
Fourthly, with regard to broadening economic and
trade ties with developing countries, China has made a
commitment to phase in zero-tariff treatment to
products listed under 95 per cent of all tariff items
from relevant LDCs. Since July 2010, we have given
zero-tariff treatment to the exports from 33 LDCs
under more than 4,700 tariff items, covering the vast
majority of the products from these countries. In the
future, we will give zero-tariff treatment to more
products and let more countries benefit from this
arrangement. We will continue to encourage Chinese
companies to expand investment in developing
countries.
Fifthly, with regard to strengthening agricultural
cooperation with developing countries, in the next five
years, China will dispatch 3,000 agricultural experts
and technical staff, provide 5,000 agriculture-related
training opportunities in China and enhance, on a
priority basis, cooperation with other developing
countries in agricultural planning, hybrid rice,

8

aquaculture, farmland
agricultural machinery.

water

conservancy

and

Sixthly, with regard to helping developing
countries develop human resources, in the next five
years, China will train another 80,000 professionals in
various fields for developing countries. We will
increase the number of scholarships and mid-career
Master’s degree programmes for people from
developing countries and provide training opportunities
in China to 3,000 school principals and teachers.
Since July this year, in order to support Pakistan’s
efforts in fighting floods and rebuilding the country,
China has decided to provide it with 320 million RMB
yuan of humanitarian assistance and has sent a relief
team to the disaster-stricken areas. I wish to take this
opportunity to announce that China will, on top of its
pledged assistance, provide an additional $200 million
to assist Pakistan.
The next five years will be crucial to achieving
the MDGs. The international community must, with a
greater sense of urgency and responsibility, take
decisive steps in the following areas to achieve
common progress. In identifying work priorities, the
international community should give high priority to
helping Africa to eliminate poverty and achieve
development and to increasing support to the least
developed countries. Developing countries should
consider poverty eradication through development a
central task and continue to strengthen national
development capacities. Developed countries must
honour their commitments in good faith, raise the
official development assistance share of their gross
national income to 0.7 per cent at an early date, and
provide long-term, stable and predictable financial
assistance to developing countries. Assistance should
be selfless and have no strings attached.
To improve implementation mechanisms, the
United Nations should continue to play a central role in
international development cooperation. It is important
to establish an MDG assessment mechanism at an early
date and to strengthen international cooperation and
coordination. In order to establish sustainable peace,
all countries and nations should relinquish past
grievances, resolve disputes by peaceful means, and
create conditions for peaceful development.
The adoption of the Millennium Declaration
(resolution 55/2) brought light to people suffering from
poverty around the world. Let us work more diligently

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

and strengthen cooperation in order to attain the
Millennium Development Goals on schedule and to
support the development and progress of all
humankind.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic):
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Lars Løkke Rasmussen, Prime Minister
of the Kingdom of Denmark.
Mr. Rasmussen (Denmark): The Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) are critical to our global
effort to meet the challenges posed by poverty, disease
and conflict. Since their adoption 10 years ago, the
world has undergone significant changes, yet the Goals
are as important as ever. Despite the emergence of a
new global landscape, they remain a common reference
point for our joint effort to create a better tomorrow for
the poorest and most vulnerable.
At this High-level Plenary Meeting, we have
reaffirmed our resolve to meet and achieve the MDGs
by 2015. This is a strong message following a period of
global crisis that has affected all of us. We have
learned that business as usual is no longer good
enough. And this lesson is just as relevant when it
comes to the fulfilment of the Millennium
Development Goals. Luckily, we now know what
works and what does not work. Therefore, we must all
focus on implementation during the remaining five
years.
The private sector is instrumental to creating
sustainable economic growth and employment. Without
private sector-driven growth, we will not be successful
in eradicating poverty or mobilizing the necessary
domestic resources for education, health and other
social services. We must ensure that the benefits of
growth reach the poor and that they generate freedom
and opportunities for individuals to change their lives.
This is particularly important in Africa.
In 2008, Denmark established the Africa
Commission with the participation of African leaders
and key stakeholders. The Commission underlined the
importance of growth and employment, particularly for
young people, who represent a huge untapped resource.
Based on the work of the Commission, Denmark is
doubling its support for private sector development in
Africa. To move this agenda forward, I was honoured
to co-sponsor an event on inclusive growth and
employment in Africa this morning with the President
of Liberia and the Prime Minister of Tanzania. Our

10-54527

geographic and economic points of departure may be
different, but we see eye to eye on the importance of
inclusive economic growth that generates employment.
The international community must also
acknowledge that conflict is a barrier to development.
In many areas affected by conflict, achieving long-term
development and economic growth remains a distant
goal, full of barriers and risks of setback.
We are sending a clear message at this summit –
women are agents of development. Equality and equal
opportunities for women are a vital engine for
economic and social development. There is no chance
whatsoever of achieving the MDGs without a
strengthened focus on women’s empowerment. If
women are to make use of their full potential, they
must be able to decide freely if and when they want
children, and they must have access to health services
when giving birth. Denmark supports developing
countries in their realization of women’s sexual and
reproductive health and rights.
Mr. Deiss, Co-Chair, took the Chair.
Developing countries must take responsibility for
their own development. I am pleased that many
developing countries have turned the MDGs into
national targets. At the same time, donor countries
must live up to their commitments. Denmark is one of
only five countries in the world that exceeds the target
of 0.7 per cent of their gross national income for
official development assistance.
We will continue to work to ensure that our aid
achieves results and makes a difference. This requires
focus and a willingness to prioritize our development
cooperation. Our global partnership is constantly
evolving. New actors are emerging. We are seeing
increased South-South cooperation and increased
public-private collaboration. And we have witnessed
how private foundations have shown the way on
important development issues. We must ensure that all
of these efforts are directed towards the same goal —
the achievement of the Millennium Development
Goals.
We have gained valuable experience over the past
10 years. The challenge has been clearly defined. We
now have five years left. We have to do it right and we
have to start today. Denmark stands ready to do its
part.

9

A/65/PV.9

The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French):
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Alik L. Alik, Vice President of the
Federated States of Micronesia
Mr. Alik (Federated States of Micronesia): I am
deeply honoured to share with the Assembly today the
experience of my country in pursuit of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). This is a story of
achievements as well as challenges for my country, the
Federated States of Micronesia. During the 2000
Millennium Summit, we committed ourselves to
establishing a new global partnership to reduce
extreme poverty and hunger, to improve the quality of
education and health, to pursue gender equality and to
promote environmental integrity and sustainability,
among other tasks. Five years later, that commitment to
the MDGs was reaffirmed.
The MDGs have become the framework
document guiding concrete measures undertaken by
countries in different parts of the globe. The ambitious
expectation is that by 2015 millions of people will rise
out of hunger and extreme poverty and have access to
better educational opportunities, safe water, sanitation
and health care and treatment. While achievements
have been made in various sectors, the recent global
financial and economic crises have imposed enormous
impediments to meeting the targets and indicators.
I am happy to report that the alarming population
growth rate of my country was reduced during the
1990s by almost 50 per cent and is now maintained at
3.28 per cent annually. But we cannot take full
satisfaction in this one index alone. We know only too
well that we need to do better in terms of per capita
income
generation
and
human
development.
Employment and income are at the very heart of
poverty reduction. The creation of job opportunities
will require policy reforms. The establishment of a
regulatory environment conducive to trade and private
sector development is also important. Our policy is to
streamline the size of Government; in so doing, we are
taking care to ensure that essential services are not
adversely impacted in a wholesale manner.
While we are grateful to our development
partners and friends for their support and cooperation
over the years, we realize that we must face reality and
chart our own course. With our economy
overwhelmingly dominated by a large public sector, a
major part of the challenge to our efforts to meet the

10

MDGs is the reduction in our resources of traditional
bilateral assistance. In this respect, I underscore the
importance of the international community honouring
its commitment to provide 0.7 per cent of gross
national income for official development assistance.
Micronesia has a special partnership agreement
with the United States that is enshrined in a treaty
called the Compact of Free Association. The treaty
includes an economic package upon which we pin high
hopes to stimulate our efforts towards the attainment of
the MDGs through improvement in the health and
education sectors.
Despite our best efforts, economic activity in
Micronesia since the amended Compact went into
effect in 2004 has been unsteady and sporadic. For
example, real gross domestic product (GDP) recovered
from a decline of 3.4 per cent in previous years to a
positive 1.6 per cent growth between 2004 and 2005.
That brief positive growth was again followed by a
decline in the ensuing years until 2009, when GDP
slightly recovered with a 0.4 per cent growth. That
modest growth in GDP is further offset by three
observable trends: sluggishness in real per capita
income, reduction in employment and increase in outmigration.
Applying the definition or criteria of the MDGs,
it is estimated that 30 per cent of our population live
below the national poverty line. It seems unlikely that
my country will halve this proportion by 2015. I am
pleased to note that, consistent with our strategic
development plan, addressing poverty through job
creation remains part of our long-term national
objective. In addition, a poverty alleviation strategy
would be needed in order to reverse the ongoing
process of out-migration and the potential adverse
impact of the expansion of the informal economic
sector.
In education, I am pleased to report that we are
achieving high enrolment rates at the primary school
level. Gross and net enrolment is over 90 per cent. The
near parity between girls and boys in elementary
schools and the higher levels of enrolment of girls in
high schools are important achievements in my
country. The literacy rate for persons 15 to 24 years old
is over 90 per cent, and is slightly higher for females
than for males. My Government is committed to
placing high priority on further improving the quality
of education in the coming years. It is for this reason,

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

among others, that we need to direct significant
attention to the remaining 5 per cent of our children
who are still outside our education system.
I believe that the increased access to education
has helped to considerably narrow the gender gap.
However, more efforts are needed to increase the
participation of women in the labour force.
Improvements in women’s health are a priority,
including better access to reproductive health care and
reducing the prevalence of non-communicable
diseases, notably in our outer islands.
I believe that the ratification of the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women has certainly helped to raise the profile
of women in our island communities. We have taken
other initiatives to address issues relating to women’s
political representation, maternity leave and domestic
violence. Legislation creating a national commission
on the status of women was also recently introduced in
our national congress.
The challenges to achieving the MDGs in the
health sector are in the areas of child mortality and
improving maternal health. It is urgent to address both
areas effectively. In my country, reducing child
mortality has been a long-standing priority, and we are
on track to achieve MDG 4. That effort will be further
bolstered with targeted interventions in the primary
health care system and in communities. It is necessary
to increase the number of pregnant women who receive
adequate prenatal care and to reduce post-neonatal
deaths by improving living conditions. The Federated
States of Micronesia is also on track to achieve the
maternal mortality rate target. However, more attention
needs to be given to universal access to reproductive
health services, especially in areas where the
population is widely dispersed.
The prevention of HIV/AIDS is a national
priority, and a national strategic plan to address the
issue has been prepared. Programmes operate at both
the national and the state levels, and focus has been
given to prevention, community-based planning and
care for persons living with HIV/AIDS. We have also
focused on reducing the number of cases of
tuberculosis, diabetes, heart disease and cancer. A
comprehensive and coordinated non-communicable
disease programme is ongoing. More awareness is
necessary to reduce behavioural risk factors, such as

10-54527

tobacco use, alcohol abuse and lack of physical
activity.
I have highlighted our achievements and
challenges, but there is a far larger challenge that
would render all our achievements irrelevant. We
cannot meaningfully talk about the MDGs unless the
international community addresses the real danger that
Micronesia and other small island developing States
will disappear because of the adverse impacts of
climate change. In short, we are the least responsible
but most vulnerable.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic):
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Nick Clegg, Deputy Prime Minister of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.
Mr. Clegg (United Kingdom): It is an honour for
me to address the General Assembly today for the first
time as Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.
It is a privilege to be here to discuss how, together, we
can reach the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
and make the necessary commitments towards
eradicating the problems that blight the world we
share: poverty, hunger, disease and the degradation of
our natural environment.
This week, we are reviewing the progress,
assessing the obstacles and agreeing a framework for
action to meet our targets. Those are the technocratic
terms in which Governments must necessarily trade,
but let us be clear. Behind the officialese of summits
lies our single, common purpose to uphold the dignity
and security that is the right of every person in every
part of the world.
In the end, development is about freedom. It is
about freedom from hunger and disease; freedom from
ignorance; and freedom from poverty. Development
means ensuring that every person has the freedom to
take their own life into their own hands and determine
their own fate. The past decade has seen some
important progress. That progress has, however, been
uneven and, on a number of our Goals, we remain
significantly off track. So, my message today from the
United Kingdom Government is that we will keep our
promises and we expect the rest of the international
community to do the same. For our part, the new
coalition Government has committed to reaching
0.7 per cent of gross national income devoted to aid
from 2013 — a pledge that we will enshrine in law.

11

A/65/PV.9

That aid will be targeted in ways that we know will
make the biggest difference.
I am pleased to announce today that the United
Kingdom will be stepping up our efforts to combat
malaria. In Africa, a child dies from that easily
preventable disease every 45 seconds. So we will make
more money available and ensure that we get more for
our money, with the aim of halving malaria-related
deaths in 10 of the worst affected countries.
The United Kingdom Government is also proud
to be boosting our contribution to the international
drive on maternal and infant health, spearheaded by the
Secretary-General. Our new commitments will save the
lives of 50,000 mothers and a quarter of a million
babies by 2015.
The United Kingdom makes such commitments at
a time of significant difficulty in our domestic
economy. The new Government has inherited a £156billion budget deficit, so increasing our international
aid budget is not an uncontroversial decision. Some
critics have questioned that decision, asking why, at a
time when people at home are making sacrifices in
their pay and their pensions, we are increasing aid for
people in other countries.
But we make that choice because we recognize
that the promises that the United Kingdom has made
must hold in the bad times as well as the good, and that
they are even more important now than they were
before; because we understand that, while we are
experiencing hardship on our shores, it does not
compare to the abject pain and destitution of others;
because we take seriously the fact that the new
coalition Government is the last Government able to
deliver on our country’s promises in time for the 2015
MDG deadline; and because we know that doing so is
in our own, enlightened self-interest.
When the world is more prosperous, the United
Kingdom will be more prosperous. Growth in the
developing world means new partners with which to
trade and new sources of global growth. Equally, when
the world is less secure, the United Kingdom is less
secure within it.
Climate change does not somehow stop at our
borders. When pandemics occur, we are not immune.
And when poverty and poor education fuel the growth
of global terrorism, our society bears the scars too.

12

Twenty-two of the 34 countries furthest from
reaching the MDGs are in the midst of or emerging
from violent conflict. These are fragile spaces, such as
Afghanistan, where hate can proliferate and terrorist
attacks can be planned, where organized criminals can
harvest the drugs that ravage our streets, and where
families are persecuted, displaced and pushed to seek
refuge with us. So we do not see the Millennium
Development Goals just as optimistic targets for
faraway lands. They are not simply charity, nor are
they pure altruism. They are also the key to lasting
safety and future prosperity for the people of the
United Kingdom and, of course, for people right across
the globe.
We welcome the General Assembly’s agreement
to annually review the progress made against the
commitments agreed at this summit. The United
Kingdom will stand up to that test, and today I call on
others to show equal resolve. The Millennium
Development Goals must be a priority for each and
every nation represented in this Hall. Developed
nations must honour their commitments, and
developing nations must understand that they will not
receive a blank cheque.
Developing countries and donors must work
together as equal partners towards securing our
common interest. They will be expected to administer
aid in ways that are accountable, transparent and
responsible, creating the conditions for economic
growth and job creation; prioritizing national budgets
on health, infrastructure, education and basic services;
managing natural resources, particularly biodiversity,
in an environmentally sustainable way; and improving
the lives of women and girls — empowering them,
educating them, and ensuring healthy mothers can raise
strong children. There can be no doubt that women and
girls hold the key to greater prosperity for their
families, their communities and their nations, too.
If we each step up, we can meet the Millennium
Development Goals. We can liberate millions of people
from daily suffering, and give them the resources to
take control of their lives and their destinies. May
future generations look back and say that they inherited
a better world because, at this critical moment, at this
difficult moment, we did not shrink from our
responsibilities. Let them say that we rose to the
challenge and that we kept our promise.

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French):
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Barack Obama, President of the United
States of America.
President Obama: In the Charter of this United
Nations, our countries pledged to work for the
promotion of the economic and social advancement of
all peoples. In the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, we recognized the inherent dignity and rights
of every individual, including the right to a decent
standard of living. And a decade ago, at the dawn of a
new millennium, we set concrete goals to free our
fellow men, women and children from the injustice of
extreme poverty.
Those are the standards that we set, and today we
must ask: Are we living up to our mutual
responsibilities? With our economies struggling, so
many people out of work and so many families barely
getting by, I suspect that some in wealthier countries
may ask, “Why a summit on development”? The
answer is simple. In our global economy, progress in
even the poorest countries can advance the prosperity
and security of people far beyond their borders,
including my fellow Americans.
When a child dies from a preventable disease, it
shocks all of our consciences. When a girl is deprived
of an education or her mother is denied equal rights, it
undermines the prosperity of their nation. When a
young entrepreneur cannot start a new business, it
stymies the creation of new jobs and markets not only
in that entrepreneur’s country, but also in our own.
When millions of fathers cannot provide for their
families, it feeds the despair that can fuel instability
and violent extremism. When a disease goes
unchecked, it can endanger the health of millions
around the world.
So let us put to rest the old myth that
development is mere charity that does not serve our
interests. Let us reject the cynicism that says certain
countries are condemned to perpetual poverty, for the
past half-century has witnessed more gains in human
development than at any time in history. A disease that
had ravaged generations, smallpox, was eradicated.
Health care has reached the far corners of the world,
saving the lives of millions. From Latin America to
Africa and Asia, developing nations have transformed
into leaders in the global economy.

10-54527

Nor can anyone deny the progress that has been
made
towards
achieving
certain
Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). The doors of education
have been opened to tens of millions of children —
boys and girls. New cases of HIV/AIDS, malaria and
tuberculosis are down. Access to clean drinking water
is up. Around the world, hundreds of millions of people
have been lifted out of extreme poverty. That is all for
the good, and it is a testimony to the extraordinary
work that has been done both within countries and by
the international community.
Yet we must also face the fact that progress
towards other Goals that were set has not come nearly
fast enough for the hundreds of thousands of women
who lose their lives every year simply giving birth; for
the millions of children who die from the agony of
malnutrition; and for the nearly 1 billion people who
endure the misery of chronic hunger.
That is the reality that we must face. If the
international community just keeps doing the same
things the same way, we may make some modest
progress here and there but we will miss many
Development Goals. That is the truth. With 10 years
down and just five years before our development
targets are due, we must do better.
Now, I know that helping communities and
countries realize a better future is not easy. I have seen
it in my own life. I saw it in my mother as she worked
to lift up the rural poor from Indonesia to Pakistan. I
saw it on the streets of Chicago, where I worked as a
community
organizer
trying
to
build
up
underdeveloped neighbourhoods in this country. It is
hard work, but I know progress is possible.
As President, I have made it clear that the United
States will do our part. My National Security Strategy
recognizes development not only as a moral
imperative, but as a strategic and economic imperative.
Secretary of State Clinton is leading a review to
strengthen and better coordinate our diplomacy and our
development efforts. We have re-engaged with
multilateral development institutions, and we are
rebuilding the United States Agency for International
Development as the world’s premier development
agency. In short, we are making sure that the United
States will be a global leader in international
development in the twenty-first century.
However, we also recognize that the old ways
will not suffice. That is why, in Ghana last year, I

13

A/65/PV.9

called for a new approach to development that
unleashes transformational change and allows more
people to take control of their own destiny. After all, no
country wants to be dependent on another. No proud
leader in this Hall wants to ask for aid. No family
wants to be beholden to the assistance of others.
To pursue that vision, my Administration
conducted a comprehensive review of America’s
development programmes. We listened to leaders in
Government, non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
civil society, the private sector, philanthropy, Congress
and our many international partners. And today, I am
announcing
our new United
States
Global
Development Policy — the first of its kind by an
American Administration. It is rooted in America’s
enduring commitment to the dignity and potential of
every human being, and it outlines our new approach
and the new thinking that will guide our overall
development efforts, including the plan that I promised
last year and that my Administration has delivered to
pursue the Millennium Development Goals. Put simply,
the United States is changing the way we do business.
First, we are changing how we define
development. For too long, we have measured our
efforts by the dollars that we spent and the food and
medicines that we delivered. But aid alone is not
development. Development is helping nations to
actually develop — moving from poverty to prosperity.
And we need more than just aid to unleash that change.
We need to harness all the tools at our disposal — from
our diplomacy to our trade policies to our investment
policies.
Secondly, we are changing how we view the
ultimate goal of development. Our focus on assistance
has saved lives in the short term, but it has not always
improved those societies over the long term. Consider
the millions of people who have relied on food
assistance for decades. That is not development; that is
dependence, and it is a cycle that we need to break.
Instead of just managing poverty, we have to offer
nations and peoples a path out of poverty.
Now, let me be clear. The United States of
America has been and will remain the global leader in
providing assistance. We will not abandon those who
depend on us for life-saving help, whether it is food or
medicine. We will keep our promises and honour our
commitments. In fact, my Administration has increased
assistance to the least developed countries. We are

14

working with partners to finally eradicate polio. We are
building on the good efforts of my predecessor to
continue to increase funds to fight HIV/AIDS,
increasing those funds to record levels — and that
includes strengthening our commitment to the Global
Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. And we
will lead in times of crisis, as we have done since the
earthquake in Haiti and the floods in Pakistan.
But the purpose of development — what is
needed most right now — is creating the conditions
where assistance is no longer needed. So we will seek
partners that want to build their own capacity to
provide for their people. We will seek development that
is sustainable. And building in part on the lessons of
the Millennium Challenge Corporation, which has
helped countries such as El Salvador to build rural
roads and raise the incomes of its people, we will
invest in the capacity of countries that are proving their
commitment to development.
Remembering the lessons of the green revolution,
we are expanding scientific collaboration with other
countries and investing in game-changing science and
technology to help spark historic leaps in development.
For example, instead of just treating HIV/AIDS, we
have invested in pioneering research to finally develop
a way to help millions of women actually prevent
themselves from being infected in the first place.
Instead of simply handing out food, our food security
initiative is helping countries such as Guatemala,
Rwanda and Bangladesh to develop their agriculture,
improve crop yields and help farmers get their products
to market. Instead of simply delivering medicine, our
Global Health Initiative is also helping countries such
as Mali and Nepal to build stronger health systems and
better deliver care.
And with financial and technical assistance, we
will help developing countries embrace the clean
energy technologies they need to adapt to climate
change and pursue low-carbon growth. In other words,
we are making it clear that we will partner with
countries that are willing to take the lead because the
days when their development was dictated by foreign
capitals must come to an end.
Now, this brings me to a third pillar of our new
approach. To unleash transformational change, we are
putting a new emphasis on the most powerful force the
world has ever known for eradicating poverty and
creating opportunity. It is the force that turned South

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

Korea from a recipient of aid to a donor of aid. It is the
force that has raised living standards from Brazil to
India. And it is the force that has allowed emerging
African countries like Ethiopia, Malawi and
Mozambique to defy the odds and make real progress
towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals,
even as some of their neighbours — such as Côte
d’Ivoire — have lagged.
The force I am speaking about is broad-based
economic growth. Now every nation will pursue its
own path to prosperity, but decades of experience tell
us that there are certain ingredients upon which
sustainable growth and lasting development depend.
We know that countries are more likely to prosper
when they encourage entrepreneurship, when they
invest in their infrastructure, and when they expand
trade and welcome investment. So we will partner with
countries like Sierra Leone to create business
environments that are attractive to investment and do
not scare it away. We will work to break down barriers
to regional trade and urge nations to open their markets
to developing countries. We will keep pushing for a
Doha Round that is ambitious and balanced, and that
works not just for major emerging economies, but for
all economies.
We also know that countries are more likely to
prosper when Governments are accountable to their
people. So we are leading a global effort to combat
corruption, which in many places is the single greatest
barrier to prosperity and which is a profound violation
of human rights. That is why we now require oil, gas
and mining companies that raise capital in the United
States to disclose all payments they make to foreign
Governments, and it is why I urged the Group of
Twenty to put corruption on its agenda and make it
harder for corrupt officials to steal from their own
people and stifle their nation’s development.
The United States will focus our development
efforts on countries like Tanzania that promote good
governance and democracy, the rule of law and equal
administration of justice, transparent institutions with
strong civil societies and respect for human rights.
Because over the long run, democracy and economic
growth go hand in hand.
We will reach out to countries making transitions
from authoritarianism to democracy and from war to
peace. The people of Liberia, for example, have shown
that even after years of war, great progress can be

10-54527

achieved. And as others show the courage to put war
behind them — including, we hope, in the Sudan —
the United States will stand with those that seek to
build and sustain peace.
We also know that countries are more likely to
prosper when they tap the talents of all their people.
That is why we are investing in the health, education
and rights of women and working to empower the next
generation of women entrepreneurs and leaders.
Because when mothers and daughters have access to
opportunity, that is when economies grow; that is when
governance improves.
And it is why we are partnering with young
people, who in many developing countries make up
more than half the population. We are expanding
educational exchanges, like the one that brought my
father here to America from Kenya. And we are
helping young entrepreneurs succeed in a global
economy. As the final pillar of our new approach, we
will insist on more responsibility — from ourselves
and from others. We insist on mutual accountability.
For our part, we will work with Congress to better
match our investments with the priorities of our partner
countries. Guided by the evidence, we will invest in
programmes that work; we will end those that do not.
We need to be big-hearted but also hard-headed in our
approach to development.
To my fellow donor nations, I say: Let us honour
our respective commitments. Let us resolve to put an
end to hollow promises that are not kept. Let us
commit to the same transparency that we expect from
others. Let us move beyond the old, narrow debate
over how much money we are spending and instead let
us focus on results — whether we are actually making
improvements in people’s lives.
Now, to developing countries I say: This must be
your moment of responsibility as well. We want you to
prosper and succeed. It is not only in your interest; it is
in our interests. We want to help you realize your
aspirations as nations and the individuals in each of
your countries. But there is no substitute for your
leadership. Only you and your people can make the
tough choices that will unleash the dynamism of your
country. Only you can make the sustainable
investments that improve the health and well-being of
your people. Only you can deliver your nations to a
more prosperous and just future. We can be partners,
but ultimately you have to take the lead.

15

A/65/PV.9

Finally, let me say this. No one nation can do
everything everywhere and still do it well. To meet our
goals, we must be more selective and focus our efforts
where we have the best partners and where we can
have the greatest impact. And just as this work cannot
be done by any one Government, it cannot be the work
of Governments alone. In fact, foundations, the private
sector and NGOs are making historic commitments that
have redefined what is possible.
And this gives us the opportunity to forge a new
division of labour for development in the twenty-first
century. It is a division of labour where, instead of so
much duplication and inefficiency, Governments,
multilaterals and NGOs are all working together. We
each do the piece that we do best — as we are doing,
for example, in support of Ghana’s food security plan,
which will help more farmers get more goods to market
and earn more money to support their families.
That is the progress that is possible. Together, we
can collaborate in ways unimaginable just a few years
ago. Together, we can realize the future that none of us
can achieve alone. Together, we can deliver historic
leaps in development. We can do this, but only if we
move forward with the seriousness and sense of
common purpose that this moment demands.
We need development that offers a path out of
poverty for that child who deserves better;
development that builds the capacity of countries to
deliver the health care and education that their people
need; development that unleashes broader prosperity
and builds the next generation of entrepreneurs and
emerging economies; development rooted in shared
responsibility, mutual accountability and, most of all,
concrete results that pull communities and countries
from poverty to prosperity. These are the elements of
America’s new approach. This is the work that we can
do together. And this can be our plan, not simply for
meeting our Millennium Development Goals, but for
exceeding them and then sustaining them for
generations to come.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French):
The Assembly will now hear an address by His
Excellency Mr. Naoto Kan, Prime Minister of Japan.
Mr. Kan (Japan) (spoke in Japanese; English
interpretation provided by the delegation): It is an
honour for me to address the General Assembly,
representing my country, Japan.

16

Ten years have passed since the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) were launched here at the
United Nations. We came together under one
objective — the attainment of the MDGs — and we
have worked together to fight poverty. During this
decade, we have achieved remarkable victories. The
under-five child mortality rate has been decreased by
more than 3.7 million child deaths per year, as
compared with 1990. An additional 37 million children
have come to enjoy the benefits of primary education. I
would like, at the outset, to express my respect for the
efforts of those who committed themselves to
achieving these outcomes.
Such advances notwithstanding, the challenge of
achieving the Goals is not yet won. Today, in order to
address areas where progress has been particularly
slow, I will announce concrete promises in the field of
health, including maternal and child health, as well as
in the field of education, including basic education. I
call this initiative the Kan commitment.
Last June, on becoming Prime Minister, I made a
pledge to the people of Japan that I would achieve a
society in which human suffering was reduced to a
minimum. I believe that the role of political leaders is
to minimize, to the extent possible, sources of misery
such as disease, poverty and conflict. In other words,
their role is to establish a society in which human
suffering is reduced to a minimum. I have long held
that belief, and I think that it resonates with the
philosophy behind the MDGs. Only when such a
society is realized can each and every individual find
his or her own way of life and take on challenges for
the fulfilment of personal dreams.
My first promise based on this philosophy is that
Japan will make contributions in the field of health in
order to protect people’s lives. First of all, let me touch
upon the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria, which Japan helped to found.
Earlier this month, I visited the Global Fund’s
photo exhibition, “Access to Life”, which was held in
Japan. When I was Minister of Health and Welfare, I
acknowledged for the first time the responsibility of
the Government concerning the issue of HIV/AIDS
infection caused by contaminated blood products. I
apologized to all patients and reached a settlement.
That experience made me even more powerfully
interested in issues associated with various diseases,
including HIV/AIDS.

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

The recent photo exhibition gave me an
opportunity to renew my awareness that in Asia,
Africa, South America and many other places in the
world a large number of people affected by AIDS are
still losing their lives. At the same time, I should also
note that, thanks to the development of new medicines,
adequate treatment can prevent mother-to-child
transmission of HIV, as well as return many people
living with HIV to society.
The Global Fund has been playing an outstanding
role, and I would like to pay sincere tribute to it. I
hereby promise that, at the third replenishment
conference, scheduled for next month, Japan will
announce its intention to make contributions
amounting to $800 million in the coming years.
Another major cause for concern is the fact that
the number of deaths among children under the age of
five remains high and that the reductions achieved to
date in the mortality rate for infants and pregnant
women are still far short of the targets set in the
MDGs. We need to exert additional drastic efforts.
Japan will provide assistance, in the amount of
$5 billion over five years beginning in 2011, to
contribute to the achievement of the health-related
MDGs. We make this contribution in order to save the
lives of 680,000 mothers and 11.3 million children, in
cooperation with other partners. Specifically, Japan
will provide intensive assistance centred on three
pillars: maternal and child health, three major
infectious diseases and measures to address global
threats such as new influenza viruses.
At the same time, Japan will propose an
assistance model in maternal and child health that will
give people in need access to appropriate preventive
services and medical care. I call that model
EMBRACE — which stands for Ensure Mothers and
Babies Regular Access to Care — virtually to embrace
mothers and children. This model aims to deliver a
sequence of health services, including prenatal care
with routine examinations and neonatal care at
facilities with quality equipment and human resources,
improved access to hospitals and the provision of
immunizations. This is an approach to ensure a
continuum of care from pregnancy to post-delivery. I
emphasized the importance of this model at the
Muskoka Summit of the Group of Eight, and obtained
the endorsement of participating countries. I now take
this opportunity to call once again on developing
countries to adopt this model, and on donors and

10-54527

international organizations to make concerted efforts to
implement optimal assistance measures in maternal and
child health.
I am convinced that Japan’s world-class medical
services and leading technologies will also contribute
to the solution of health issues. For instance, a
Japanese company that plays a leadership role in my
country’s business community has provided tens of
millions of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets to
African countries. This product has its roots in Japan’s
traditional life wisdom. A cutting-edge technology has
made it possible for the anti-insect effect to be longlasting. That has made an immeasurable contribution in
the struggle to eradicate malaria. As that example
demonstrates, the role to be played by civil society,
including the private sector and non-governmental
organizations, is very significant. I fully support such
endeavours on the part of civil society, now and in the
future.
For its part, education, in conjunction with good
health, provides the basis for participation in society. It
is a cause of great dismay that in the world today there
are many children who are forced into hard labour or
are deprived of opportunities to receive an education
due to poverty and conflict. Without a proper
education, young people cannot realize their potential
or take an active part in their society. They lose hope
and, in turn, society loses dynamism.
Japan will provide $3.5 billion in assistance over
five years beginning in 2011, so as to contribute to the
achievement of the education-related MDGs and to
provide an education to all the children of the world,
including those who have been marginalized and those
living in conflict areas. To that end, Japan will
cooperate with developing countries and other partners.
This assistance will provide a quality education
environment for at least 7 million children. Japan will
also pay careful attention to post-primary education,
namely, secondary education, vocational training and
tertiary education. Assistance for education leads to the
creation of jobs and social vitality, which I consider
essential.
Japan therefore proposes a basic education
assistance model which encourages coordinated efforts
among schools, communities and Governments for the
comprehensive
improvement
of
the
learning
environment in such areas as quality of teachers,
school management, treatment of girls and disabled

17

A/65/PV.9

students, nutrition, sanitation and child physical
fitness. I call this model “School for All”, and I am
confident that the introduction of this model in
developing countries will lead to the diffusion of
sustainable education. I call on donor countries and
international organizations to work together to support
children around the world in accordance with this
model. Japan will definitely be standing at the
forefront of such efforts.
Japan attaches importance to assistance in the
field of health and education because it can serve as a
basis for developing countries to achieve sustained
development. From that perspective, achieving the
MDGs with an emphasis on these two fields is crucial.
We must make the utmost effort to this end.
It is important to follow up on this High-level
Plenary Meeting. With that in mind, my country
proposes to hold an international conference in Japan
next year in order to strengthen coordination among a
broad range of stakeholders, not only Governments but
also international organizations and non-governmental
organizations.
Today, I have announced the Kan commitment,
which consists of concrete measures that Japan will
take, particularly in the fields of health and education.
This is our promise to the next generation, who bear
the world’s hopes for the future. The MDGs are the
promises that our generation must keep to future
generations. The path to their achievement overlaps
with the path towards a society in which human
suffering is reduced to a minimum. The Goals are
interrelated, and much more needs to be done.
However, little time remains. We, the Member States,
need to renew our commitment to achieve the MDGs
by 2015 and take action. Let us work together towards
achieving this critical aim.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Han Seungsoo, Presidential Envoy of the Republic of Korea and
President of the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth
session.
Mr. Han Seung-soo (Republic of Korea): We are
gathered here today at a moment well past the midway
point in our journey to achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) by the 2015 target date.
The past decade has witnessed impressive progress
towards meeting the Goals. However, we must
continue to address the unmet and under-met targets

18

across sectors, countries and regions, so that we can
break with the destiny syndrome: “where you live
determines how you live”.
To keep our promise to achieve the MDG targets
by 2015, it will be critical to secure adequate,
consistent and predictable financial resources for
development. Donor countries must honour their longstanding promises and deliver on their commitments.
At the same time, development financing has to be
broad-based, going beyond official development
assistance (ODA), as we agreed at the United Nations
International
Conference
on
Financing
for
Development in Monterrey, Mexico, in 2002, a
conference I had the honour of hosting in my capacity
as President of the General Assembly at its fifty-sixth
session.
Financing the MDGs has to start at home, too. We
need to raise and allocate more domestic resources and
revenues through improved tax systems and financing
mechanisms. Innovative financing mechanisms also
have much to offer to scale up existing resources. For
its part, the Republic of Korea is taking concrete steps
to fulfil its commitment to increase the volume of ODA
to 0.25 per cent of its gross national income, about $3
million, by 2015. We are also utilizing innovative
financing mechanisms to increase our support to health
sectors.
Of equal importance is the effective use of
development resources. The call for more development
resources needs to go hand in hand with the effort to
improve the quality and effectiveness of development
assistance through enhanced national ownership,
alignment, harmonization, managing for results and
mutual accountability.
Following the High-level Forums on Aid
Effectiveness held in Rome, Paris and Accra, Korea
will host the fourth such meeting, in Busan, Korea,
next year. At that fourth High-level Forum, we will
assess the relevance of the principles on aid
effectiveness, based on hard data and on close
monitoring of those principles. However, our
discussion will not stop there. We need to go even
further, moving beyond the aid effectiveness agenda at
the Forum. Indeed, we have to broaden our concept of
development cooperation to focus more on
development itself. What ultimately matters is not the
effectiveness of aid, but rather the development results
it brings about.

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

We strongly support the Secretary-General’s view
expressed in his report, “Keeping the Promise”
(A/64/665), that the intricately interwoven nature of
the MDGs calls for a holistic approach to development.
Improvement in one sector will carry the momentum
over to other closely related Goals. For instance, Korea
fully understands the far-reaching impact of health and
education on development, based on its own
development experiences. Similarly, gender equality
and women’s empowerment will have a multiplier
effect for development.
While these MDG targets are pivotal to
development, their progress has been mostly
disappointing. To partake in the global efforts to
remedy these shortfalls, we have recently joined the
Muskoka Initiative on Maternal, Newborn and Child
Health. In a similar vein, we welcome and support the
Secretary-General’s Global Strategy for Women’s and
Children’s Health. In addition, Korea has been a solid
supporter of the International Drug Purchase Facility
(UNITAID) and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria. I am also pleased to
announce that this year Korea became a new supporter
of the GAVI Alliance — formerly known as the Global
Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization — which
focuses on improving rates of child mortality through
vaccination for those under five years old. Korea will
be the first Asian country to participate in the GAVI
Alliance.
Another area where we are strengthening our
development cooperation is addressing environmental
degradation and climate change, on which the future of
humanity so critically depends. Korea has been
implementing the East Asia Climate Partnership to
support the efforts of Asia Pacific countries to address
the challenges posed by climate change. We have also
launched a low-carbon green growth initiative to
contribute to the promotion of green industries, which
will be integral to realizing inclusive and equitable
growth. In order to promote low-carbon green growth
and to share our experience with developing and
emerging economies, the Global Green Growth
Institute was established in Korea three months ago.
Our action plans need to be further focused on the
regions falling behind on progress. Most of the subSaharan African countries and the least developed
countries are seriously off track on most of the MDG
targets. While Asia remains the focus of Korea’s
development cooperation, we are increasing our

10-54527

support to Africa and to least developed countries in
other regions. In this regard, we are implementing a
Korea-Africa initiative as a multi-year programme for
partnership with African countries. The least developed
countries continue to be prominent development
partners with Korea. Thus, about 50 per cent of
Korea’s bilateral assistance has been allocated to lowincome countries, including the least developed
countries.
By investing in the MDGs, we invest in global
economic growth. The growth we harness, however,
must be inclusive and equitable. Sustainable
achievement of poverty eradication comes only when
we obtain inclusive and equitable growth, where
people across every sphere of society are allowed to
participate in the process of development and equitably
enjoy the benefits of growth.
Achieving the MDGs cannot be seen as an end in
itself. Our work does not stop at achieving the MDGs.
We must aim at sustaining them in the long run. It is in
this context that, at the forthcoming Group of Twenty
(G 20) summit in Seoul in November, we will
deliberate on the ways to ensure development through
sustainable growth. We will utilize our comparative
advantage as a group of major global economies by
concentrating on laying the foundations for growth,
such as infrastructure, investment, trade, human
resources development and financial inclusion. Thus,
the G 20 will focus on increasing the sustainability of
growth by enhancing the capacity of developing
countries and by securing resilience in times of
financial and economic crisis. This will in turn further
contribute to a sustained achievement of the MDGs.
The road ahead will likely be more difficult than
the road already travelled. But with the renewed
resolution forged today, I am confident that we will
turn our global visions into reality as we chart our path
to 2015. Korea, for its part, remains very much
committed to serving in a leadership role in bridging
the gap between the developed and developing
countries.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. S.M. Krishna,
Minister for External Affairs of India.
Mr. Krishna (India): I am honoured to be present
at this august gathering and to speak on the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), an aspiration that so
fittingly captures the global vision and promise for

19

A/65/PV.9

humanity in the twenty-first century. Allow me to
begin by thanking you, Mr. Co-Chair, for your
stewardship, guidance and support of the expansive
development agenda of the United Nations, including
the Millennium Development Goals.

With just five years to go until the MDG target
year, and given our record of mixed success, it is
imperative that we significantly step up our individual
and collective commitments and efforts for the
realization of the MDGs.

In his message on United Nations Public Service
Day five years ago, our Prime Minister, Mr. Manmohan
Singh, said:

Our collective efforts have certainly borne fruit
towards the goal of poverty eradication at the global
level. But more than 60 million people slipped back
into poverty in 2009 following the economic and
financial crisis of 2008. This has certainly had a
regressive impact on the MDGs.

“The Millennium Development Goals that
we have set for ourselves cannot be met unless
Governments are proactive. No Government in
any civilized society can ignore the basic needs
of people. The goal of the development process
must be to include every last member of our
society in that process.”
As we take stock of the MDGs, we note that the
world as a whole has made substantial gains but that
the progress is uneven and falls short of expectations.
This is particularly visible in the so-called forgotten
MDGs, the MDGs that deal with women and children’s
health. We are therefore happy that the SecretaryGeneral has set out a Global Strategy for Women’s and
Children’s Health.
Natural disasters have also taken a toll on MDG
achievement. The death and destruction in Haiti and
Pakistan have been on an unprecedented scale. As a
fellow developing country that has itself seen a huge
impact from such disasters, we responded, duty-bound
in solidarity, to assist the Governments and people in
the affected countries to the best of our ability and in
keeping with their priorities.
A growing concern is the impact of climate
change on vulnerable communities and regions in our
country. Rain-fed agriculture accounts for 60 per cent
of crop area in India. Climate change has aggravated
the situation in traditionally drought- and flood-prone
regions in the country. The National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme was designed to provide relief to
affected farming communities in the country. We in
India are alive to the challenges of climate change, and
remain committed to mounting appropriate national
and regional responses. Our national action plan on
climate change will increase the share of clean and
renewable energy in our energy mix, increase energy
efficiency across the economy and expand our forest
cover.

20

It is, therefore, important that we ensure that
global economic recovery is durable, balanced and
sustainable. This is also critical for achieving the
MDGs and for us to be able to effectively address the
challenges of food and energy security, climate change
and natural disasters. As far as India is concerned, our
economy has shown resilience and is expected to grow
by 8.5 per cent in 2010-2011, and by over 9 per cent in
2011-2012.
The Millennium Development Goals Report
2010, published by the United Nations, notes that
India’s efforts on poverty reduction have been a major
contributor to a reduction in global poverty levels;
some 188 million people in India will be out of poverty
by 2015. We need, however, to be cognizant of the fact
that the largest concentration of poor in the world
remains in India and South Asia. The long distance we
still have to travel to put poverty behind us in India
should not be underestimated.
Our efforts, therefore, are aimed at pushing push
for growth while ensuring that the fruits of growth
reach out across our society. That is what we call
inclusive growth. This indeed is the main objective of
India’s
ambitious
socio-economic
development
programmes.
The
Mahatma
Gandhi
National
Rural
Employment Guarantee Act, with an annual budget of
$8 billion, is the largest cash for work poverty
alleviation programme in the world and has benefited
50 million rural households in India thus far.
By law, all Indian children aged 6 to 14 years
must now receive free education. Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan, a universal elementary education programme
with an annual budget of $3 billion, has dramatically
increased primary school enrolment. To ensure that
children remain in school, and that this also benefits

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

them nutritionally, we also run the largest school lunch
programme in the world. This is being supplemented
by Saakshar Bharat, a special programme focused on
female literacy launched in 2009.
Enormous strides have been made in the
empowerment of women. India has embarked on
perhaps the most ambitious affirmative action initiative
ever by mandating that one third of all elected
positions in local government be reserved for women.
We are striving to raise this figure even higher. More
than a million women representatives already hold
elected positions in India. Legislation to extend the
reservation of seats in parliament is under
consideration.
India faces enormous challenges in the areas of
women’s and children’s health. The Government of
India adopted a multi-pronged strategy under the
National Rural Health Mission in 2005 to provide rural
area health care that is accessible, affordable,
accountable, effective and reliable. This Mission is
fully focused on improving our standing on maternal
and child health indicators. Under the umbrella of this
Mission, recently, in order to accelerate progress, new
initiatives have been identified, namely, the namebased tracking of pregnant women, a maternal death
review, an adolescent reproductive and sexual health
programme, differential planning and an annual health
survey.
Janani Suraksha Yojana, our dedicated safe
motherhood programme, has so far benefited 28
million women. As a result of ongoing efforts, the
maternal mortality rate in India has come down from
301 per 100,000 live births during the period 20012003 to 254 during the period 2004-2006, a decline of
47 points over a period of three years. Though we are
still some distance away from the target of 109 by
2015, given the rate of decline in the past and
comprehensive efforts being made across the country,
it appears that India is on the right track with regard to
MDG 5. We are also trying to take similar strides on
the infant mortality rate.
India has made notable progress on combating
HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases. The HIV
epidemic has reached a plateau in India, and we now
have the prevalence rate down to 0.34 per cent.
India has made valuable use of technology to
bring the benefits of development to our people.
Teledensity in India has increased from 0.67 per cent in

10-54527

1991 to 37 per cent in 2009. Our innovative and lowcost technology solutions in the field of information
technology and telecommunication have brought about
development benefits, not just in India, but also to
people in Africa, Latin America and elsewhere.
In August 2010, we launched the second phase of
the Pan-African e-network project. The network project
will link all 53 countries in Africa with centres of
excellence in India for telemedicine and tele-education
services. More than 1,700 students from African
countries have already registered with Indian
universities for various courses, and regular
telemedical consultations have started between African
doctors and Indian specialists.
The lack of progress on building a robust global
partnership needs to be urgently addressed. Unmet
financial commitments by developed country partners
have widened the financing for development gap. We
call upon them to fulfil the commitment made long ago
to devote 0.7 per cent of gross national income to
official development assistance. Equally urgent is the
need to transfer technology and undertake capacitybuilding in developing countries.
The quantum leap in South-South cooperation has
significantly complemented global resources targeted
at the development agenda, but it cannot be a substitute
for North-South cooperation. We are happy that India’s
development partnership with countries in the South
today goes beyond technical cooperation. Our annual
outlay on concessional lending and grants is well over
$1 billion and covers countries in our region, in Africa
and beyond. In addition, $5 billion has been extended
in lines of credit since 2003. We are committed to
doing more in the coming years with our partners in
the South and to stepping up our support to SouthSouth cooperation, both on the development side and
in support of humanitarian needs.
India is seized of the MDG challenges that lie
ahead of us. Our commitment remains resolute. Our
national goal of inclusive growth and the larger idea of
a more humane and just global society that underlines
the Millennium Declaration will continue to inspire us
to work untiringly to achieve the MDGs by 2015.
In the final march towards the attainment of the
MDGs, let us be inspired by the belief of Mahatma
Gandhi in the limitless potential of human
achievement. He said that “a small body of determined
spirits fired by an unquenchable faith in their mission

21

A/65/PV.9

can alter the course of history”. That should be the
driving force for nations around the world. To that we
dedicate ourselves.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic): I
now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Xavier Espot
Miró, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Institutional
Relations of the Principality of Andorra.
Mr. Espot Miró (Andorra) (spoke in Catalan;
French text provided by the delegation): We are here in
New York today in the same Hall where we met
10 years ago, when all Member States made promises
in the form of concrete goals to combat poverty and
work on behalf of the world’s most vulnerable people.
At that time, we spoke of global solidarity rising above
national interests. We also spoke of fair globalization
as a cornerstone for peace and security.
Today we face promises that may not be able to
be met. If we are optimistic, we may note some
progress, even if it has been unequal. People who have
fallen victim to violent conflict and those most
vulnerable to natural disasters have once again
remained on the sidelines of development. World Bank
statistics show that in recent years the number of
people in extreme poverty has fallen by 28 per cent.
That decrease was concentrated mainly in Eastern Asia,
while the regions of Western Asia and sub-Saharan
Africa saw movement in the opposite direction.
The situation is critical when we talk about
hunger and malnutrition. We must not forget today that
billions of people are victims of hunger — an alarming
figure. The current financial crisis has only served to
exacerbate the situation, in particular in sub-Saharan
Africa, where salaries have fallen and prices for staples
continue to rise.
In the area of education, the 2010 Education for
All Global Monitoring Report, published by UNESCO,
reveals that much headway has been made in the past
10 years. Nonetheless, there are still 72 million
children in the world who do not receive schooling.
With regard to gender equality, we welcome the
creation of the United Nations Entity for Gender
Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN
Women). I hope that this new tool will make it possible
to improve women’s participation in the political and
economic spheres.
In the area of health, we have not yet resolved the
problem of the HIV/AIDS epidemic. At the same time,

22

80 per cent of diseases are the result of pollution and
shortages of water. Every day, more than 5,000
children under the age of five die due to water that is
not safe to drink. The right to drinking water is a
fundamental right. We hope that, in line with the
fundamental right to water and sanitation, we will be
able to step up efforts to guarantee better access to
drinking water.
We have indeed made progress, but the results are
relative and still fall far short of the Millennium
Development Goals. Moreover, collective security, the
fight against terrorism, financial stability and the issue
of commodity prices can be added to the list of
objectives. We all recognize that, year after year, we
are becoming increasingly dependent upon each other.
We know that shared prosperity translates into shared
security. Why is it so difficult to make available the
resources required to achieve the Goals?
In Andorra, the achievement of the MDGs is
endorsed and respected by the entire society. Moreover,
we engage in cooperation so that the Goals can be
achieved throughout the world, while at the same time
taking into account the situation of our own country.
Our Development Cooperation Service, which I have
the honour to lead, was established in 2001. Today, the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs and Institutional Relations
allocates 23 per cent of its financial resources to
development cooperation. Andorra’s development aid
plan, which governs our cooperation, takes into
account the Millennium Development Goals, which are
included as priority areas for our cooperation. Andorra
promotes solidarity among human beings at both the
community and the Government levels. Andorran
associations are also making their contribution to
achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
We have entered the home stretch of a race that
will conclude in five years. We face difficulties that are
more serious than expected. The efforts we have made
to date have not been sufficient. The word “crisis” in
Chinese is made up of two characters. One means
danger and the other means opportunity.
We must try to get back on track. This requires all
States to be able to carry out their own development
policies adapted to their needs. Accordingly, the role of
the United Nations and all of its specialized agencies is
crucial.
In conclusion, I would like to express my
Government’s support for the draft outcome document

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

of this Meeting (A/65/L.1). We hope that each one of
us will find the ways and means to achieve a multiplier
effect and reverse the current trends. We are convinced
that we can make the most of this.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic): I
now give the floor to the His Excellency Mr. Hugo
Roger Martínez Bonilla, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of El Salvador.
Mr. Martínez Bonilla (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): In fulfilment of the commitments entered
into with respect to the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), it is a priority for El Salvador to
comply with the Goals’ indicators.
We know that it is possible to achieve the Goals
if they are fully addressed through public economic
and social policies that promote the inclusion in the
development process of all citizens as their advocates
and beneficiaries, especially the more vulnerable
sectors.
In this regard, the model of economic growth
with social inclusion which President Carlos Mauricio
Funes Cartagena has launched emphasizes, among
other things, the strengthening of personal and social
capacities, access to basic public goods, the rebuilding
of the social fabric and the creation of employment
opportunities.
The elimination of poverty and hunger, the
achievement of universal primary education and the
improvement of the health of the population are some
of the key elements in the national five-year plan that
we are promoting in El Salvador. Furthermore,
President Funes has proposed that these development
initiatives be taken to a regional level in Central
America through a social compact which will make it
possible to improve the standard of living and the
development of our peoples and to turn us into a more
prosperous and inclusive region in the concert of
nations.
We are pleased with the recognition made by
President Obama of the efforts being made by El
Salvador and other countries in striving to achieve the
MDGs. Efforts aimed at eradicating poverty mainly
require investments in basic education, sanitation, the
supply of drinking water, decent housing, food supply
and adequate infrastructure for a population that is
rapidly growing. We also want to create jobs for the
growing number of young people joining the labour

10-54527

force at a time when unemployment becomes a threat,
especially in urban areas.
Even though this was an extraordinary year,
given the global economic crisis, the problems in terms
of security and the high exposure to natural disasters,
we were able, through measures implemented during
this period, to make some considerable gains, which
deserve mention. For example, I would underline the
launching of a real estate guarantee fund; agricultural
kits for small producers; delivery of land titles; a
programme of temporary income support; the
implementation of a rural communities solidarity
programme, which has reached 100 extremely poor
municipalities and delivered health and education
vouchers to 106,000 families; the issuing of universal
basic pensions, starting in November 2009, to 7,000
adults over 70 years old in 32 municipalities suffering
severe extreme poverty. These actions are all steps
taken in support of MDG 1.
With respect to MDG 2, we can mention the
expansion of the coverage of the school food
programme, which serves on the national level almost
5,000 schools and which benefits more than 1,330,000
students.
With respect to other MDGs, we note the
issuance of unemployment certificates, beginning in
February 2010, which guarantee workers who have
been laid off six months of health care services and the
regional provision of essential medicines to health
units. Similarly, the elimination of the fee required for
access to the public health system contributed to a
40 per cent increase in the demand for health services.
The Government of El Salvador has been
developing a thorough reform of its health system
which during decades had been abandoned. This
reform is motivated by the recognition that health is a
public good and a fundamental human right, which the
State must therefore guarantee to all its population. We
will continue to create spaces for the active social
participation of all sectors, particularly those which
have been traditionally excluded. This step, which was
announced this week by President Funes, will take
health to the homes of Salvadorans and will open up
job opportunities for 14,000 health professionals.
Another of the most relevant examples of this
inclusive policy which takes human rights into account
is the national response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic led
by the Government of El Salvador, with the decisive

23

A/65/PV.9

support of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS and other technical and financial
cooperation agencies, in order to work on the country’s
policy in the promotion, prevention, early detection,
follow-up and treatment of sexually transmitted
infections and diseases as well as of HIV/AIDS. The
Government has thus committed itself to undertaking
relevant measures and actions to achieve the targets
proposed in the MDGs. In this framework, the
awareness of the population concerning a reduction in
stigma and discrimination, the reduction of mother-tochild transmission, the free and mass HIV testing and
access to antiretroviral therapy, also free of cost, by
persons who need it are placing the country on the
right path to achieve MDG 6.
In emphasizing these results, I would like to say
that experience shows us that in order for these policies
to be effective, they must include a gender perspective
as well as one of social inclusion while making
deliberate efforts to offer incentives to civil society
institutions to participate with the strategies that
address the basic needs of the population.
To this end, we promote the participation of the
young population, communities, schools and
non-governmental
organizations,
among
other
stakeholders, in the delivery of promotion and
prevention programmes to reduce health risks, to
prevent dropping out of school, to expand the coverage
of services, and to contribute to the prevention of harm
or risky behaviour.
Another measure was the devising of social
programmes as part of a universal protection system,
which gave rise to policies that promoted broad
coverage and inclusiveness. For example, we
eliminated voluntary quotas in hospitals and started the
mass distribution of free medicines as part of the
national health system. In the area of preventive
medicine, the Government trebled the use of vaccines.
We also doubled the investment in vaccines by
introducing the pneumonia vaccine. Similarly, during
President Funes’s administration we will have brought
into the health system thousands of women employed
as domestic workers, who are mostly single mothers
and heads of household.
In the area of education, the Government
implemented the most ambitious programme of
assistance to low-income families ever carried out in
El Salvador. The school kit includes uniforms, shoes

24

and school supplies for students attending public
school. This major programme was designed so as not
only to assist families but also to promote employment.
More than 40,000 artisans, family businesses,
microenterprises and cooperatives participated in the
sewing of uniforms and the manufacture of shoes as
well as distributing raw materials and products.
To strengthen aid to the neediest areas of the
country, we extended the solidarity initiative for rural
communities to cover the 100 poorest municipalities.
Moreover, in the 32 poorest municipalities in the rural
zones, we initiated the universal basic pension for
persons over 70 years of age without means, who had
never before received Government help.
Given the threat of the exponential growth of
urban poverty as a result of the global financial crisis,
urban solidarity communities were created, which
included two pilot programmes. One is the temporary
income aid programme, which consists of a stipend of
$100 per month for unemployed youth and women
heads of household, in exchange for which the
recipients offer four days of productive community
work and attend a day of job training. Four
hundred
twenty thousand agricultural kits, with seeds and
fertilizer, have been distributed to small rural
producers who cultivate up to 0.7 hectares of land for
their own consumption to help them with their family
finances.
While recognizing that each country must take
responsibility for its own development agenda, we are
also convinced that — because it is a commitment on
the part of the international community — all national
efforts must be supported and complemented by the
solidarity and cooperation of the international
community. In this context we commend and we share
the vision of the Secretary-General, who recently
stated that the priority for the next five years must be
to increase assistance to projects that can yield the best
results. We therefore support the establishment and
maintenance of a global alliance for development that
is united and generous and takes into account the
capacities, resources and limitations — and above all,
the commitment — of each Government towards
meeting the MDGs as criteria to support the flow of
assistance needed to achieve those Goals.
El Salvador shares the vision that all Member
States will attain, through achieving the MDGs, better

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

standards of living for their peoples, but above all for
the most vulnerable groups.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic): I
now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Kevin Rudd,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Australia.
Mr. Rudd (Australia): As nations we have a
responsibility to do that which we say we will do — a
responsibility to keep our promises to fellow Member
States and a responsibility to turn our commitments,
solemnly given in this great Hall, into concrete actions
that change the lives of the poorest of the poor across
the world. A decade ago, we, the nations of the world,
assembled here to offer the world’s poor a fairer share
in the world’s future. A decade later we gather once
again to take stock and to celebrate that which we have
done, but also honestly to admit where we have failed.
I want to begin with a story of two children. The
first is about a young girl I met on Monday, here in
New York. Her name is Nthabiseng. She was born in
Soweto. Nthabiseng is a beautiful little girl with the
brightest of smiles. She is 12 years old. But when she
was seven, her mother died. Normally, that would have
consigned her to a life of poverty. But Nthabiseng was
determined to get an education. She said, “When
children are stopped from going to school, they are
losing their future and they are losing their tomorrow.”
Now she is doing very well in school and has a very
bright future. Children like Nthabiseng will benefit
from the United Nations One Goal programme, which
seeks to make education a reality for all the children in
the world, not just some.
The second story is of a young boy who has never
been to New York. He too lost his mother — she died
giving birth to him. His family ekes out a living in the
slums of one of the world’s developing mega-cities, not
far from the skyscrapers of its booming financial
district. This little boy’s days are spent not in school
but in the traffic of the city, begging for spare change
at car windows when cars stop at the lights. We have
all seen him in our travels. I have not given him a
name. He has thousands of names. And right now, he is
without hope.
Why do I tell these stories? Because they are the
human faces of what happens when the world acts with
compassion — and when it does not. The first story
inspires us to further action. The second should make
us determined to act for all.

10-54527

At the turn of the millennium we, the States
Members of the United Nations, made a compact with
one another. We said we would put our shoulders to the
wheel to lift a billion people out of poverty. And we
said we should be measured by these Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) in 2015: to halve poverty
and hunger, to give every girl and boy the chance of a
good education, to make big cuts in the number of
women dying in childbirth and children dying from
easily preventable diseases, to promote gender equality
and empower women, to combat HIV/AIDS, to ensure
global sustainability and to develop a global
partnership for development.
Ten years on, it is time to reflect on the report
card of our progress. The truth is we are not yet on
track to register even the barest of passing marks.
Successes in some areas — poverty reduction and
school enrolment — must be weighed against failures
in other areas, including maternal health and child
nutrition.
Our failures have attracted vocal critics — those
who say that international aid does not work, that it is
wasted that it is poorly managed, that there is just no
point. This is not Australia’s view. Our view is that the
richest among us have a profound responsibility to help
the poorest members of the human family out of
poverty.
Poverty
is
degrading.
Poverty
is
dehumanizing. Poverty destroys human dignity.
As the Secretary-General reminded us in his
report “Keeping the promise” (A/64/665), the MDGs
are an expression of basic human rights, the rights of
everyone to good health, education and shelter. I
believe that these truths are in fact self-evident. But for
those who doubt that there is any self-evident truth in
this concept of social justice we should consider the
following.
Eliminating extreme poverty boosts global
growth for all. It grows the global cake. It grows trade
and investment. It grows jobs. It acts against political
and religious extremism and radicalization. It builds
peace. It enhances stability. And it reduces dangerous,
irregular movements of people around the world. In
other words, eliminating extreme poverty is good for
the entire human family, and it is good for all nations.
As members of the family of nations, we cannot
stand idly by while 70 million children are unable to
attend school. We cannot stand idly by when hundreds
of thousands of women die in childbirth — an

25

A/65/PV.9

estimated 358,000 in the year before last. Nor can we
stand idly by while infectious diseases cut a
devastating swath through the communities of the poor.
The chilling fact is that more than half of the 800
million people in the least developed countries of the
world are still living in extreme poverty.
Let us be honest. Donor countries have made
commitments that they have not honoured. For
example, less than half of the funding pledged to
Africa five years ago in the Gleneagles declaration of
the Group of Eight has been delivered. The answer is
not to push our commitments even further into the
future, nor is it simply to sweep it all quietly under the
international carpet. The answer is to do that which we
say that we will do: to honour our commitments, even
when the global economic environment is hard,
because for the poorest of the poor, it is even harder.
This is what Australia seeks to do.
Several years ago, halfway to the 2015 deadline,
we in Australia saw that our efforts were not sufficient.
We realized that we had to do much more. By 2015, on
current projections, our aid budget will double, just as
it doubled between 2005 and 2010. That will make
Australia the fastest-growing donor country in the
Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development. We have maintained our commitment,
including a 200 per cent increase in aid to Africa alone,
despite the impacts of the financial crisis.
The Australian Government, under Prime
Minister Gillard, puts the MDGs at the heart of our aid
programme, and, as Australia’s aid programme doubles
over the next five years, we will increase our support
to the least developed countries through the MDGs.
Today I am committing Australia to work towards
providing 0.15 per cent of our gross national income in
aid to the least developed countries, in line with
international targets. Across our entire overseas
development assistance programme, Australia expects
between now and 2015 to allocate A$5 billion to
education, A$1.6 billion to women’s and children’s
health, A$1.8 billion to food security, and A$1.2 billion
to action on climate-change adaptation and mitigation
in developing countries, including the 39 small island
developing States that are the most exposed to, but the
least responsible for, that great threat to our planet —
climate change.
Australia will also work to open world markets to
least developed countries in order to enable private

26

commerce, trade and investment to help lift these
countries out of poverty. All that is made possible by
necessary governance measures to provide transparency
and accountability. Those elements are the necessary
stepping stones to development.
I began with a story of two children, one with
opportunities and one without. The Australian people
by instinct want to see that all the little ones of the
world are given a fair go. Through their generous
private donations and through the official aid
programme paid for by taxes, Australians want to
provide opportunities for all the peoples of the world to
live a decent life. Australian non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) are active across the world —
NGOs including World Vision, Oxfam, Caritas,
ChildFund, Plan International, the Red Cross and the
Oaktree Foundation.
Let me conclude by quoting a third child — this
time a young Australian, a 10-year-old girl who wrote
to me with the following:
“I think kids in other countries have the
same rights as kids here — yes, that’s right. Kids
everywhere should have the same things we
have — like good teachers, doctors, houses and
clean water.”
The Governments of the world cannot let down
the children of the world. If we want to reform this
great institution — these United Nations, this
parliament of humankind — we should not begin with
another grand plan. We should simply begin by doing
that which we say we will do. We in Australia want to
do just that. We want to play our part in bringing these
Millennium Development Goals into reality, to make a
fundamental difference to the world’s poor, and to
make a fundamental difference to the future of all
humankind.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic): I
now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Mourad
Medelci, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the People’s
Democratic Republic of Algeria.
Mr. Medelci (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): Our
meeting today is an excellent opportunity to evaluate
the efforts to implement the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs). At the same time, it allows us to note
the obstacles that hamper their achievement, to learn
lessons and to renew commitments as part of our future
work.

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

Today, although we can express satisfaction at the
progress made by some countries in the five years
since the first evaluation meeting and five years before
the 2015 deadline, we must also note that many
countries are not going to achieve the Goals. Further
complicating matters is the slowdown resulting from
the food, climate and economic crises from which
African countries, in particular, have suffered —
countries that have made considerable efforts to
implement the MDGs.
It is therefore not surprising that the most recent
African Union Summit, in Kampala, focused its work
on the MDGs, especially maternal and child health.
Nonetheless, the people of Africa are responsible for
their own development, as the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development has affirmed. However, that
responsibility should be shared with and supported by
the international community.
In that context, all considerations concerning our
future actions should, in my view, keep in mind two
key points. First, the eradication of poverty and hunger
is the main MDG and broadly determines the
implementation of the rest of the Goals, and secondly,
the crucial need to overcome poverty and hunger in the
world puts the mobilization of resources, particularly
financial resources, at the core of any action aimed at
implementing the MDGs.
These key points have led me to propose the
following ideas for our action in future, as part of the
efforts to improve the performance of developing
countries in achieving the MDGs.
First, the flow of official development assistance
(ODA) must double to bring it into line with
international commitments, particularly those made by
the Group of Eight. For many countries ODA plays a
key role in poverty reduction. Secondly, we need to
move towards a delay on debt for struggling
developing countries in order to complement those
multilateral and bilateral initiatives already adopted to
cancel or mitigate the debt burden for the poorest and
least developed countries. Thirdly, we should
encourage industrialized countries to increase their
foreign direct investment in the poorest countries. And
fourthly, we should improve access to developed
countries’ markets for developing countries’ exports.
As far as Algeria is concerned, we are firmly
committed to achieving the MDGs by putting
economic and social development at the heart of the

10-54527

new investment programme for 2010 to 2014. Today,
we can state that my country — which has just
presented its second national report on progress
towards implementing the MDGs — has already
achieved several Goals, particularly in the areas of
fighting poverty and of education. That is why our
poverty levels have dropped, from 7.1 per cent in the
1990s to 5 per cent in 2009, and why more than a
million housing units were built during the five-year
period from 2005 to 2009, in large part to help abolish
substandard housing. In the area of education, the
school enrolment rate for six-year-olds has risen from
93 per cent in 1999 to 96.97 per cent in 2009.
The challenges we face today demand that we all
increase our efforts to do better, and faster. More than
ever, that requires of us self-reliance through solidarity,
through developing everybody’s capacities, and
through partnership for the poorest and most
underprivileged.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic): I
now give the floor to Her Excellency Ms. Márcia
Helena Carvalho Lopes, Minister for Social
Development and the Fight Against Hunger of the
Federative Republic of Brazil.
Ms. Lopes (Brazil) (spoke in Portuguese;
English text provided by the delegation): It is an
honour to represent President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva
at this meeting of great global interest. After seven and
a half years of President Lula’s Government, Brazil has
consolidated a model for fairer and more equitable
economic growth, with social participation and
inclusion. We are thus repaying our immense debt to
the Brazilian people and achieving excellent results in
seeking to meet the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs).
In spite of the sectorial advances in some
countries, it seems clear that if the current trends are
maintained, we will not achieve all the MDGs by 2015.
It is up to this meeting, therefore, to identify the
necessary and urgent strategies to accelerate the
international community’s efforts to meet the Goals.
However, Brazil considers that meeting the MDGs will
not be possible without the allocation of significant
additional financial resources in a stable and
predictable manner, particularly to the poorest
countries.
Few developed countries have fulfilled the
established agreements to promote development, in

27

A/65/PV.9

particular their commitment to allocate 0.7 per cent of
their gross national income to official development
assistance. Brazil firmly believes that all countries
must fulfil their international obligations.
It is our understanding that international
cooperation must be accompanied by substantive
reform of the international economic system, including
in the area of governance. We also consider it
necessary to overcome the obstacles presented by
agricultural subsidies and tariffs, restrictive patents and
unsustainable debt.
Brazil’s progress is the result of a combination of
structured, nationwide social policies that enjoy the
active participation of civil society. We set a goal for
ourselves, more ambitious than the Goal established in
2000, to eradicate hunger and to reduce extreme
poverty by three fourths by 2015. That goal was
reached in 2007 and surpassed in 2008, when the
percentage of the population living in extreme poverty
dropped to 4.8 per cent — less than one fifth of the
1990 level of 25.6 per cent. In 2008, we also reduced
our country’s historical inequality, with Brazil’s Gini
index reached 0.544, its lowest level ever.
The Lula Government put in place a wide-ranging
social protection system that reaches 70 million people
every month. The Family Stipend programme today
benefits 12.6 million families, guaranteeing income
upon their meeting conditions in the areas of education,
maternal and child health, and avoidance of child
labour.
We are implementing the Unified Social
Assistance System and the National System of Food
and Nutritional Security. The minimum wage has been
significantly increased, improving the income of
workers, retirees and pensioners. The internal market
was expanded through employment and incomegenerating policies, even during the recent
international financial crisis. The promotion of policies
aimed at ensuring decent work for all and racial
equality have also been priority issues.
With regard to education, 95 per cent of Brazilian
children are in school, and the conditions attached to
the Family Stipend have increased the time that they
remain there. In terms of gender equality and the
empowerment of women, the indicators for education
are positive. In the labour force, the wage gap between
men and women has been shrinking in the last five
years. However, high levels of violence against women

28

continue to pose a challenge. In light of that, Brazil is
fully committed to the Unite to End of Violence against
Women campaign.
Brazil has constantly improved the largest unified
universal and free public health system, the “SUS”. We
will have the opportunity to share our experiences with
other countries in two international conferences that
Brazil will host: the first, this coming December, on
universal social security systems, and the second, in
October of 2011, on the social determinants of health.
An important result in the area of health has been
the 58 per cent decrease in the mortality rate of
children under the age of five, meeting the Goal before
the deadline. Addressing maternal mortality is a major
challenge for the Brazilian Government. In spite of a
decrease since 1990, it is still high in Brazil, thus
requiring more targeted policies.
Over the past few years, there has been a
decrease in Brazil in the incidence of tuberculosis and
of deaths resulting from that disease, as well as a
decrease in the incidence of malaria in the Amazon
region. The Brazilian Government, with the
participation of civil society, implements free and
universal programmes of information dissemination
regarding HIV/AIDS. It distributes preventive
materials and ensures access to anti-retroviral drugs to
around 220,000 people. The incidence of HIV/AIDS in
children has fallen drastically as a result of actions
adopted in Brazil to reduce vertical transmission of
HIV.
Regarding MDG 7, Brazil has reduced
deforestation levels in the Amazon and established a
system to monitor the deforestation in the cerrado —
the Brazilian savanna. Forty-five per cent of our
internal energy supply comes from renewable sources.
Our levels of carbon dioxide emissions originating
from fossil fuels are at half the global average.
Brazil has achieved its goal of halving the
proportion of the population without access to safe
drinking water in urban areas. Sixty-six per cent of this
population today has adequate living conditions, as
opposed to 51 per cent in 1992.
Brazil is increasingly contributing to the global
partnership for development, sharing successful
experiences and deepening cooperation through a
South-South perspective. Between 2003 and 2009, the
Brazilian Government concluded over 400 cooperation

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

agreements with other developing countries. We
granted $1.25 billion in debt relief to those countries.
Since the launch of the global Action against
Hunger and Poverty and the creation of the pilot,
Brazil has actively participated in innovative financing
mechanisms, including through significant financial
contributions.
No country should be allowed to fall short of the
Millennium Development Goals because of lack of
financial resources. Any country’s inability to achieve
its national goals is also our responsibility. There are
many challenges still ahead of us, but Brazil remains
committed to promoting the achievement of all the
MDGs and to ensuring a more just world for all women
and men. We can all do better.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French):
The Assembly will now hear an address by
Mr. Muhammad Mumuni, Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Regional Integration of the Republic of Ghana.
Mr. Mumuni (Ghana): At the turn of the century,
in September 2000, Ghana, along with 189 Member
States of this august Organization, adopted the
Millennium Declaration (resolution 55/2) that laid out
the vision for a world of common values and renewed
determination to achieve peace and a decent standard
of living for every man, woman and child. The eight
goals that emanated from the Millennium Declaration
were expected to generate unprecedented and
coordinated action within the United Nations system,
including the Bretton Woods institutions, and within
the wider donor community.
Ghana has since mainstreamed the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) into its medium-term
development policy frameworks: the Ghana Poverty
Reduction Strategy I, 2003-2005, and the Growth and
Poverty Reduction Strategy II, 2006-2009. The two
policy frameworks focused on macroeconomic
stability, gainful employment, human resource
development, the provision of basic services, the
vulnerable and the excluded. Other areas included good
governance, continued macroeconomic stability,
private sector competitiveness and civic responsibility.
Ghana’s development agenda has been focused on
growth and poverty reduction, with the MDGs being
adopted as the minimum requirements for socioeconomic development. It was estimated that the total
resources needed to implement the Growth and Poverty

10-54527

Reduction Strategy II over the period 2006-2009 was
$8.06 billion, with considerable proportions of these
funds allocated towards the implementation of MDGrelated programmes and projects.
Achieving the MDGs is no mean task. For Ghana,
halving the proportion of people below the poverty line
alone will require an annual investment expenditure of
approximately $1.9 billion over the period 2005-2015.
In addition, the country also needs to address critical
infrastructure gaps, especially in energy, information
and communications technology, rural roads, water and
sanitation, low productivity in agriculture, and
improving business and investment climate.
Although poverty levels have declined, inequality
exists between and within regions and districts,
together with other challenges. The country continues
to depend on primary commodity exports such as cocoa
and gold with limited diversification or processing, and
now there is concern that the discovery of oil may
aggravate the situation. Ghana is also vulnerable to
external shocks arising from commodity price
volatility, as well as challenges posed by climate
change manifested through high temperatures, sealevel rise, droughts and floods, which affect
agricultural output with repercussions for other sectors
of the economy.
Despite these constraints, Ghana continues to
strive towards achieving the MDGs. Ghana’s current
socio-economic development agenda is to attain
middle-income status by 2020 within a decentralized
democratic environment. This is being pursued
simultaneously with the adoption of a social protection
policy aimed at empowering the vulnerable and the
excluded, especially women, to contribute to and also
share in the benefits of economic growth. To
underscore Ghana’s commitment to the attainment of
the MDGs, the 2010-2013 Medium Term Development
Policy Framework — the successor to the Growth and
Poverty Reduction Strategy II — has also harmonized
national development priorities with the MDGs.
The Government continues to work aggressively
towards improving and sustaining macroeconomic
stability, enhancing the nation’s competitiveness in
industry and service sectors, and achieving agricultural
modernization, infrastructural transformation, human
resources development and transparency and
accountability. The Parliament of Ghana also does its
bit through its Committee on Poverty and the MDGs by

29

A/65/PV.9

sensitizing ministries, departments and agencies to
make provision in their budget proposals to support
MDG and other pro-poor programmes.
We are approximately four and a half years from
the 2015 target date for achieving the MDGs, and
Ghana’s progress is encouraging. According to a report
released by the British Overseas Development
Institute, an international think tank, Ghana is firmly
on track to achieve MDG 1, halving poverty, MDG 2,
achieving universal basic education, and part of MDG
3, ensuring gender parity especially at the primary
school level, before the target date 2015. The report
further states that “Ghana outperformed all other
countries around the world by reducing hunger across
its population by nearly three-quarters, from 34 per
cent to 9 per cent between 1990 and 2004. The report
points out that Ghana is on course to be the first
African country to achieve MDG 1, halving poverty
and hunger by 2015.
Significant progress has been made towards
achieving the MDG 4 target, reducing both infant and
under-five mortality rates by two thirds by 2015, and it
is possible for Ghana to achieve that target if we scale
up efforts and sustain the child survival interventions
which brought about the current improvement. Despite
heightened efforts over the years, the maternal
mortality rate is still unacceptably high, currently
standing at 451 deaths per 100,000 live births, which
means that Ghana is unlikely to attain the target of
reducing the maternal mortality ratio by three quarters
by 2015, despite improvements in maternal health care
over the past 20 years.
HIV/AIDS prevalence, which is covered by
MDG 6, in Ghana fell from 3.2 per cent in 2006 to
2.2 per cent in 2008 but the challenge to meet the 2015
target of halting and reversing the spread of the
epidemic remains daunting though not insurmountable.
A great deal needs to be done in terms of educational
campaigns and other HIV/AIDS programmes to
promote significant behavioural change.
The incidence of malaria remains a serious public
health concern. It is still considered a leading cause of
mortality and morbidity particularly among pregnant
women and children aged under five.
Ghana is also on track to achieve the MDG 7
target of reducing by half the proportion of people
without access to improved water before 2015.
However, critical challenges exist in providing access

30

to improved sanitation and reducing the proportion of
the urban population living in slum areas. Although
access to improved sanitation has been increasing,
Ghana is unlikely to achieve the targets unless extra
effort is made to accelerate the pace of policy
implementation.
With respect to MDG 8, what is of essence is the
political will to fulfil pledges already made. The
success stories in a number of developing countries
show that rapid progress towards achieving the MDGs
is still possible when sound national development
policies are supported effectively by development
partners and the international community with
adequate financial and technical assistance. Existing
international commitments can extend these success
stories and facilitate achievement of the MDGs.
Approximately two years ago, it was said that meeting
the MDGs, especially reducing poverty by one half by
2015, would require raising the annual flow of official
development assistance to poor countries by at least
$50 or $60 billion above the prevailing level. We are
mindful of the adverse consequences unleashed by the
global financial, oil and food crises on major
economies, but $60 billion is a sum that definitely
pales by comparison with the domestic bailouts and
other response measures adopted by the advanced
economies in the wake of the crises at home.
This notwithstanding, the supportive environment
for achieving the MDGs remains strong in Ghana, and
I believe this is also true in many other developing
countries. Besides the direct poverty reduction
expenditures, the Government is also implementing
policies and programmes that have high potential to
support wealth creation and sustainable poverty
reduction. For instance, in Ghana today, social
protection programmes such as the Livelihood
Empowerment Against Poverty project, which supports
extremely poor households with monthly cash
transfers. The improved National Health Insurance
Scheme ensures quality access to health care for all at
affordable or no cost. The enhanced capitation grant
guarantees every child of school-going age the right to
free basic education. The supply of free exercise books
and school uniforms to deprived communities
encourages school attendance and ensures retention.
And the expansion of the School Feeding Programme
enhances school enrolment and improves the
nutritional and health status of children.

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic): I
now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. João Gomes
Cravinho, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation of the Portuguese Republic.
Mr. Cravinho (Portugal): On behalf of my
Government, allow me to thank you, Mr. Co-Chair, for
convening this summit on the Millennium
Development Goals. It is essential that we seize this
moment to strengthen international cooperation and
galvanize action towards the implementation of the
commitments that we agreed upon ten years ago.
In the aftermath of this High-level Plenary
Meeting, Portugal will be hosting a ministerial meeting
on the mobilization of financial resources for the least
developed countries, in Lisbon on 2 and 3 October
2010. This will be an opportunity to come back to the
main issues of this summit, to put at the core of our
attention the vulnerabilities and the needs of the least
developed countries, and to assess the best ways in
which we can collectively help to address them.
We must reinforce the principle of ownership and
reaffirm clearly that each country is primarily
responsible for its own economic and social
development. But at the same time, we must redouble
efforts to generate appropriate international support
mechanisms.
Ten years ago, in an atmosphere of confidence
and growth, the common concern for the development
and dignity of all peoples in the world led to the
affirmation of a shared and global commitment, the
Millennium Declaration. For the past 10 years, the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) have
represented a shared agenda, involving the mutual
responsibility and accountability of developed and
developing countries, guided in their policies by their
commitments to the MDGs. The political and policy
relevance of this agenda is unquestionable, and it is
imperative that the MDGs remain a reference
framework, thus allowing for measuring and tracking
results.
Where do we stand in 2010? I believe that we can
refer both to results and to shortcomings. There has
been significant progress by many countries, including
in Africa, in many areas, but much still remains to be
done by all parties if the Goals are to be attained by
2015.

The world has changed dramatically since the
Millennium Declaration was adopted, and the forces of
change have accelerated with the financial crisis that
we have experienced in the past couple of years. The
geostrategic balance and the development paradigm are
now very different from what we faced 10 years ago
when we adopted the MDGs. Developed economies are
struggling with growth and deficits while, all over,
emerging economies are influencing the world
economy and playing an increasing role at the global
level. Clearly, we now live in a multi-polar world,
although our institutional frameworks and even our
language and mindsets still remain to be updated to this
reality.
In this new international context, a much greater
role must be taken on by organizations of regional
integration in the emerging global governance
architecture. These organizations constitute the best
framework in which to voice concerns and put forward
proposals that reflect different experiences and
particular ways of facing the challenges ahead of us.
The complexity of the world obliges us to test new
concepts for action and to take advantage of diversity.
The clear North-South divide in which the old
development paradigm was embedded is now no longer
so evident. The sooner we adapt to this reality, the
better we will collectively manage the many global
challenges that stand before us.
In the next five years, we must also address new
and global challenges, such as the increased impact of
climate change, the financial and economic crisis and
food security. New geopolitical tensions in different
regions are conditioning the development of hundreds
of millions of people. These have become critical for
the MDGs and for the post-2015 agenda. While some
of these challenges call for a longer-term involvement,
we cannot afford to postpone action.
First, on climate change: its impacts, particularly
on the most vulnerable countries, such as the least
developed countries and small island developing
States, are increasingly evident. Every day, the
negative effects of climate change claim thousands of
human lives and important livelihood stocks. The very
existence of some island States is even threatened.
Building resilience and reducing vulnerabilities to
climate change effects is therefore vital.
Portugal is strongly involved in the global effort
on renewable energies, and we believe that low-carbon

10-54527

31

A/65/PV.9

development strategies are a key feature of sustainable
growth and will significantly contribute to attaining the
MDGs. To this end, Portugal remains committed to
developing a competitive, knowledge-based, inclusive
and eco-efficient global economy, contributing to the
implementation of adaptation and mitigation actions, in
particular in small island developing States, least
developed countries and on the African continent, in
the framework of the fast start financing that was
agreed upon in Copenhagen.
Another important challenge is the financial and
economic crisis and its impact and consequences,
especially, but not only, for the least developed
countries. The effects of this are of various types, from
trade to investment and financing. Nevertheless, I
would like to particularly highlight the deep structural
changes that affect the way we look upon economic
growth and development over the next few decades. It
is evident that a new paradigm for our global economy
is needed, and such a paradigm cannot be dissociated
from greater justice and equity in the use of resources
and in the distribution of wealth.
In this context, the MDGs constitute an essential
framework for our common future. This must remain
uppermost in our minds as we all strive to reach the
MDG targets by 2015, and that is why mobilizing
financial resources, domestic or external, traditional or
innovative, is essential at this stage.
While keeping our aid pledges and working for
increased quantity and quality of official development
assistance, Portugal supports the ongoing work on
innovative sources of financing, and we join our voice
to others before us in calling for the creation of a new
tax on financial transactions, a tax allocated to
development, including the fight against climate
change.
My final word goes to the role of the emerging
economies and new actors in cooperation in achieving
the MDGs by 2015. Due to its own historic experience,
Portugal is particularly well-positioned to understand
the spirit of solidarity that should guide cooperation
with developing countries. The current aid architecture
is evolving, quite rightly, to incorporate the
contributions and opportunities that arise from the
involvement of emerging economies. We stand ready to
engage in a constructive dialogue with them, open to
the concerns of the poorest countries. Let me assure

32

you that Portugal continues to be fully committed to
the MDGs.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Jorge Lara
Castro, Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Paraguay.
Mr. Lara Castro (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Today’s world is truly in a process of transition
towards a new world order. Global change is
accelerating, and the financial, energy, social and
environmental crises have revealed the contradictions,
conflicts and strategic interests of the great Powers, as
well as the weaknesses of dependent countries and
countries of intermediate development. There is talk of
strategic alliances at various levels within these
interdependent relationships and of failed States.
Paraguay is among those nation States that, over
the course of history, have fallen prey to various
factors that made them vulnerable, given their
geographic situation and historical experiences. As a
landlocked State, Paraguay has been weakened by a
historic model of socio-economic development based
on the looting of its natural and strategic resources and
administered
through
relations
of
structural
dependence.
Our country has one of the largest freshwater
reserves, the Guaraní aquifer, and many other valuable
water resources that we share with our neighbours.
These strategic resources require genuine energy
integration to foster capacities to produce clean and
renewable energy on a fair and equitable basis for all.
Paraguay’s goal is to focus on sustainable
development that will meet our present needs without
compromising the resources available of future
generations. Paraguay believes that sustainable human
development is possible to the extent that the planet
itself is sustainable. Living in harmony with Mother
Earth must be an imperative for all peoples and a
historic responsibility towards future generations.
At the international level, globalization poses a
challenge to countries like Paraguay, and all the more
so in a world of unequal relationships where developed
economies weigh heavily on developing economies.
This situation, at the dawn of the twenty-first century,
entails various responsibilities but only one common
objective — that of sharing the effort to uphold the
humanity of our peoples.

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

For Paraguay, which has been a Member of this
Organization from the outset, and in particular for the
current Government of President Fernando Lugo, the
principles and purpose of maintaining international
peace and security, established in the Charter of the
United Nations, are crucial. We are certain that only an
effective multilateral discussion of such problems as
the fight against poverty, pandemics, terrorism,
international organized crime and inequalities among
nations, as well as the growing threat of the loss of
cultural identities and other global threats, such as
climate change, will enable us to design and implement
an agenda to promote these important goals.
It is therefore politically important for global
leaders to heighten their awareness of the need to
address these challenges and commitments. A key
component and catalyst for the renewed United Nations
agenda are the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), which we adopted 10 years ago as a synthesis
of all the proposals made at our high-level summits of
the 1990s. Through these Goals, we salvaged and
renewed the commitments, values and principles of our
United Nations. Meeting the Millennium Development
Goals and implementing the necessary actions to do so
will require, first, cooperation, solidarity and
integration; secondly, international social justice; and
thirdly, human rights and democracy.
Thus, the Millennium Development Goals recall
the commitments made both at the level of our
Governments as well as within the United Nations
development system. It is thus, too, that we conclude
that declarations are not sufficient, but that we must
further define these commitments on the basis of
specific responsibilities and give them substance.
The noble Millennium Development Goals
represent the broadest consensus ever achieved by
humankind on how to improve the quality of life of the
citizens of the world over a short period of time. Today,
that time is shorter than ever, as we are now counting
down the days. Only 1,825 remain.
Paraguay reaffirms its commitment to continuing
to strive to meet the established Goals. By shouldering
its responsibility for the MDGs, our Government has
worked in a participatory manner with representatives
of the public sector, the private sector and civil society
in developing a draft public policy on social
development for the period 2010-2020. The 2020 plan,
known as “Paraguay for All”, provides the guiding

10-54527

framework of our current Government’s social policies,
and is based on four main elements.
The first concerns universal access to social
goods and services provided by the State, and is
founded on the recognition of the peoples’ right to
universal access to quality social goods and services.
The second element addresses the poor, excluded and
vulnerable population, whose access to universal social
services has diminished. In designing specific policies,
we seek to progressively ensure greater equality in
access to social services. The third element provides
for an inclusive development model that encourages
social and economic equity among the population. The
final element is aimed at strengthening institutions and
improving the effectiveness of social investment.
With regard to the progress made and challenges
encountered in meeting the Millennium Development
Goals in Paraguay, next year we will celebrate our
bicentennial. We hope to celebrate that important event
with a significant reduction in the level of extreme
poverty, pursuant to prior commitments made by our
country’s previous representatives.
However, as a result of the State’s lengthy
periods of delinquency, we have accrued a significant
social deficit in Paraguay. In Paraguay, we refer to
almost two and a half decades — the 1980s, 1990s and
part of the first decade of the twenty-first century — as
lost decades. Our gross domestic product decreased
during that time and social policy was more a matter of
rhetoric than of real action on the ground. As a result,
our attainment of the Goals has been delayed.
Both Government and civil society have
understood the validity of the arguments favouring
more and better social investment to eradicate poverty.
The underpinning ethical argument is that the
universalization of human rights must constitute the
bedrock of a nation that seeks to ensure equity and
equality for its citizens. The political argument is that
social investment is an instrument to promote social
cohesion and democratic governance. Finally, the
economic argument is that social investment is a
powerful tool for economic and productive growth in
the medium and the long terms. It is therefore
important for developed countries to cooperate with
developing countries through innovative financing
mechanisms.
While the MDGs are more than the work of
Governments, we are convinced that by 2013, when

33

A/65/PV.9

our Government will have completed its mandate, we
will have brought change to Paraguay as it becomes a
more prosperous, equitable and sustainable country
with a comprehensive social policy focused on
territorial coverage and enshrined in a stronger,
institutionalized and transparent public administration
that responds to needs and demands without exception.
The change to which we are committed will
include people living in poverty in the development
process in order to improve their quality of life,
generate comprehensive development, promote and
build capacity to facilitate access to employment,
eradicate illiteracy, and guarantee food security and
universal access to health care, primary schooling, safe
water and basic sanitation. In turn, as a priority matter,
we shall establish mechanisms to guarantee the rights
of children, adolescents and indigenous peoples.
With respect to education, our explicit
commitment is to achieve an illiteracy rate of only
1.9 per cent by 2013. We shall complete the process
launched at the advent of democracy in Paraguay in the
field of access to education, and in the coming years
we will focus on improving the quality of education.
In the area of gender equality and empowerment
of women, we can say that there have been highs and
lows. We have almost achieved gender equality in
basic and secondary education, but with respect to the
labour market and women in political positions, there
is still room for improvement in order to achieve
greater equality between men and women.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss): I am sorry, but
speeches are timed to be five minutes. You have
spoken for 15 minutes now, and there are many other
interventions.
Mr. Castro (Paraguay): I will finish in two
minutes.
(spoke in Spanish)
In the context of our Government’s programme,
civil society organizations are crucial in supporting the
policies of structural reform and promoting social
conditions that will guarantee fundamental rights
through the dovetailing of the Government’s work with
civil society.
With respect to the environment, at the upcoming
sixteenth Conference of the Parties to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to

34

take place in Cancún, Mexico, our negotiators will
again, as they did Copenhagen, undertake the urgent
and overdue mission of making real change for the
future of humankind.
To conclude, we wish to emphasize that by 2013,
the Government of President Fernando Lugo Méndez,
through the public policy for social development
known as 2020 Plan: Paraguay for All, to which I
referred to at the start of my statement, has committed
to deploying its greatest efforts to meet and overcome
our historic challenges and to fulfil our commitments
made at the Millennium Summit. Having learned from
the errors of the past and now building on present
achievements, we firmly believe that we are sowing
fertile fields so that our future generations will inherit
a better world.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki): May I remind
speakers that statements should not exceed five
minutes. We have too many speakers on our list.
(spoke in Arabic)
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Paul
Badji, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Senegal.
Mr. Badji (Senegal) (spoke in French): Assessing
the progress made in implementing the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) reminds us once again
that our ambitious mission to build a world free of the
scourges of poverty and famine has not yet been
accomplished. In the unusual current circumstances,
where the combined effects of the recent crises
continue to burden the economies of developing
countries and our States’ capacities, this assessment
recalls us to our duty to act as soon as possible in the
final stretch towards 2015. It is not too late to
transform the act of faith symbolized by the MDGs
into positive and tangible results that will benefit all,
including the wealthy countries.
My country remains committed to that path and
intends to pursue bold reforms and the implementation
of necessary policies to improve the daily living
conditions of its people, in particular the most
vulnerable groups.
That is why Senegal has made progress in such
areas as the fight against malnutrition, education,
combating HIV and other infectious diseases, access to
drinking water and sanitation, the empowerment of
women and gender equality. However, the context of

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

the global crises could further compromise these
achievements and have a negative impact on attaining
the goals. In other words, many challenges remain
despite the non-negligible achievements made. Thus, in
Senegal we have undertaken to refocus our efforts and
prioritize the path to success. This has led the
Government to pursue three areas for priority
intervention in order to promote development while
bearing in mind new challenges.
The first priority is to pursue lasting economic
growth. It is clear that while we must strive to meet
social demands, we must also invest in growth in order
to facilitate young people’s access to employment and
enable a fairer distribution of income and services,
including to those most socially disadvantaged. We
have therefore designed our strategy and economic
development guidelines for the long term, focusing in
particular on investment in human resources, highquality major infrastructure and the promotion of a
climate conducive to unleashing private initiative. We
seek to consolidate growth in order to accelerate the
creation of wealth and sustainable jobs, particularly for
women and young people, and to strengthen the bases
of long-term development, supported by a far-sighted
policy of good governance and the rule of law.
Our second priority is to develop and modernize
agriculture in order to eliminate the vulnerability and
lack of stability that afflict the millions of individuals
who work in that sector. Since three-fourths of the
population depends on this sector, increased
investments will be crucial to raising productivity,
winning the fight against hunger and food security, and
maintaining employment in rural areas, thus ensuring
farmers a permanent livelihood and limiting their
exodus.
Our major agricultural programme for food and
abundance, known as Goana — which was launched in
2008 and for which we, following the success of
previous years, have started the third phase of its
implementation — reflects our desire to foster a rural
revolution. It will make agriculture a lever for the
economic promotion of farmers, in particular through
their unionization and the establishment of rural banks,
which will enable them to access credit and financing.
Our third priority involves the acceleration and
expansion of the provision of basic social services,
education, and, above all, health care, with a particular
focus on strengthening health care systems and

10-54527

universal access to health care services. This is a
prerequisite to meeting the challenge of eradicating
infectious diseases and achieving the Goals of reducing
maternal and child mortality rates, as well as
improving the food and nutrition situation.
Here, I solemnly commend the excellent initiative
of the Secretary-General, who had the ingenious idea
of submitting to us the Global Strategy for Women’s
and Children’s Health. The Strategy will certainly be
an important benchmark for our collective effort to
inspire the future work of States as we round this final
bend.
Clearly, we have no option but to work together
to maintain our positive achievements and, above all,
to overcome the difficulties through the pooled,
concerted and unified efforts of the international
community as a whole, underpinned by a global agenda
in which each person can play his or her own role.
It goes without saying that in this exercise, the
support of wealthy countries and respect for
commitments undertaken in the context of various
partnerships will be critical to removing the obstacles
that hamper the achievement of the MDGs. In this
great endeavour, Senegal is more determined than ever
to work with all its partners for the achievement of the
better world to which we are so looking forward.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic): We
shall now hear brief reports of the Chairs of the round
tables.
We begin with the Co-Chair of round table 1, Her
Excellency Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister of the
People’s Republic of Bangladesh.
Sheikh Hasina (Bangladesh): We concluded the
deliberations of round table 1 on 20 September. At the
outset, I would like to thank the heads of delegations,
civil society, experts and academia for their invaluable
contribution to our discussion. The round table was a
huge success. Before summarizing our deliberations, I
would also ask Member States to set a new goal for the
implementation of what we have decided in our
deliberations.
We agree that the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs), and in particular the
eradication of poverty, hunger and malnutrition and the
promotion of gender equality, is essential to our
economic and social development efforts. Concrete
national and international actions and investments are

35

A/65/PV.9

needed to accelerate progress towards achieving the
Goals and to strengthen global partnerships for
development.
Member States commit to pursuing gendersensitive policies for inclusive and equitable economic
growth and sustainable development. Priority attention
must be given to alleviating the adverse effects on the
poor, especially women, of the multiple global crises
and the challenge of climate change.
Actions must be comprehensive and enhance
national ownership of development processes. We
commit to mobilizing private and public sector
resources, scaling-up good practices and strengthening
national and local capacity for service delivery and
infrastructure development. Such actions should be
supported by increased development assistance and
reinforced by gender-sensitive monitoring and
accountability mechanisms at the national level.
We recognize that the promotion of gender
equality and women’s human rights is a key driver for
achieving all MDGs and has a multiplier effect across
all sectors. We commit to the elimination of
discrimination and violence against women, the full
and equal participation of women at all levels of
decision-making processes, and the accelerated
implementation of gender-responsive laws and
policies.
We agree that broad-based employment policies
for full and productive employment and decent work
for all are central to our responses. Priority attention
should focus on promoting job-intensive recovery. This
will require targeted labour market support and skills
development, including programmes that enhance the
full and equal participation of women in the formal
economy. Ensuring universal access to social services
and comprehensive systems of social protection at the
national level is critical to reducing poverty, hunger
and inequality. Innovative and inclusive financial
services, such as microfinancing and microcredit, must
be made available to the poor, especially women.
We resolve to pay much greater attention to
improving agricultural productivity and ensuring food
and nutrition security in developing countries,
especially for those living in extreme poverty and
hunger. Coordinated responses to the food crisis should
focus on addressing food price volatility and on
adopting measures encouraging greater resilience to
shocks. At the global and national levels, efforts must

36

be redoubled to achieve greater investment in
agriculture. We must invest in smallholder agriculture
through improved infrastructure, better access to
markets, imports, financial services, skills, technology
and reserves. It is critical to ensure that women and
marginalized groups have full and equal access to land
and property.
Since this is a summary statement, I will not add
any further points here. What I will emphasize is the
realization of what we have resolved. Let us make
poverty and gender inequality history. To that end, we
must make history today by adopting the
recommendations of round table 1 in the outcome
document of the plenary.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Gert
Rosenthal, Permanent Representative of Guatemala to
the United Nations, who will make a presentation on
behalf of the Co-Chair of round table 2.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
have the honour to present, on behalf of the President
of Guatemala and the Prime Minister of Kuwait, some
of the highlights of the discussions in round table 2 on
meeting the goals of health and education. The
numerous statements covered diverse points of view
and issues, and no attempt has been made to
distinguish areas that gave rise to agreement from
those that did not.
First, it was underscored that education and
health go hand in hand. For instance, it is said that a
one-year increase in women’s education translates into
an almost 10-per cent drop in infant mortality.
Second, noting that education and health are
central to poverty reduction and to achieving all the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), most
speakers stressed that those two sectors must be closely
coordinated in national development plans.
Third, it was emphasized that inequities in health
and education are a barrier to attaining the MDGs. It
was therefore felt that improving access to quality
education and health services — especially for women
and girls, the residents of rural and remote areas, the
vulnerable and poorest populations, and persons with
disabilities — is crucial to overcoming disparities
within countries.
Fourth, since improvements in health depend on
multi-pronged strategies, many speakers expressed

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

their commitment to strengthening health systems;
improving access to good health care and quality,
community-based sanitation interventions; increasing
access to clean water and sanitation; and expanding
immunization coverage.
Fifth, in general, speakers made it clear that
important progress has been made towards achieving
universal primary education, stressing that many
countries have passed the 90-per cent enrolment
threshold. It must also be recognized, however, that
more attention must be paid to expanding access to all
levels of education, from early childhood to higher
levels, particularly for girls, and to improving the
quality of education, including by improving teacher
training.
Sixth, one point frequently raised was the need to
increase funding for reducing maternal, child and
newborn mortality, and for achieving universal
reproductive health by 2015, including by expanding
access to family planning, emergency obstetric care
and skilled birth attendants. The Secretary-General’s
Global Strategy for Women’s and Children’s Health
was warmly welcomed.
Seventh, it was suggested that partnerships are
the way forward, and that we must continue working
together, mobilizing stakeholders at all levels and
across sectors in order to align with and support
Government-led processes, to develop and implement
comprehensive national health and education plans.
It was also widely recognized that mobilizing
sufficient resources remains a challenge. National and
international financial commitments must be honoured,
despite the current financial crisis. The need to meet
the Abuja targets for health, to support large-scale
initiatives such as Muskoka and Education for All, and
to explore innovative financing mechanisms was
frequently mentioned. Several delegations called for
the replenishment of the Global Fund.
Lastly, the announcement of specific commitments
over the next five years was welcomed. These include
the World Bank’s pledge to devote more than $600
million to maternal and child health, plus an additional
$750 million to education, as well as Germany’s offer
to provide €400 million to combat maternal and child
mortality.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic): I
now give the floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Etta Banda,

10-54527

Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Malawi,
who will make a statement on behalf of the Co-Chair
of round table 3.
Mrs. Banda (Malawi): I present to members the
summary of discussions held at the summit’s round
table 3, entitled “Promoting sustainable development”.
Member States acknowledged the interdependence
of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and
affirmed that achieving them would demand a more
balanced and coherent approach that integrates the
economic, social and environmental dimensions of
sustainable development. We reiterate that eradicating
poverty and enhancing the quality of life for the
poorest and most vulnerable remains the overarching
development objective.
Sustainable development is the answer to the
MDGs. Social, economic and environmental policies
need to be better integrated, including through a green
economy approach. Linkages between environment and
development are therefore critical and must be
strengthened in preparation for the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development in 2012.
National ownership of the Development Goals is
crucial, and a commitment to improved governance
essential to more effectively promoting integrated
development planning, ensuring broad participation
among major stakeholders, and strengthening
institutions and national capacities to more effectively
deliver services. Greater attention should be given to
national sustainable development strategies to promote
transformation towards sustainable development.
Water plays a central role in ensuring increased
food production to combat hunger, reduce mortality,
facilitate education and promote gender equality and
the empowerment of women. Member States
acknowledged the importance of the supply side to
progress in implementing the MDGs, and agreed that it
must be adequately addressed if all is to go well.
Member States committed to enhancing water access
and affordability and to improving sanitation services.
Integrated water resources management is central to
ensuring sustainable and equitable access to safe
drinking water and basic sanitation.
We resolved to pay greater attention to
sustainable urbanization. Cities must become
environmentally sustainable, socially responsible and
economically productive. Improving the lives of slum-

37

A/65/PV.9

dwellers is essential to achieving the MDGs. We
therefore commit to addressing the most fundamental
rights of slum-dwellers, including access to water and
sanitation, adequate shelter, nutrition, health care and
education.
We underscore the urgent need for investment in
our ecological infrastructure, including ecosystems and
biodiversity, taking into account the importance of
natural resources, including forests, in combating
climate change. We welcome the progress in
integrating the ecosystem approach, biodiversity and
water resources to ensure environmental sustainability.
We also welcome support for the incorporation of
sustainable
forest
management
into
national
development plans through fiscal and non-fiscal
incentives to Governments.
We reaffirm that strong global partnership and the
support of the donor community and development
institutions are vital to progress in achieving the
MDGs. Such support should be mobilized to promote
the transfer of skills, improve national capacities to
deliver services, and facilitate technology transfer.
International support should be based on priorities
identified at the national level. The improved
coordination of existing initiatives is crucial at all
levels.
Finally, we recognize the importance of peace
and stability as essential preconditions for sustainable
development and the improvement of the quality of life
for all.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French):
The Assembly will now hear an address by the CoChair of round table 4, Her Excellency Ms. Tarja
Halonen, President of the Republic of Finland.
President Halonen: It is an honour to present, on
behalf of His Excellency Mr. Danilo Türk, President of
Slovenia, and myself, a summary of the rich
discussions on emerging issues and evolving
approaches. I also convey our warm thanks to all the
participants.
First, regarding climate change, participants
shared the view that the transition to a green economy
with high growth and reduced greenhouse gas
emissions is both necessary and feasible. Several
participants welcomed the launch of the High-level
Panel on Global Sustainability in that regard.

38

Several participants stressed that adaptation and
mitigation will require additional financial assistance,
beyond existing official development assistance
commitments, sharing technological know-how and
building institutional capacity. It was noted that public
financing is not enough to cover adaptation and
mitigation needs, but the contribution of the business
sector, as well as non-governmental organizations, is
required.
The urgent need to increase access to modern and
sustainable energy services was highlighted.
Secondly, a more comprehensive approach to the
global financial and economic crisis was called for.
With a fragile and uneven recovery and the threat of an
unprecedented global jobs crisis, participants called for
a rethink of the current economic development
paradigm. The immediate challenge is to implement
appropriate policies to cement the recovery, strengthen
resilience against future shocks, and gradually
withdraw stimulus policies.
A long-term solution to the crisis will require
addressing its root causes, including reviewing
regulatory oversight, continuing the ongoing reform of
the financial and economic system, and placing job
creation and decent work at the heart of
macroeconomic policies.
Providing basic social protection floors is an
important element in combating poverty and growing
inequalities within countries. While emerging from the
crisis may take time, job creation is an immediate and
critically important task. The need to fully tap the
potential of civil society and the private sector,
especially in providing innovative solutions, was
stressed.
Thirdly, the importance of food security has very
often been underestimated. Medium- and long-term
investment needs to be scaled up to feed a growing
world population and to improve rural livelihoods.
Such investment should focus on smallholder farmers,
particularly women, to enable them to build profitable
businesses and to promote access to nutritious food for
the most vulnerable.
There are also other major emerging issues, such
as enhancing accountability on all sides and increasing
policy coherence, which require our urgent collective
attention.

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

The human and social dimensions of policy
choices and indices are easily forgotten. For example,
economic growth helps people best if it increases jobs.
Other issues emphasized include the nexus
between conflict and development, energy systems and
energy access, cross-border movements of people
seeking jobs and a better life, and the importance of
exploring innovative sources of financing while
honouring official development assistance commitments.
Also, the fact that preventing and responding early to
conflict is less expensive, and more human, than crisis
management, was mentioned many times.
In summary, the overall sense of the round table
was that there is an urgent need for a new development
paradigm, with environmental sustainability and social
inclusion at its centre. A true partnership and a
coordinated approach are needed among all
stakeholders: Governments, civil society, research and
academia, and the private sector. There was a broadly
held view that the United Nations has a key role to play
in a rapidly changing and interdependent world with
many evolving challenges that call for global
responses.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic): I
now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Winston
Baldwin Spencer, Prime Minister of Antigua and
Barbuda, Co-Chair of round table 5.
Mr. Spencer (Antigua and Barbuda): I am
honoured to present a summary of the discussion in
round table 5, on addressing the needs of the most
vulnerable.
It was observed that the promotion and protection
of human rights is a prerequisite for the achievement of
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). We must
spare no effort to advance equality and nondiscrimination with regard to gender, age, disability,
ethnicity, geographic location and HIV/AIDS status. It
was noted that to answer the question of who the most
vulnerable are, and what the causes of their
vulnerability are, we need more disaggregated data.
The representatives of small island developing
States and landlocked countries pointed out their
special vulnerability to climate change, natural
disasters and high energy and transportation costs. To
fight climate change, more investment should be made
in mitigation and adaptation mechanisms, reducing

10-54527

dependency on fossil fuels and increasing investment
in renewable energies.
The international community is urged to assist
vulnerable countries, least developed countries,
landlocked developing countries and small island
developing States in addressing their specific needs
and development challenges. Urgent action must focus
on effective aid and trade policies, the fulfilment of all
official development assistance commitments and
further mobilization of financial resources for
development,
including
capacity-building
and
technology transfer. Countries in conflict and postconflict situations are especially vulnerable, and are in
need of renewed focus on peacebuilding, including
consolidation of State institutions and assistance to
internally displaced people and refugees.
Member States recognize that ensuring equitable
access to economic opportunities and social services
for the poor and those in vulnerable situations is vital
for the achievement of the MDGs. We should devote
adequate resources to tackling basic sources of
vulnerability, such as lack of access to adequate
nutrition, education, skills training, health services and
decent jobs. More efforts are needed to ensure access
to financial services, including microfinancing, credit
and insurance for all, especially those in vulnerable
situations.
Governments also underscore that comprehensive
systems of social protection are essential to reducing
inequality and vulnerability, to achieving development
goals and to shielding those most vulnerable in times
of economic crisis. Some also noted that conditional
and unconditional cash transfers can be effective in
reducing vulnerability. More international cooperation
is needed to support policies and programmes aimed at
reducing the vulnerability of people living with
HIV/AIDS, through prevention, treatment, care and
support strategies, including special efforts to address
stigmatization and discrimination.
Vulnerable groups, especially women and
minorities, should be empowered and represented in
national parliaments and included in the development
process. Vulnerability in the context of peace
negotiations was also noted. The special needs of
Palestinian refugees merit special attention.
In conclusion, we all agree that, without
addressing the special needs of the most vulnerable
countries and people, the MDGs cannot be achieved.

39

A/65/PV.9

The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to Her Excellency Mrs. Tiina
Intelmann, Permanent Representative of the Republic
of Estonia, who will make a presentation on behalf of
the Co-Chair of round table 6.
Mrs. Intelmann (Estonia): On behalf of the
President of Estonia, Co-Chair of round table 6, I am
pleased to provide a summary of the round table
discussions on widening and strengthening partnerships.
It was acknowledged that progress has been made
in achieving the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), especially in the area of reducing extreme
poverty. However, it was also acknowledged that the
recent global climate and food crisis has had an
adverse impact on development. Effective partnerships
are now more crucial to achieving the MDGs, and there
was commitment to enhancing the global partnership
for development and accelerating efforts to deliver and
fully implement existing commitments, as called for in
MDG 8.
It was emphasized that responsibility lies with
both developed and developing countries. Developed
countries were called on to support development by
meeting their commitments, as set by the Gleneagles
meeting of the Group of 8, the United Nations targets
of 0.7 per cent of gross national income (GNI) by 2015
and 0.5 per cent of GNI by 2010, with clear and
accountable timelines. In addition to traditional
development cooperation, the increasing importance of
South-South cooperation was stressed, and the fact that
development has become more globalized was
welcomed. In this sense, the role of civil society and
the private sector, through greater investment,
non-governmental organizations and local communities,
was acknowledged. Participants emphasized that
increasing the effectiveness and quality of aid,
including reducing the fragmentation of aid, in
accordance with the Paris Declaration and the Accra
Agenda, was most essential.
Ultimately, Governments are responsible for their
own development. National strategies and leadership,
effective policies for reaching the poorest, increased
domestic
revenues,
promoting
growth
and
strengthening capacity-building were mentioned as
critical to development.
The call was made to treat development as a
human right for all. The role of women, with an equal
voice and under equal conditions, was also mentioned

40

as essential for long-term development. Another
precondition for effective aid and development was a
stable and secure environment. Therefore, the rule of
law, the fight against crime, corruption, terrorism and
trafficking in illegal drugs, weapons and human beings
were presented as most essential if we are to have
accountable and effective institutions.
A fair and equitable multilateral trading system
remains critical to strengthening the global partnership
for development by ensuring market access through
full and unconditional, duty-free and quota-free
treatment for exports originating in least developed
countries. The timely and development-oriented
conclusion of the Doha Round of trade negotiations
would be essential.
It was recognized that many countries are in debt
distress and that debt initiatives must be expanded
beyond the poorest countries and strengthened to strive
for more broadly applicable sovereign debt work-out
mechanisms. The special needs of small island
developing States and least developed countries were
recognized, especially their vulnerability to external
shocks, for example natural disasters, and to the
negative effects of climate change.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French):
The General Assembly will now turn to draft resolution
A/65/L.1, entitled “Keeping the promise: united to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals”. We shall
now proceed to consider the draft resolution.
In connection with draft resolution A/65/L.1, I
wish to put on record the following statement of
financial implications, in accordance with rule 153 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly. Under
the terms of the draft resolution’s operative paragraph,
the General Assembly would adopt the outcome
document of the High-level Plenary Meeting of the
sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly on the
Millennium Development Goals.
In paragraph 77 (p) of the draft outcome
document, heads of State and Government would
commit themselves to accelerating progress in order to
achieve Goal 7, including through working towards a
successful United Nations conference on sustainable
development in 2012.
Further, in paragraph 79 of the draft outcome
document, heads of State and Government would
request the President of the sixty-eighth session of the

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

General Assembly to organize a special event in 2013
to follow up on efforts made towards achieving the
Millennium Development Goals.
At the present time, there is no clarity on the
scope, modalities, format and organization of the
United
Nations
Conference
on
Sustainable
Development in 2012 and the special event in 2013
which could enable the Secretariat to determine the full
potential financial implications for the biennium 20122013. Once the General Assembly takes a specific
decision at a later stage regarding the scope,
modalities, format and organization of the United
Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and
the special event, the Secretary-General would at that
time submit statements of programme budget
implications to the General Assembly.
The General Assembly will now take a decision
on draft resolution A/65/L.1, entitled, “Keeping the
promise: united to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals”. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution A/65/L.1 was adopted (resolution
65/1).
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
congratulate members on having adopted resolution
65/1.
I should like to express sincere appreciation to
His Excellency Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki, President of
the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth session and
Co-Chair of this High-level Plenary Meeting, for his
extraordinary efforts to make this Meeting a
resounding success. He deserves a round of applause.
My appreciation is also extended to Ambassador
Carsten Staur of Denmark and Ambassador Paul Badji
of Senegal, who have so ably and patiently conducted
the discussions and complex negotiations in the
informal consultations on draft resolution A/65/L.1,
and to all Member States for their valuable
contributions to the successful completion of the
outcome document.
I will reserve my substantive remarks for the
closing of the meeting.
I now yield the floor to His Excellency Mr. Ali
Abdussalam Treki, President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session and Co-Chair of the Highlevel Plenary Meeting.

10-54527

The Co-Chair (Mr. Treki) (spoke in Arabic):
These past three days have shown a common spirit in
the international community to meet the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. Many of you,
colleagues, have spoken of the progress you have made
and the challenges that still confront you. But all of
you agree that achieving the MDGs by 2015 is possible
if we are committed to do so.
The agreement which we adopted today as
resolution 65/1 captures this commitment and the
resolve of all members to achieve the Goals. It was the
result of consensus, inclusiveness and openness and is
an expression of the global partnership that is
highlighted in MDG 8. It conveys the sense of urgency
that only five years remain, and it outlines an agenda
for action with specific ideas to ensure the
implementation of our commitments to attain the
Goals.
This agreement recognizes that national
ownership and responsibility for establishing priorities
and the strategies needed to achieve them is the
foundation of development. It is also highlights,
throughout the resolution, that inclusive and equitable
growth and the promotion of trade and investment are
necessary for reaching the MDGs and sustaining
poverty reduction. It recognizes women as important
agents of development and that gender equality and the
empowerment of women have a multiplier impact on
all the Goals.
It focuses on smallholder agriculture as an
important basis for countries to develop the
infrastructure to feed their own populations and for the
poor to lift themselves out of poverty. It goes beyond
the specific Goals on health and calls for the
strengthening of health systems to deliver equitable,
accessible and high-quality health care services to all.
It also recognizes the special needs of Africa in
achieving the MDGs, as well as those of least
developed countries elsewhere.
I would like to thank you all for your support and
for your commitment to reaching this agreement before
the start of the summit. We should be proud of this
achievement; we need to use it as a common platform
from which to strive to achieve all the MDGs by 2015.
I cannot fail to express, on behalf of all
participants, my thanks and appreciation to His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon as well as
to members of the Secretariat and all of those working

41

A/65/PV.9

with it for the support that they have provided
throughout our efforts to achieve these goals.
In closing, I should like to express our
appreciation to the President of the General Assembly
for the efforts that he has made. I wish him every
success in his future endeavours.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General (spoke in French): My
congratulations go to you all. This summit has laid a
solid foundation for the progress we need in our quest
to achieve the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) by the internationally agreed deadline of
2015. Through the participation of a large number of
heads of State or Government and leaders from civil
society, the private sector and the philanthropic
community, this event has galvanized worldwide
attention. The summit outcome document (resolution
65/1) sends a clear sign that you remain committed to
the Goals even in a difficult international environment.
Special thanks go to His Excellency Mr. Ali
Abdussalam Treki, President of the General Assembly
at its sixty-fourth session, His Excellency Mr. Joseph
Deiss, President of the General Assembly at its sixtyfifth session, and the Co-Chairs of the round tables. I
also commend the organizers and participants of the
more than 80 side events, which added great vibrancy
to the summit.
The two co-facilitators — Ambassador Staur of
Denmark and Ambassador Badji of Senegal — worked
tirelessly over the past few months to reach agreement
on the summit outcome document.
Last but not least, I would like to express my
deepest appreciation to the members of the MDG
Advocacy Group. Their participation has brought a
new level of hope to the MDG Action Agenda.
(spoke in English)
That Agenda gives us a road map for dramatically
accelerating MDG progress. Many of you have already
committed to launching new initiatives. Others have
pledged to do so in the near future. I am very
encouraged to note that many Member States used this
summit to announce concrete support.

the outcome document. Jobs, and especially green jobs,
inclusive and sustainable development, the need for a
successful Doha Trade Round outcome, smallholder
farming, food and nutrition security, inclusive financial
services, women’s health and empowerment, a
rejuvenated global partnership: all of this and more is
where it should be: at the forefront of our attention as
we ready ourselves for the push that begins now — this
very minute.
In the past, we have seen that when the spotlights
are switched off, world attention quickly moves on to
other issues. With only five years left, we cannot let
that happen. Between now and 2015, we must make
sure that promises made became promises kept. The
consequences of doing otherwise are profound: death,
illness, despair, needless suffering and lost
opportunities for millions upon millions of people. We
must hold each other accountable. The United Nations
system and I personally will do our utmost to promote
accountability on all sides.
The MDGs were never meant to be a one-way
street: something that rich countries do for poor ones.
Quite the contrary. Our longstanding work for
development in general has always been based on
global solidarity, on a shared interest, a powerful sense
of community and linked fates in an interconnected
world.
Much of our focus has been on 2015. In a rapidly
changing international environment, we must also look
ahead beyond the deadline for the Goals. And so, in
response to your request in the outcome document, I
intend to initiate a process that will result in a post2015 framework for the development work of the
United Nations. I ask that all of you also consider the
long term even as you intensify your efforts to achieve
the goals in the next five years.
Thank you again for your role in making this
summit a great success.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
thank the Secretary-General for his statement.
We shall now continue with the remaining
speakers for the High-level Plenary Meeting.
Given the lateness of the hour, I kindly remind
speakers to respect the time limit that has been agreed.

All the key issues and ideas have been on the
table, were part of the discussion and are now part of

42

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

I now give the floor to the observer of the
Organization
for
Economic
Cooperation
and
Development.
Mr. Boucher (Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development): With five years to go,
with famine and poverty still rampant, we face a
defining moment for development. Can we learn from
the past, from both our successes and our failures, and
improve on our historic commitment to achieve
substantial progress by 2015?
Over the past decade, hundreds of millions of
people have emerged from poverty to build new lives
based on their own energy and enterprise. But gains
have been uneven within and across borders. Too many
mothers and children still die during childbirth. Fragile
and conflict-ridden States have yet to achieve a single
Millennium Development Goal. In parts of Africa,
15 per cent of the children die under the age of five and
only one out of three children attends secondary
school. These children deserve a chance. Their parents
deserve the tools to give their children a decent future.
At this moment, the economic crisis, the threat of
climate change and the volatility of food prices
compound the challenge. If we are to achieve our goals
by 2015, we urgently need to intensify our efforts. We
need to ask: What can we do better? What can we do
differently?
First, we need to concert our efforts to provide
new economic opportunities. Everyone has a stake in
the lives of the poorest among us; everyone benefits
from their enrichment. At the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), we
pledge to welcome to our discussions all those who
want to enlist economic forces on the side of the poor.
To do that, developing countries must maintain the
pace and scope of their far-reaching political and
economic reforms that have created millions of
opportunities for trade, jobs and enterprise. Developed
countries must complement those efforts with stronger
action in key areas such as taxation, combating illicit
capital flows, keeping markets open and moving
forward on multilateral trade liberalization for
development.
Each of us can build on our own experience and
the experience of fellow countries in terms of what
works and what does not. This approach forms the core
of the OECD raison d’être: sharing best practices
among all who want to identify and implement better

10-54527

policies for better lives. We should pay particular
attention to critical areas like investment and trade and
mobilizing domestic resources, advancing gender
equality, educating girls and achieving environmentally
sound growth.
Secondly, technical cooperation and financial
assistance will continue to play a vital role in meeting
the needs of the poorest of the poor and helping
Governments create the infrastructure, education and
systems that people need to better their lives. It is vital
that developed countries meet their aid targets. We
cannot backslide on commitments at this critical
juncture. We have highlighted some recent slippage,
but we also note that assistance from developed
countries has grown by 55 per cent over the last
10 years. South-South cooperation is also a vital factor
now in development.
Thirdly, we need to ensure the coherence of our
efforts. In a rapidly changing international landscape,
new donors, philanthropic organizations and innovative
finance are playing a growing role. That is good. But
as the global aid system grows more fragmented and
complex, we urgently need to improve the coherence of
all the different programmes and policies. The OECD
has been leading in this regard through the Paris
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda
for Action. In Korea next year, we can turn the OECD’s
fourth High-Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness into a
key platform to deliver on Millennium Goal 8, on
building a global partnership for development.
We also can improve the effectiveness of both
domestic and private investment by putting in place
comprehensive systems to prevent, detect and punish
corruption, which steals from the poor and victimizes
the most vulnerable. The OECD will continue to lead
in this effort as well.
The financial and economic crisis should not
divert us from our aid commitments or our
commitments to sound policy reforms. At the OECD
we feel a special responsibility towards the Millennium
Development Goals, which were born out of our 1996
International Development Goals, which were meant to
crystallize international aid commitments into
development objectives that could be measured and
monitored. And measurement and monitoring is,
precisely, one of our central responsibilities.
But beyond that, we are committed to a broad
range of efforts, with a broad range of partners, to

43

A/65/PV.9

distil and promote international best practices and to
support effective policy based on the experience of our
current membership and that of the broader community
of nations. We will work with partners to integrate the
development agenda into all aspects of our work — for
example, as we look at finance flows, taxation, private
sector development, governance and gender issues.
Only with better coordination, better assistance
and better policy joined together can we progress
towards achieving the Goals by 2015 and honour our
commitment to the world’s poorest, who struggle so
hard to make their lives better.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the observer of the International
Organization for Migration.
Mr. Swing (International Organization for
Migration): When the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) were conceived 10 years ago, there was no
mention of migration. And I think that this in itself
tells a story, because at that point migration was not yet
on the global scene. In fact, there were only
150 million migrants at that time.
Today, at the 10-year mark, there are more people
on the move than at any other time in recorded history:
214 million international migrants, including
12 million refugees, and 740 million internal
migrants — in other words, a total of one billion
people on the move, or roughly one in every seven
human beings.
Migration cuts across most, if not all, of the
MDGs. Let me share several examples.
One example is migrant remittances, which touch
MDGs 1, 2, 4, 5 and 6. Migrant remittances — in other
words, the money sent home — help reduce poverty.
Migrant remittances provide families in countries of
origin with additional, often vital, income. Migrant
remittances are directly linked to the achievement of
ending poverty and hunger — MDG 1. The official
remittance flows to developing countries last year was
$316 billion. That is twice the totality of overseas
development aid. It is roughly equal to the annual
foreign direct investment and it is equal to the gross
domestic product (GDP) of several industrialized
nations. For at least a dozen countries, migrant
remittances represent 30 per cent of annual GDP.
There is another type of remittance called “social
remittances”. In other words, in addition to the money

44

that comes back, there are also skills, knowledge and
experience. These foster innovation, trigger learning
processes, build networks and facilitate the transfer of
knowledge and technology to countries of origin.
The second example is the feminization of
migration, which touches directly MDG 3. Women are
increasingly migrating independently of family, or as
the breadwinner, thereby playing a part in MDG 3 —
promoting gender equality and the empowerment of
women. Nearly half of the world’s migrants today are
women. Female migration is challenging gender
stereotypes and leading to greater independence.
However, migration can also pose obstacles to the
achievement of gender equality. Women face an entire
set of issues: vulnerability along the path to their new
life and trafficking and smuggling of female migrants,
as well as the lack of access to health or legal services.
The
third
example
is
environmental
sustainability. MDG 7 can serve as an adaptation
strategy for communities vulnerable to the effects of
environmental degradation. In several countries,
migrants are using the savings and skills they have
acquired abroad to address environmental degradation
in their homeland.
The final example is migration partnerships,
which addresses MDG 8. The development of
partnerships through diaspora communities across the
globe is fostering development in their home countries
through investments and knowledge and technology
transfers. Partnership is pivotal to developing more
accessible formal channels for remittance transfers and
beneficial trade linkages.
Let me conclude quickly. Migration is one of
humankind’s oldest freedoms. Migration has long been
the individual’s poverty reduction strategy. Migration
is a powerful demonstration of a person’s right to
development. Migration will continue to influence and
shape development prospects and the MDGs in the
years ahead. However, we will need to work closely
together to mitigate the potential negative effects of
migration on development, and we will need to work
together to realize migration’s full potential — the
potential to advance human development and the
MDGs.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French) I
now give the floor to the observer of the International
Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

Mr. Gelete (International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies): In the interest of
time I will be reading only a few paragraphs of my
presentation, and the full text will be circulated
tomorrow.
The International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies and its 186 member national
societies are fully committed to contribute effectively
towards the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. The International Federation, its
member national societies and community-based
volunteers are a unique bridge between Governments,
civil society and vulnerable people. With their skills,
compassion and unrivalled local knowledge, Red Cross
and Red Crescent volunteers can reach and transform
the lives of those most in need, especially those facing
discrimination and living on the margins of society.
I have been visiting many national societies and
talking to their dedicated staff and volunteers. I have
witnessed the strength of their commitment to the
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals,
and I have seen the important work done at the
community level. We have delivered on these
commitments within our mandate, experience and
expertise, and we will continue to do so.
We will continue to strive to achieve excellence
in our well-known role as the world’s leading actor in
humanitarian action and disaster response. In 2009
alone, the Red Cross and Red Crescent reached
13.5 million people in 113 countries with our disaster
preparedness and risk reduction programmes. From
experience, we believe that the professional estimate
that one dollar spent on risk reduction saves four
dollars in response is true. We will also continue to
build on our strengths in established community
service delivery, and we resolve to do more to promote
development at the community level by preventing and
reducing the underlying causes of vulnerability.
Our world is changing continuously, and we face
many entwined challenges. Food insecurity, disasters,
climate change, poverty and rapid urbanization are
today’s major humanitarian challenges, which are also
impacted by today’s social and economic challenges.
On the positive side, minds and attitudes are also
changing. Communication and information technology
is having a great influence, especially on the way
young people think and go about doing things, as we
learn from our young volunteers. By utilizing the

10-54527

power of communication and information technology
we can change minds and attitudes and thus overcome
some of the intractable barriers to progress, including
those that are social, cultural and behavioural. Young
people are leading the changes in their communities,
and we need to empower them.
Last but not least, I would like to take this
opportunity to extend our heartfelt thanks and
appreciation for Member States’ continued support and
confidence in the work of the staff and volunteers of
the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement around the world. We attach great
importance to this unique and distinctive relationship
between the components of the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement and States. At the same
time, we emphasize that our commitment to our
fundamental principles, including independence,
neutrality and impartiality, provides the best available
means to gain the confidence of all in order to have
access to those in need.
We also attach great importance to our
partnerships with other humanitarian actors, including
the United Nations and other international
organizations, non-governmental organizations and
civil society, as well as with the private sector. Such
partnerships are essential to address effectively the
needs of vulnerable people worldwide, in the spirit of
working together for humanity.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the observer of the International
Olympic Committee.
Ms. El Moutawakel (International Olympic
Committee): On behalf of the International Olympic
Committee (IOC), I thank the General Assembly and
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for giving the IOC the
opportunity to contribute more effectively, through
sports, to the important work of the United Nations as a
Permanent Observer. The Assembly’s decision to grant
observer status to our organization was a resounding
acknowledgement by Member States and the
international community as a whole of the positive
power of sports. The additional recognition of sports in
the Outcome Document of this summit (resolution
65/1) is another cause for our appreciation and
inspiration.
I am here today to contribute to the discussion on
the role of sports in achieving the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs). We are now just five

45

A/65/PV.9

years away from the deadline set by the United Nations
for achieving the Goals. Time is short and the list of
needs is still long. The International Olympic
Committee shares the Assembly’s sense of urgency.
Many of the Committee’s development projects are
closely aligned with the MDGs. We are working hard
to eradicate poverty and extreme hunger by using
sports to support community development and school
food programmes in Africa and Asia.
In May, the International Olympic Committee
opened the first Olympic Youth Development Centre in
Zambia. This innovative project addresses community
needs by combining sports with education and healthcare programmes. We are working to achieve universal
primary education by collaborating with UNESCO and
other relevant partners to provide education to children
and also to youth of disadvantaged communities. We
are supporting values-based education in Africa, in
Asia, in Latin America, in the Caribbean islands and
also in Oceania.
The International Olympic Committee is also
using sports to promote gender equality and the
empowerment of women and girls. In this regard, we
congratulate the United Nations for its decision to
establish the entity UN Women. We look forward to
working closely with the organization as soon as it is
up and running. The goal of gender equality in and
through sports is included in the Olympic Charter, the
Olympic Movement’s guiding document. With the
addition of more women’s events to the Olympic
programme, women will participate in every sport at
the next Olympic Games, to be held in London in
2012.
The International Olympic Committee is
contributing, to the fight against HIV/AIDS and
malaria, as well as other, non-communicable diseases,
through extensive education programmes in partnership
with the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS, the World Health Organization, the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement
and other partners from civil society.
We are also working to ensure environmental
sustainability by making sustainability an integral part
of the planning process for the Olympic Games and
other sports activities. In 1994 International Olympic
Committee adopted the environment as the third pillar
of the Olympic Movement, alongside sports and

46

culture. The Committee is proud to be part of a global
partnership for development.
The Olympic Movement is composed of the
International Olympic Committee, the International
and National Sport Federations and the 205 National
Olympic Committees. They are all using the power of
sports to promote the MDGs in countries across the
world and they cooperate to that end with all sectors,
including Governments, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, non-governmental organizations,
the business community and civil society at large.
While we indeed are doing our best, we are fully
aware that more must and can be done. All of us in
sports can and must do more. This is a clarion call to
sports organizations and to the billions of sportspersons
and their supporters and fans throughout the world to
play their part fully.
As it has done for more than a century now, the
International Olympic Committee, and the Olympic
Movement at large, will continue to look for new ways
to use the power of sports to bring people together, to
inspire them to be the best they can be, to encourage
healthy lifestyles, to foster peace, to promote valuesbased education — in short, to make better citizens of
our youth and the world a better place for all of us.
Sport cannot solve all of the world’s problems,
but it can help this honourable institution in its mission
to serve and to save humanity. I thank the Assembly for
advancing the causes of peace, development and
human rights throughout the world. Thank you for
recognizing the importance of sports in achieving the
MDGs and for giving sports the opportunity to
contribute to this noble agenda.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the observer for the International
Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance.
Mr. Helgesen (International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance): The Millennium
Declaration (resolution 55/2) affirms that the United
Nations will spare no effort to promote democracy. For
the International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance International (IDEA), as the only
intergovernmental organization with a specific mandate
to support democracy worldwide, it is significant that
this world body draws the link between democracy and
development.

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

The rationale for that link is evident. For
democracy to be genuinely sustainable, it must be
owned and led by those whose development is at stake.
Profound development, like democracy, can only be
driven from within and below. For that to happen there
is a need for open, inclusive, accountable structures for
participation in society.
Democracy serves the cause of development
because it reinforces the social contract between
citizens and decision-makers. It provides for the
necessary democratic ownership of the development
process. A critical but often weak link in ensuring
democratic ownership is certain key political actors,
notably political parties and parliaments. Too often
they fail in their responsibility to capture citizens’
needs and aspirations and transform them into policies
that can deliver on development. Too often they fail in
their responsibility to hold the executive to account.
And too often the international community fails in its
responsibility to support the strengthening of such
democratic accountability processes through existing
development cooperation frameworks.
If the next years of efforts to attain the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) are to be
more successful, sustaining aid levels is not enough.
Getting out of the global economic crisis is also not
enough. If development is to be truly nationally owned,
it requires more responsive national democratic
politics. Responsive politics must include increased
political participation of women. One of the intolerable
democratic deficits worldwide that is also a barrier to
human development is the continuing gross underrepresentation of women in politics. Fifteen years after
from the Beijing target of 30 per cent representation by
women in parliaments, only 24 parliaments worldwide
have reached that target.
Democratic principles of participation, inclusion,
regular free and fair elections and an independent
judiciary are more likely to bring about development
gains than other systems of governance. Democratic
participation supports development in three ways.
First, elections empower people to articulate their
interests. In elections governments will be held
accountable if they do not attend to the needs of the
poor. Secondly, democracy requires freedom of speech
and association and thus facilitates transfer of
information to the Government about the needs,
aspirations and preferences of the poor. Thirdly,
democratic Governments are more efficient in

10-54527

providing public goods such as education, health care,
job training, a clean environment and, most critically,
the rule of law. That is why democracy is the most
desired and desirable form of governance. Democracy
is good for development. The opposite is also true:
development is good for democracy.
In International IDEA’s experience it is critically
important to support the integrity of electoral
processes, the centrality of parliaments and political
parties, and the effectiveness of sector-specific
democratic dialogue for making sure that democracy
delivers on key areas of human development such as
health, education or community security.
Our work also shows that the rich democracybuilding experiences from the global South can
contribute to a better understanding of the relationship
between the quality of democracy over time and
country-level performance on the MDGs.
In conclusion, I reiterate International IDEA’s
commitment to contributing to the achievement of the
MDGs, in partnership with national, regional and
global actors and to deepen our strategic partnership
with the United Nations in that endeavour.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the observer of the International
Organization of la Francophonie.
Mr. Benessahraoui (International Organization
of la Francophonie) (spoke in French): Since
September 2000, the International Organization of la
Francophonie (OIF) has made the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) the guiding principle of
the actions of all its missions. Since then it has
contributed, to the extent that its means allow, to
achieving the Goals with an approach that provides
added value and effective solidarity. That approach is
based on assisting member countries, including
through sharing its rich wealth of experiences and good
practices displayed in all four corners of our world.
In working to achieve the MDGs, the OIF is
working at the same time for the emergence of a
sustainable institutional and political context based on
a tripartite solidarity: solidarity among States,
especially between the North and the South, solidarity
among current generations within States, and solidarity
everywhere towards future generations.
All told, the approach of la Francophonie is part
of a vision that takes into account the world’s diversity.

47

A/65/PV.9

It is based on a dialogue of cultures and recognizes that
culture is a crucial component of human development
and represents a source of identity, innovation and
creativity for individuals and communities. It is also a
factor for reconciliation and social cohesion.
There has been progress in terms of
implementing several MDGs in the francophone sphere
and elsewhere in the developing world. Some countries
are on the right path to achieve at least some of the
MDGs by the 2015 deadline. However, it must be
noted that despite efforts made and the tangible
progress noted, achieving the MDGs remains out of
reach in many regions, particularly in Africa. The road
before us is long if we are to ensure that every single
child in the human family enjoys his fundamental right
to education and health care.
Much remains to be done, be it with regard to
education and health care for all or to eradicating
poverty; whether it concerns gender equality or, more
broadly, the emergence of a more fertile global
partnership that is more resolutely based in solidarity,
with renewed planetary governance that is fairer and
more democratic.
More than ever, these worrying observations
require the collective, focused and ongoing attention of
the international community in order to renew and
increase the global efforts being made in terms of
official development assistance, and to find and
mobilize additional resources and innovative financing
commensurate with a challenge that imperils the very
survival of an entire branch of the human family.
Finally, the review of the MDGs two-thirds of the
way to their deadline highlights the need to find ways
and means to improve synchronization of actions,
targets and goals, and to adapt them to the diversity of
situations and developments. With these improvements,
and by taking into consideration cultural factors and
access to energy, the MDGs must continue to be a
vector for and a common thread of the renewed
commitment of the international community to
combating poverty and giving specific and measurable
meaning to solidarity with the most disadvantaged.
The renewal of the international commitment,
which la Francophonie vigorously urges, is particularly
necessary because the multifaceted financial,
economic, energy and food crisis that has shaken the
world for the past three years threatens to destroy the
achievements that have been made since 2000. The

48

crisis also threatens to destroy the praiseworthy efforts
of the less developed countries, which will suffer, still
more than others, the effects of the crisis.
On the other hand, the environmental crisis,
which will certainly and irreversibly exacerbate
climate change and the erosion of biodiversity, is
another source of concern, whose multiple impacts will
ultimately result, if nothing serious is done
everywhere, in the unfair aggravation of poverty, in
particular in developing countries. This worrisome
context therefore requires more commitment and more
boldness in consolidating governance, both at the
national and the international levels.
The emergence of global governance is
necessary; the need for regulation is more urgent and
imperative than ever. While the establishment of the
Group of Twenty can be considered to be progress with
respect to the Group of Eight, much remains to be done
to strengthen cooperation on the rules governing the
world economy, allowing everyone to become active
partners in an improved form of shared Government.
In a word, we must ensure that all our efforts
converge for managed globalization designed to
sustainably inaugurate an era of responsibility and
shared prosperity. As our Secretary General, Mr. Abdou
Diouf, has affirmed,
“by calling on the international community to
implement its commitments, la Francophonie also
shows its own determination to work along these
lines, as has been proved already by the desire of
its Heads of State and Government to address this
question at the thirteenth summit of la
Francophonie, which will take place next 22 to 24
October in Montreux, Switzerland”.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the observer of the International
Union for the Conservation of Nature.
Ms. Marton-Lefèvre (International Union for the
Conservation of Nature): I have the privilege of
representing the world’s oldest and largest international
conservation network, and speak on behalf of its 1,200
members — big and small, sovereign States and nongovernmental organizations — which are all united by
a common vision of a just world that values and
conserves nature.
At the turn of the millennium, world leaders
made an unprecedented commitment to ensuring

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

environmental sustainability and to making sustainable
development an overarching framework for all
development efforts. Participants may ask themselves
what could possibly be the connection between a
nature conservation organization and the global quest
for economic growth and social progress that are
enshrined in the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs).
The International Union for the Conservation of
Nature (IUCN) has been working on the development
paradigm for many years, especially since our 1980
World Conservation Strategy, which stressed the
interdependence of conservation and development, thus
being the first to give currency to the term “sustainable
development”.
The concept is now commonplace, but it seems as
though, 10 years after nearly 200 nations agreed to
integrate environmental sustainability into all major
policy decisions, we are still trying to make the case
for it rather than getting on with the actual task at
hand. IUCN echoes the concerns of many in this Hall
that, despite progress made in some areas and in some
regions, the achievement of MDG 7 — and the MDGs
overall — may be compromised.
We have five years to make a difference.
Groundbreaking research and practical experience on
the ground tell us that the key to not just one but
several MDGs may well be found in rethinking the
relationship between biodiversity, ecosystems — or
simply what nature provides — and human well-being.
Food security and the livelihoods of the poor
directly depend on functioning ecosystems like forests,
mangroves and coastal areas. Global water and
sanitation targets can be achieved only by sustaining
ecosystems that ensure the supply of clear, safe water,
whilst improved management of local watersheds can
reduce child deaths from water-borne diseases.
By providing sustainable energy alternatives we
can reduce the time that children, especially girls,
spend collecting firewood instead of studying.
Empowering women to manage natural resources
sustainably can contribute to improving food safety
and security, as would alleviating the hardships of
other vulnerable groups, especially children and
indigenous peoples.
Climate change, recognized as a threat and
challenge for achieving development, is closely linked

10-54527

to the need for robust ecosystems. By acknowledging
the role of healthy nature in extreme events such as
droughts and floods, we improve our resilience and
capacity to adapt to climate change. In other words,
investing in nature is investing in development and, at
the same time, investing in the achievement of the
MDGs.
The landmark study entitled “The Economics of
Ecosystems and Biodiversity” has gone a long way in
helping us understand the contribution of nature to our
well-being and put it in language that is understood by
economists, business people, politicians and citizens
worldwide. For example, tropical forests that provide
livelihoods for over 1 billion of the world’s poorest
people are being lost at an alarming rate. In addition,
deforestation accounts for about 17 per cent of
greenhouse gas emissions, and halting deforestation
would save some $3.7 trillion in terms of avoided
greenhouse gas emissions. Fish provides the main
source of protein for more than one-sixth of humanity.
By redirecting the financial flows that currently drive
most commercially valuable fish stocks to
overexploitation, we could improve the performance of
global fisheries by an estimated $50 billion annually.
“The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity” has
many, many more examples of this type.
The achievement of the MDGs requires
refocusing and redoubling efforts made by
Governments and other actors, including civil society
and the private sector. The opportunity is not lost, but a
different
approach,
in
which
environmental
sustainability is at the heart of development efforts, is
desperately needed if we are to meet our commitments
in five years’ time. Let us bring to the world a renewed
leadership to realize sustainable development — for
people, for nature and for the planet, our unique home.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the observer of the Asian
Development Bank.
Mr. Kuroda (Asian Development Bank): The
Asian and Pacific region encompasses nearly threefifths of humankind. No global effort to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) will succeed
unless our region succeeds.
With more than 500 million people having
overcome poverty since 1990, the region’s target for
reducing extreme income poverty is in sight. However,
as home to two-thirds of the world’s poor, it still faces

49

A/65/PV.9

enormous challenges. Almost 2 billion people in the
region still live without basic sanitation, and nearly
half a billion without safe drinking water. Infant
mortality in some countries is more than 10 times
higher than in developed nations. In South Asia,
illiteracy rates are among the highest in the world,
slum-dwellers comprise 40 per cent of the urban
population, and women are still deprived of the
benefits of growth.
The region’s environment faces daunting threats,
including a decline in forest cover and the steady rise
of greenhouse gas emissions. Recent catastrophic
floods that have brought misery to millions highlight
the need for stronger measures to counter climaterelated vulnerabilities and better adapt to climate
change.
The MDGs represent a global compact to
eradicate these deprivations and threats, and we must
all do our part. National Governments must make
growth more inclusive. They must provide better
access to basic services and engage the private sector,
civil society, and communities in order to help ensure
better service delivery. They must expand basic
infrastructure to provide access to electricity, roads and
other essential services so that the poor can access
health care, education and economic opportunities. And
they must move quickly towards low-carbon growth.
At the regional level, traditional donors and
newly emerging ones alike can do more to help their
less-developed neighbours. Expanding regional
cooperation in the areas of trade, investment,
knowledge and technology can also help bridge gaps in
resources and capacities. While the region overall is
progressing, many countries within Asia and the
Pacific are falling behind. Linking those worse-off
countries to larger subregional and regional markets
will spur faster growth, create economic opportunities
and facilitate the sharing of regional resources, such as
energy and water.
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) is
committed to strengthening regional and global
partnerships to achieve the MDGs. We are increasing
our support for roads, electricity, water, sanitation and
education. We have established dedicated funds to
promote environmentally sustainable growth and tackle
climate change. Our financing for clean energy has
grown to more than $1 billion a year, and we plan to
double that to more than $2 billion per year by 2013.

50

ADB’s projects in the areas of water and sanitation
have benefited more than 130 million people in the
past five years, and we plan to further increase our
operations. Our school improvement projects are
expected to benefit more than 22 million students in
the next three years, and we also intend to scale up our
assistance for education, which is one of our core areas
of operation.
The Asian and Pacific region represents the
world’s best help for achieving the MDGs, but it
cannot do it alone. The international community must,
above all, live up to the commitment of the historic
Millennium Declaration of 2000 (resolution 55/2). The
Declaration promised a better life to millions of poor
people in the Asian and Pacific region and across the
globe. Our collective action today can make that
promise a reality.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the observer of the Sovereign
Military Order of Malta.
Mr. Shafer (Sovereign Military Order of Malta):
The Sovereign Hospitaller Military Order of Malta
appreciates the opportunity to address this High-level
Plenary Meeting, and I shall be very brief. The Order
would also like to congratulate the Secretary-General
and the President of the General Assembly on their
wise guidance in organizing this important high-level
event and for bringing the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) directly into the spotlight that shines on
the United Nations every September.
The Order has continued to pledge and strengthen
our cooperation with the United Nations on these
issues, particularly in the fields of humanitarian
assistance and sustainable development, and we
reiterate that pledge today. The Order considers the
Millennium Development Goals to be an example of
the preferential option for the poor that we firmly
believe in. Combating poverty, disease and suffering,
regardless of race, religion or nationality, has been at
the heart of the Order’s activities for 900 years. The
Order’s 13,000 members, 80,000 permanent volunteers
and professional medical staff, and 20,000 doctors,
nurses and stretcher-bearers make up an exceptional
network working in 120 countries.
With respect to Goal 1, the Order is saddened by
the dire situation of more than 1 billion people living
in extreme poverty and hunger and by the inequities
between and within countries. This is a scandal to

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

humankind and one of the most significant challenges
facing the world today. Extreme poverty and hunger
are the cause, symptoms and effects of the issues the
MDGs address, and progress on this Goal is most
crucial.
I would also like to state that, in our view, Goals
4, 5 and 6 are interconnected on every level. Failure on
any one of them is likely to endanger progress on
others. It is an inexcusable reality that five diseases —
pneumonia,
diarrhoea,
malaria,
measles
and
HIV/AIDS — account for half the deaths of children
under five. Low-cost prevention and treatment could
save most of these children.
I should also point, however, to bright spots. The
Order’s Holy Family Maternity Hospital in Bethlehem
will soon be delivering its 50,000th baby. In the 20
years since its first delivery, the Holy Family Hospital
has gone from 1,000 births annually to more than
4,000. It is the only hospital of its kind in the West
Bank. Its intensive care unit is the only one in the
entire region. The hospital has facilitated IsraeliPalestinian cooperation in the medical field, and the
Palestinian Ministry of Health has designated the Holy
Family Hospital as a training centre for young doctors.
We also immediately expanded our hospital in the
North of Haiti when the horrible earthquake occurred.
We added more than 400 beds, and helicopters brought
many of the worst injured people there from Port-auPrince. Our planes left Cologne the day after the
earthquake and landed, bringing German and Swiss
doctors and supplies for 50,000 people. I should like to
conclude by saying that without peace the development
of peoples will never come about just as without
development there will never be peace. And I
congratulate you all for bringing these issues before us
today.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the observer of the Partners in
Population and Development.
Mr. Rao (Partners in Population and
Development): Thank you very much, Sir, for giving
me the opportunity to make a few comments on behalf
of the Partners in Population and Development (PPD)
at this landmark High-level Plenary Meeting. Because
of time constraints, I will not read out the whole of my
prepared statement.

10-54527

As an intergovernmental organization of
24 developing countries committed to the promotion of
South-South cooperation in the field of population and
development, PPD has been actively promoting the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs) and the goals of the International Conference
on Population and Development (ICPD), especially in
its member countries. A number of international
organizations and foundations, including the United
Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), continue to support
the activities of PPD, and, on this occasion, the PPD
would like to put on record its appreciation for the
Fund’s continued collaboration and support.
Partners in Population and Development
recognizes that all the MDGs are interlinked, thereby
facilitating an integrated and comprehensive approach
to achieving the goals, as many have noted. Bearing in
mind that it is a networking and partnership institution,
PPD is, in line with its mandate, encouraging and
supporting activities in the programme priority areas
substantive areas by focusing on capacity-building
through
training,
knowledge-sharing
through
documenting and disseminating innovative practices in
population and reproductive health, information
exchange, and advocacy for population, reproductive
health and development.
Partners in Population and Development would
like to draw attention, as others have done at this
Meeting, to the slow rate of progress in such areas as
improving maternal and reproductive health and
reducing maternal mortality, MDG 5, and advancing
gender equality and the empowerment of women and
girls, MDG 3. At the same time, PPD notes with great
satisfaction the renewed interest shown by Member
States in maternal health and family planning as
evidenced by the discussions at the last meeting of the
Group of Eight in Canada and at the African Union
Summit, which took place in July of this year in
Kampala. Likewise, the Secretary-General’s Global
Strategy on Women’s and Children’s Health is most
timely and should be commended. Given that maternal
mortality rates are still high, however, a concerted
effort is required if accelerated progress on the relevant
Goal is to be achieved by 2015. In this regard, PPD
would like to reiterate the recommendations contained
in the outcome document on family planning,
emergency obstetric care and related services.
However, PPD notes with deep concern that the
funding for family planning is lower today than it was

51

A/65/PV.9

in 1995. As UNFPA has cautioned, if that trend is not
reversed, it will have serious implications for
countries’ abilities to address unmet needs for family
planning and reproductive health. Urgent action is
required in this regard.
In the context of achieving the MDGs and the
ICPD goals, the role of South-South cooperation needs
to be highlighted. The Ministerial Meeting of the highlevel segment of the Economic and Social Council in
July of this year highlighted the growing importance of
South-South cooperation and noted that it currently
accounts for around 10 per cent of all development
cooperation.
Partners in Population and Development have
been doing their part since 1994, when it was
established at the time of the ICPD in Cairo. PPD
experience
indicates
that
first-rate
technical
capabilities exist in the population and reproductive
health field in many developing countries and greater
efforts should be made to fully capitalize on such
capabilities through South-South and triangular
cooperation. For example, the Governments of Egypt,
Morocco and India have offered long-term fellowships
and China and South Africa are offering short-term
fellowships to train population, family planning and
health experts. The Government of Bangladesh
continues to host and support the secretariat of the PPD
in Dhaka. In addition, PPD member countries have
built a network of world-class institutions that can
provide a whole range of training, research and
technical support opportunities.
In closing, PPD would like to express its fervent
hope that the great potential that exists for South-South
cooperation in many developing countries will be
utilized and play an enhanced and critical role in
contributing to the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015, and, indeed, to
sustainable development and international cooperation.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the observer of the Parliamentary
Assembly of the Mediterranean.
Mr. Amoruso (Parliamentary Assembly of the
Mediterranean) (spoke in Italian; English text provided
by the delegation): It is with great pride that the
Parliamentary Assembly of the Mediterranean (PAM)
participates today in the High-level Plenary Meeting on
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs),
exercising for the first time its observer status, which it

52

obtained last December at the sixty-fourth session of
the General Assembly. Established in 2006 after some
20 years of collaboration among the countries
bordering the Mediterranean Sea, under the aegis of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, the Parliamentary Assembly
of the Mediterranean now has 25 member parliaments
from around the Mediterranean, whose joint hope for
the Mediterranean is to improve the quality of life for
some, to preserve a way of living for others, and to
ensure the peaceful coexistence of all in a region that is
prosperous and stable.
Security-related political concerns and economic,
social and environmental issues are crucial for our
Assembly, which has placed the human dimension at
the heart of its concerns. Achieving the MDGs is a
global endeavour bolstered by one of the most
ambitious programmes developed by humanity, to
which the parliamentarians of the Mediterranean have
decided to devote their steadfast dedication. The
various aspects of poverty and suffering can be clearly
seen in our region. Within the region, there are widely
differing levels of development, which could threaten
regional stability and trigger population shifts or
conflict. The region must therefore step up its efforts in
support of the attainment of the eight MDGs.
Ten years after the Millennium Summit, a great
deal of progress has been seen in our region. But it
varies widely across the region, and a great deal more
effort is still needed. While official development
assistance to the Mediterranean countries has increased
considerably, it remains inadequate. And some
countries seem unlikely to be able to achieve the Goals
set for 2015 unless additional efforts are made.
The economic crisis, which is often invoked as an
excuse, cannot be taken as a valid justification for
failing to seize the opportunity before us to help the
poorest populations on the required scale and eradicate
extreme poverty.
The American economist Jeffrey Sachs recently
highlighted the gaps that must be bridged to attain the
Millennium Development Goals. I would like to focus
on one of them that is still of great concern in our
region: access to drinking water and basic sanitation.
Just to mention one figure, the Mediterranean accounts
for 60 per cent of the world’s water-poor populations,
with access to less than one thousand cubic metres per
person per year. Water management here has a
significant impact on life, health, agriculture, energy

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

production, transportation and, hence, on the economy,
the environment and biodiversity.
Mindful that our region must seriously address
the problem of collective water management, the
Parliamentary Assembly resolved in 2008 to publish an
annual report on water in the Mediterranean. Its
resolution on water was adopted unanimously in 2009
at its meeting in Istanbul. It specifically requires
member Parliaments to take action to ensure as soon as
possible that the right of access to water by all may be
recognized as an essential human right.
We are very proud to note that last July the
General Assembly adopted resolution 64/292, declaring
that the right to safe and clean drinking water and
sanitation is a human right that is essential for the full
enjoyment of the right to life. The PAM congratulates
the General Assembly on this historic decision, which
makes it possible to complete one stage leading to the
attainment of the Millennium Goals.
However, this stage is only theoretical and PAM’s
concerns remain unchanged. By emphasizing water and
access to clean water today, I am solemnly requesting
in the name of the Parliamentarians of the
Mediterranean that this historic resolution not be
allowed to remain a dead letter, but will, rather, lead to
the establishment of tangible rights, making it possible
for several hundreds of millions of people to truly
improve their living conditions. The Goals provide us
with a unique opportunity to achieve this ambition by
2015.
We, as Parliamentarians, are ready to use all our
powers to legislate, oversee our executives and vote on
budgets to ensure that this is achieved in our region,
thereby underpinning the efforts being deployed by the
United Nations.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the observer of the
Commonwealth Secretariat.
Mr. Smith (Commonwealth Secretariat): The
Commonwealth is honoured to make a statement at this
High-level United Nations General Assembly Meeting
to review the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
The Commonwealth is a voluntary association of
54 countries on five continents. We account for a third
of the world’s population, a quarter of its countries and
a fifth of its trade. We are rich and poor, large and
small — diverse countries with varied peoples aspiring

10-54527

to the shared goals of freedoms and rights which
emanate from and underpin development and
democracy.
And with our membership containing 16 least
developed countries, 19 countries in sub-Saharan
Africa, 32 small States, the achieving of the
Millennium Development Goals is an imperative for all
Commonwealth citizens.
The Commonwealth’s commitment to the MDGs
is deep. The MDGs embody the fundamental rights
which underpin our association. They provide an
essential guiding light for the Commonwealth’s work
among its members.
Since 2000, when the international community
embarked on this unique human endeavour, many
countries in the Commonwealth have made significant
progress. The incidence of tuberculosis has fallen in
most Commonwealth developing States, rates of
primary education have risen significantly in a large
number of Commonwealth countries, especially in
sub-Saharan Africa. Two thirds of Commonwealth
developing countries have already eliminated gender
disparities in primary and secondary education.
However, it is also clear that looking across the
Commonwealth as a whole, much remains to be done.
To illustrate: there are 20 million people in the
Commonwealth living with HIV. In addition, two thirds
of all maternal deaths take place in Commonwealth
countries.
Time is now short to attain the MDGs. Current
circumstances demand now more than ever that the
flame that was lit in 2000 be kept alive. We must now
redouble our efforts to ensure that the MDGs are
achieved and that this takes place within the agreed
timeframe.
In the Commonwealth, our Heads of Government
and Ministers, especially those in health, education and
women’s affairs, have looked hard at the challenges
our countries face in meeting the MDGs. They have
highlighted the need for action in a number of areas,
four of which I will now specifically draw attention to
and which are also reflected in the outcome document.
First, there is a need for increased levels of
development finance. With global pressure on
development budgets, there is urgent need for the
global community and its members to consider and

53

A/65/PV.9

implement new, innovative mechanisms for generating
development finance.

and financial resources necessary to the task ahead
which is assuring the attainment of the MDGs.

Secondly, a new emphasis is needed on the role
of women in development. Both Commonwealth health
ministers and women’s affairs ministers stressed the
urgency of addressing shortcomings in maternal health
provision. More midwives are desperately needed. But
women are also important economic agents. As the
women’s affairs ministers have emphasized, they need
new and innovative ways to be supported as wealth
creators if the MDGs are to be met.

The overarching goal that is still within our grasp
is nothing less than saving present and future
generations of the world’s people from wasted lives.

Thirdly, trade is well recognized as essential to
support economic growth and promote poverty
reduction. The will must be found to deliver a fair,
development-oriented conclusion to the DOHA
Development Round. Regional and other trading
arrangements must be pursued and concluded on bases
that strengthen productive capacity and improve access
to markets, especially for women, youth entrepreneurs
and small business owners.
Fourthly, new and innovative partnerships are
essential to delivering the MDGs. In the
Commonwealth, we champion the linking together of
our governmental, business and civil society networks.
This is a model with global relevance. Our technical
cooperation work is built on sharing best practice and
south-south cooperation. These provide a new basis for
sustainable development cooperation.
In its work on the MDGs, the Commonwealth and
its Secretariat are guided by the recognition that
democracy and development are interdependent.
Democracy at the national and local level promotes the
transparency and accountability essential to efficient
and effective delivery of public services and the
economic growth which reduces poverty. We strongly
believe that achieving the MDGs requires the full
engagement of all citizens, for both “people
ownership” of these objectives and “country
ownership” are essential.
We acknowledge and support the commitment of
the United Nations Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Kimoon, the United Nations as an organization, and so
many millions across the globe to maintaining the hope
that inspired the MDGs in 2000. We trust that this
meeting and the outcome document will serve to
galvanize the global community, and particularly those
most able to do so, into providing the human, technical

54

The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to the observer of the Common
Fund for Commodities.
Mr. Mchumo (Common Fund for Commodities):
It is a great honour for the Common Fund for
Commodities (CFC), and for myself, to address this
meeting to present the perspective of the Common
Fund with regard to the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs).
By its very creation, the core business of the
Common Fund for Commodities is essentially to
combat poverty in developing countries by ensuring
greater productivity, increased income, and enhanced
export earnings from commodities, which constitute
the base of the economies of the majority of the
developing countries. The CFC undertakes projects on
commodity diversification and value addition, disease
and pest control for higher productivity, and other
commodity development measures. Our main mandate
is to enhance the socio-economic development of
commodity producers, giving priority to assisting
small-holder commodity producers. The projects
financed by the Common Fund, therefore, are aligned
to make a tangible contribution to the attainment of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
Currently, three quarters of the world’s extremely
poor, estimated to be about 800 million people, live in
rural areas and depend on commodities and
commodity-related jobs for their livelihoods.
Commodities are central for the economies of
developing countries, being a major source of income,
employment, trade and Government revenues. Of a
total of 141 developing countries, 95 depend on
commodities for at least 50 per cent of their export
earnings, and approximately half the countries in
Africa derive over 80 per cent of their merchandise
export income from commodities.
Considering that backdrop — where many
developing countries, especially the most vulnerable,
are heavily dependent on commodities — one cannot
effectively address the implementation of the MDGs

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

and combat poverty without taking into account the
imperative of commodity development.
Although in the context of the MDGs
commodities are particularly important for attaining
Goal 1 — to eradicate poverty and hunger — they have
a cross-cutting relevance, affecting many of the agreed
MDG targets. Goal 8 — to develop a global
partnership for development — is another with regard
to the targets addressing the needs of least developed
countries (LDCs) and developing an open, rule-based,
predictable, non-discriminatory trading system.
Statistics from the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development show that about 80 per cent of the
agreed exports of LDCs are comprised of commodities
and that for landlocked developing countries, that
number is 70 per cent.
A fairer international system for commodities
trade would result in more opportunities for poor
farmers and thus directly influence the socio-economic
conditions in many of the world’s poorest countries.
Market barriers and volatile commodity prices have led
many producers in developing countries to abandon
their farms and migrate to urban areas to look for new
economic opportunities. That creates pressure on urban
areas, particularly in basic services like health,
education, drinking water and housing.
Women constitute a significant majority of the
workforce involved in commodity production.
Implementing commodity measures therefore has a
significant effect on promoting gender equality and
empowering women, which is Goal 3, and that is why
the gender dimension is an integral part in the appraisal
process of CFC projects.
Commodities also have an indirect impact on
social development, especially in education and health.
Maintaining sustainable and productive commodity
systems provides farmers and their families with food
security and cash income and effects the general health
and education of the family. Raising the incomes of
commodity growers and ensuring that those incomes
are predictable could promote rural social development
in general, because farmers will be more likely to send
their children to school. That would contribute to the
implementation of Goal 2 — universal primary
education. It would also guarantee that children are
better nourished, thus facilitating the reduction of child
mortality, as set under Goal 4.

10-54527

Furthermore, it cannot be overemphasized that
export commodities are the main source of
Government revenues in developing countries,
providing a major source of public resources to finance
social policies.
In order to implement the MDGs, the following
issues should be taken into account: first, the supply
capacity limitations under which commodity producers
operate, including infrastructure issues; second, the
lack of diversification in commodity production; third,
the effective participation of producers, especially
small-holders; fourth, appropriate instruments for
tackling fluctuation in commodity prices; fifth, an
international enabling environment, including an
equitable, predictable and rule-based international
trade system; sixth, effective mobilization of capital
and increased public spending in order to assist
commodity producers; and finally, additional resources
in international official development assistance,
especially targeting the commodity sector.
Finally, as repeatedly stated, commodities have a
multifaceted dimension and a cross-cutting impact that
in general permeate all the targets set in the MDGs. It
is necessary to make commodities a growth factor and
to unlock the potential which is embedded in rich
natural and human resources.
Through its Five-Year Action Plan, the Common
Fund for Commodities provides a modest contribution
to the achievement of the MDGs, but the challenge is
greater than the resources available. More resources
need to be committed in commodity development
assistance by the international community.
We at the CFC are at a crossroads, as our member
countries are now discussing the future of the
organization. In line with the General Assembly’s
resolution on commodities (resolution 64/192), adopted
in December 2009, we hope that we will be given
enough resources to continue making a modest impact
in international development and the achievements of
the MDGs towards 2015 and beyond.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to Mrs. Melinda French Gates,
Co-Chair and Trustee of the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation.
Mrs. Gates (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation):
I am honoured to join the Assembly at the conclusion
of this critical dialogue among world leaders about

55

A/65/PV.9

what I believe is one of the most urgent challenges
facing the world today: how to accelerate the progress
toward the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
Over the past week I have heard some people say
we will never meet the MDGs. Sometimes, our
impatience with the way the world is leads us to be
pessimistic about our ability to change it. But at the
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, we believe we can
be very impatient with the way the world is and very
optimistic that we will change it. The MDGs
themselves embody this impatient optimism. They
recognize how much there is to be done, while at the
same time signalling the scale and scope of the world’s
ambition.
One reason I am optimistic is the progress I have
seen in the 10 years since the MDGs were agreed to as
part of the historic Millennium Declaration (resolution
55/2). The world is not called on to conjure progress
from a void. Instead, it is called on to learn from very
real progress on nearly all the MDGs, to expand it and
to speed it up.
One refrain I hear is that we are off track on
many of the Goals. That statement is technically
accurate. Not every country will meet every Goal, and
there is a risk that some of the Goals will not be met.
But that binary outlook — with total success on one
side and total failure on the other and people on both
sides blaming each other — obscures the extraordinary
progress driven by extraordinary people across the
globe.
Take the MDG for child mortality. The goal is a
two-thirds reduction, and we may not reach it by 2015.
But have we failed when 4 million children who would
have died in 1990 will survive in 2010? Have we failed
when we have reduced polio, a crippling childhood
disease, by 99 per cent in the past 20 years?
Another complaint I hear a lot is that progress is
not spread evenly. Some people dismiss the fact that
1.3 billion people have lifted themselves out of poverty
by pointing out that most of them live in China and
India, not in African countries. I believe that when
poor people lift themselves out of poverty, we ought to
celebrate, no matter where they come from. Bill and I
started our foundation because we believe that all lives
have equal value, and I am not comfortable comparing
one person’s suffering to that of another.

56

While it is true that some countries are reducing
poverty more quickly than others — and some, sadly,
have moved backwards — eight African countries have
already achieved the Goal on poverty reduction, and
several more are on schedule to do so by 2015. Across
nearly every Goal, there are inspiring examples of even
the poorest countries making dramatic improvements
in short periods of time.
The task ahead is to learn what the most
successful countries are doing right, so that we can
spread their best practices. In difficult economic times,
it is imperative that we increase support for effective
interventions that provide maximum value for
money — and not shift even bigger burdens to the
poorest by cutting back on development spending.
Recently, we have seen some of these proven,
cost-effective approaches gaining momentum, for
example, agricultural development. More than three
quarters of the poor people in the world depend on
farming for their food and income, which is why
agriculture is such an effective weapon against hunger
and poverty. The Gates Foundation is supporting
partners like the Alliance for a Green Revolution in
Africa to work with donors and developing countries to
create new agricultural opportunities for small farmers.
The Group of Eight (G8) and Group of 20 countries
increased their commitments to agriculture last year,
and many developing country Governments, especially
in Africa, have followed up with spending increases of
their own.
To take another example, women’s and children’s
health, we know that investments in women and
children generate huge returns. A healthy mother who
can give her children a healthy start in life has a
tremendous ripple effect on development. Earlier
today, the Secretary-General launched the Global
Strategy for Women’s and Children’s Health, which
builds on the financial commitments made at the G8
meeting in Canada this summer.
Along with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and
Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg, I was proud to
announce that the Gates Foundation has formed a
partnership with the United States Agency for
International Development, the United Kingdom
Department for International Development and the
Australian Government Overseas Aid Program to
coordinate our efforts on the ground in poor countries.

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

The synergy will help all of us make a bigger
difference in the lives of more women and children.

Africa a successful destination for investment and
economic growth.

So I am impatient. I am impatient because the
world is not getting better fast enough, or for enough
people. But I am also optimistic. I am optimistic
because there are proven and affordable ways to
decrease hunger and poverty, to help mothers and their
babies thrive, and to make rapid progress on all the
MDGs.

Business does need to step up through innovative
partnerships, co-investment and direct financial
contributions. I have spent much of my life in a
dialogue among business, government and civil
society, and I speak to this Assembly today as a true
believer in the ideal that when all three work together
in public-private partnerships, our world does work
better.

And I am optimistic about one more thing. I am
optimistic that our impatience will lead us all to be
more motivated, not less. I am optimistic that our sense
of urgency will inspire us to work together, not to
isolate ourselves. For if we are motivated, if we are
inspired, if we work together, then we can meet again
in five years to celebrate achievements that few of us
might have dared to imagine.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to Mr. Rajat Kumar Gupta,
Chairman of the International Chamber of Commerce.
Mr.
Gupta
(International
Chamber
of
Commerce): As Chairman of the International Chamber
of Commerce (ICC), it gives me great pleasure to
speak on behalf of the global business community and
the International Chamber.
When I spoke five years ago in the General
Assembly (see A/60/PV.3), the role of business in the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) was just
emerging. Now we have many successes. For example,
we stand here today knowing that we have made a
dramatic impact in saving mothers and children from
malaria. In the past 10 years, we have saved nearly
three quarters of a million children across Africa.
Technological solutions were made available through
long-lasting insecticide-treated nets, and Governments
provided additional financing through the World Bank
and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and
Malaria.
But what was critical to the success was a
private-sector approach scale up efforts to achieve
universal coverage by 2010, employing a war-room
type strategy to meet that Goal through better supply
chain planning, improved logistics, innovative
financing approaches, and more. If that attitude is
maintained through 2015, we can save an additional
three million lives. Those gains are truly critical
because success has a multiplier effect in making

10-54527

In 2006, for example, Nestle began working with
local communities in India, Pakistan and Africa on
water efficiency. That partnership has expanded
through the World Bank’s International Finance
Corporation, McKinsey and Company and a number of
other companies. They are now working with
Governments to solve the water problem, watershed by
watershed. Those partnerships bring results for society
by expanding community access to water and
improving both quality and efficiency.
To capture and encourage the benefits of
increased private-sector investment, Governments and
development agencies need to work much more
directly with business to identify investment
impediments and remedies and to enhance the capacity
to create business-enabling environments. However,
mistrust and misunderstanding sometimes prevent us
from working together more often in those types of
endeavours. When that happens, we all lose: business
loses opportunity and government loses credibility, but
society loses most of all. We must overcome this
mistrust, and I commit, as Chair of the ICC, that I will
advocate among our hundreds of thousands of
members to increase our contribution to the
achievement of the MDGs.
Public-private partnerships will get us closer to
the MDGs, but economic growth, entrepreneurship and
job creation are absolutely fundamental. Global trade
and investment are the engines to move hundreds of
millions of people out of poverty and to achieve the
MDGs — which is why the Governments need to
create this enabling environment. The biggest lesson
from emerging economies and less developed countries
is that the greatest source of development has been
business, enterprise creation, productivity growth and
job creation.
In the most underdeveloped economies, the aid
and innovative financing provided by the rich countries

57

A/65/PV.9

can create a minimum threshold required for the
private sector to truly prosper. And in every country,
leaders like those gathered here set the framework for
local entrepreneurship: for setting up businesses, for
closing them down, for formalizing national
economies, and so on. Further, Governments set the
framework for national competitiveness, for how to
protect workers, enforce contracts and protect
intellectual property and for other initiatives.
That is why it is important for Governments to
create a level playing field: to create an enabling
environment for enterprises of all sizes and sectors to
develop, to create jobs and to pursue technological
innovation and cooperation. Economic growth and our
ambitions for the eradication of poverty depend upon
the energy and drive of business and commerce. We at
ICC are committed to trade, investment and job
creation, and we should resist the urges of
protectionism in these challenging economic times.
Now let me talk about a topic that is often not
linked to the MDGs but is critically important. The
world is undergoing the largest wave of urban growth
in history. As of 2008, more than half of the world’s
population was living in towns and cities. By 2030 that
number will swell to almost 5 billion, with urban
growth concentrated in Africa and Asia. While megacities have captured much public attention, most of the
new growth will occur in smaller towns and cities,
which have fewer resources with which to respond to
the magnitude of the change.
Poverty is now growing faster in urban areas than
in rural areas. One billion people live in urban slums,
which are typically overcrowded, polluted and
dangerous and lack the basic services such as clean
water and sanitation. The MDGs cannot be achieved
without solving the smart-urbanization problem.
Addressing the challenges of meeting the MDGs
by 2015 will require concerted efforts and partnerships
by all actors in society. My message to Governments is
that they cannot hope for development without
business, but business needs Governments to be
successful. Whenever we see evidence of the private
sector driving development, in every single case the
Government got the conditions right. Governments,
and Governments alone, get to set those conditions that
enable business to grow and, in turn, societies to
prosper.

58

I would urge Government leaders to have higher
expectation of what business can deliver. We must
bring innovative approaches to education, health,
municipal services, and so on. Such approaches could
include the normal business incentives for the private
sector to rapidly ramp up and provide much needed
capacity in all such fields. That may sound like
aspirations aimed too high, but I believe that
development that fails to leverage the best of business
is development aimed too low.
In summary, I believe that the success of the
MDGs is possible and that public-private partnerships
are part of that success. But we cannot forget that our
greatest chance of achieving the MDGs will be through
economic growth, which requires us to fundamentally
address access to education, universal health care,
environmentally responsible growth and the challenges
of urbanization.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now give the floor to Ms. Zhou Lu, who will speak for
Friendship across Frontiers.
Ms. Zhou Lu (Friendship across Frontiers): The
co-founder of the London School of Economics,
George Bernard Shaw, once said that progress is
impossible without change, and those who cannot
change their minds cannot change anything. We are
here today. That is the best proof of progress that
reflects far more change than just the change of minds.
Not so long ago, the prevalent notion of business
was that the only social responsibility of business is to
make profits. Yet today, business leaders from many
developing countries, such as my country, China, have
shown that true sustainable value does not come from
profits but from making a real difference. We all
realize that Governments alone cannot tackle many of
the problems that we face today. The collaboration and
commitment of the private sector and civil society,
working in partnership with Governments, are
indispensable to achieve the Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs) — a collaboration based on solidarity,
not charity.
That is why we are here today with the
commitment to address the challenges of the MDGs
and to do so collaboratively with all concerned
stakeholders — Governments, business and nongovernmental partners — and to do it in a way that
ensures national ownership and the empowerment of
the poor.

10-54527

A/65/PV.9

We need to commit to mobilizing the requisite
resources and to using them effectively and to
enhancing South-South cooperation. We know the gaps
and we know what works and what does not. We know
that a fairer trading system and private investment are
essential, not just external aid. We cannot wait. It is
time to join efforts, to partner and to collaborate.

Our High-level Meeting is coming to an end. By
adopting the final document (resolution 65/1), we have
reaffirmed that keeping the promise made in the year
2000 and achieving the Millennium Development
Goals is a moral duty. It is an essential contribution to
global peace, security and prosperity. We are
determined to fulfil that duty.

It is time for the private sector and civil society to
explore new forms of multi-stakeholder partnerships
that are focused on investing in the underprivileged.
This important event is an opportunity to invite the
private sector to develop business models and
strategies for achieving the MDGs, using the rigours of
the market place, its management expertise and its
logistic systems to move beyond corporate social
responsibility to create a shared value for all
stakeholders.

That message is clear to all participants, and I
have heard it from all participants. I welcome the many
new proposals and commitments that were made
during our debate, commitments to increase official
development assistance, to develop innovative
financing and, in particular, to mobilize domestic
resources.

Since we all recognize that the MDGs are a
responsibility for all citizens, we should encourage all
citizens and civil society to create a culture of personal
responsibility and encourage social innovation to
achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
I urge participants, in their different roles, to be
more innovative in considering new forms of
partnerships for the achievement of the MDGs. I come
from China, the world’s workshop, and I am proud of
what we have achieved with hard work, ingenuity and
expanding partnerships. Some 700 years ago, a group
of Venetians left their homeland and headed for the
East. It took them 24 years to return to their homeland,
and Marco Polo said “I have not told half what I saw”.
Today we have many more resources than previously.
Therefore, we need to repeat that endeavour and come
form every corner of the world and work with each
other. There is a wealth of promise and potential that
can benefit us all in our endeavours to lift people from
poverty.
The world is so interconnected. What happens in
one part ripples and affects another part, and we need
to keep that in mind in our efforts and our promise to
achieve the MDGs and, as the Secretary-General said,
make it happen.
The Co-Chair (Mr. Deiss) (spoke in French): I
now come to the final remarks of the President of the
sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly, for which I
have chosen the title “We will do more to achieve the
Millennium Development Goals”.

10-54527

However, it is not financial resources that make
the difference. It is important that the policies
implemented at the international and national levels
promote development, through opening of markets,
improving governance and giving priority in national
budgets to public spending to promote the Millennium
Development Goals.
What matters now is that our words be followed
by action and that they have concrete results for the
millions of men, women and children living in poverty.
We will have to closely monitor the implementation of
our commitments. The annual reports of the SecretaryGeneral will allow us to measure the results. The
General Assembly will play its role, in particular
through a special event to take place in 2013.
That is how we will show that we are trustworthy
partners, credible and responsible. That is essential,
and I said so in my statement at the opening of this
Plenary Meeting. If we want to succeed, we must work
together. The commitment of both donors and
recipients is needed, as an authentic partnership. That
partnership should extend to civil society and the
private sector.
In that regard, I am impressed by the strong
commitment of civil society and private sector partners
to the Millennium Development Goals. Over
150 events have been organized here in New York by
the partners. A broad range of questions fundamental to
development have been addressed. That profusion of
events facilitated the exchange of lessons learned and
good practices and strengthened partnerships. We are
stronger as we continue.

59

A/65/PV.9

Formation of partnerships between the public
sector and the private sector is a powerful tool for
development. The roles of both those actors are
complementary. Governments must establish the
conditions that will allow the private sector to
innovate, invest and create jobs. That is the condition
for lasting success. It is heartening to note that today
companies are exploring innovative models that are
better adapted to meeting the needs of the poor.

disaster prevention and risk reduction. An earthquake
in Haiti, forest fires in Russia, floods in Pakistan —
unfortunately, that list is not exhaustive. This year, the
enormous human, social, economic and environmental
cost of natural disasters has been demonstrated far too
often. Real success will be achieved only if
development is sustainable and if our economic
structures are respectful of humanity and its
environment.

This afternoon I attended the launch of one
example of a broad partnership, the Global Strategy for
Women’s and Children’s Health, entitled “Every
woman, every child”. At the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral, the Global Strategy is united around the same
goal and includes not only the 192 United Nations
Member States, but also representatives of civil
society, the private sector and foundations. Such
initiatives are encouraging. I take this opportunity to
thank all of those who have made a commitment to the
Millennium Development Goals, and I hope that others
will follow their example.

After these three days of debate, I remain
optimistic. We will achieve the Millennium
Development Goals. Ladies and gentlemen, I am
counting on you.

We have five years more to prove our
determination. But if we want to strengthen our
progress, we must make a greater investment in

60

Before adjourning this meeting, I wish to remind
members that the closing meeting of the High-level
Plenary Meeting as a contribution to the 2010
International Year of Biodiversity will take place
immediately after the adjournment of this meeting in
this Hall.
I declare closed the High-level Plenary Meeting
of the sixty-fifth session of the General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 10.05 p.m.

10-54527
