A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/51/31
10 January 1997

Fifty-first session
Agenda item 41
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/51/L.20/Rev.1 and Rev.1/Add.1)]
51/31.

Support by the United Nations system of the
efforts of Governments to promote and
consolidate new or restored democracies

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the indissoluble links between the principles enshrined
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights1 and the foundations of any
democratic society,
Recalling the Manila Declaration2 adopted by the First International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies3 in June 1988,
Considering the major changes taking place on the international scene
and the aspirations of all peoples for an international order based on the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, including the
promotion and encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all and other important principles, such as respect for the equal
rights and self-determination of peoples, peace, democracy, justice, equality,
the rule of law, pluralism, development, better standards of living and
solidarity,
Recalling its resolutions 49/30 of 7 December 1994 and 50/133 of
20 December 1995, in which it recognized the importance of the Managua

1

Resolution 217 A (III).

2

A/43/538, annex.

3

Then called the International Conference of Newly Restored Democracies.

97-76123

/...

A/RES/51/31
Page 2

Declaration4 and Plan of Action5 adopted by the Second International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies in July 1994,
Recalling also the view expressed in the Managua Declaration that the
international community must pay closer attention to the obstacles facing the
new or restored democracies,
Taking note of the views of Member States expressed in the debate on
this item at its forty-ninth, fiftieth and fifty-first sessions,
Taking note also of the holding of the Informal Ministerial Meeting of
New or Restored Democracies in New York on 30 September 1996 in accordance
with the Managua Plan of Action,
Bearing in mind that such activities of the United Nations carried out
in support of the efforts of Governments are undertaken in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and only at the specific request of the Member
States concerned,
Bearing in mind also that democracy, development and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms are interdependent and mutually reinforcing
and that democracy is based on the freely expressed will of the people to
determine their own political, economic, social and cultural systems and on
their full participation in all aspects of their lives,
Noting that a considerable number of societies have recently undertaken
considerable efforts to achieve their social, political and economic goals
through democratization and the reform of their economies, pursuits that are
deserving of the support and recognition of the international community,
Noting with satisfaction that the Third International Conference of New
or Restored Democracies will take place at Bucharest from 2 to 4 September
1997,
Stressing the importance of support by Member States, the United Nations
system, the specialized agencies and other intergovernmental organizations of
the holding of the Third International Conference,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General6 on assistance
provided in the past by the United Nations, at the request of Member States,
as well as important concepts and considerations that are pertinent to this
question,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Secretary-General;6

2.
Commends the Secretary-General, and through him the United Nations
system, for the activities undertaken at the request of Governments to support
the efforts to consolidate democracy, as reflected in his report;

4

A/49/713, annex I.

5

Ibid., annex II.

6

A/51/512.
/...

A/RES/51/31
Page 3

3.
Recognizes that the Organization has an important role to play in
providing timely, appropriate and coherent support to the efforts of
Governments to achieve democratization within the context of their development
efforts;
4.
Stresses that activities undertaken by the Organization must be in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations;
5.
Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to improve the
capacity of the Organization to respond effectively to the request of Member
States through coherent, adequate support of their efforts to achieve the goal
of democratization;
6.
Encourages Member States to promote democratization and to make
additional efforts to identify possible steps to support the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored democracies;
7.
Invites the Secretary-General, Member States, the relevant
specialized agencies and bodies of the United Nations system, as well as other
intergovernmental organizations, to collaborate in the holding of the Third
International Conference of New or Restored Democracies;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-second session on the implementation of the present
resolution, including innovative ways and means as well as other reflections,
to enable the Organization to respond effectively and in an integrated manner
to requests of Member States for assistance in the field of democratization;
9.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-second
session the item entitled "Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or restored democracies".
75th plenary meeting
6 December 1996
