S/2012/238

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
19 April 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 19 April 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Further to paragraph 5 of Security Council resolution 2042 (2012), and to the
briefing of the Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States, Mr. Kofi Annan, to the Security Council on 12 April 2012, I wish to outline a
proposal for a United Nations supervision mission in the Syrian Arab Republic
(UNSMIS) for an initial period of three months. I recommend that the Council
authorize such a mission, with the understanding that I will consider relevant
developments on the ground, including the consolidation of the cessation of the
violence, in deciding on deployments.
Background
The protracted crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic over the past 13 months has
seen many thousands killed, injured, detained or displaced. The violence has been
characterized by the use of heavy weapons in civilian areas and widespread
violations of human rights, while aspirations for political change in the country have
not been met. I remain deeply concerned about the gravity of the situation in the
country. However, while the serious challenges ahead cannot be underestimated, an
opportunity for progress may now exist, on which we need to build.
On 25 March 2012, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic committed
itself to an initial six-point plan proposed by the Joint Special Envoy, which has the
full support of the Security Council. This plan includes provisions for immediate
steps by the Syrian Government, and a cessation of armed violence in all its forms
by all parties to protect civilians and stabilize the country. To this end, it requires the
Syrian Government immediately to cease troop movements towards, and end the use
of heavy weapons in, population centres and to begin the pull-back of military
concentrations in and around population centres.
It also requires a range of other steps by the Syrian Government to alleviate
the crisis, including humanitarian access, access to and release of detainees, access
and freedom of movement for journalists, and freedom of association and the right
to demonstrate peacefully.
The plan embodies the need for an inclusive Syrian-led political process to
address the legitimate aspirations and concerns of the Syrian people.
On 11 April 2012, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic stated that it
would cease all military operations throughout the entire country, and similar
commitments were obtained from the armed opposition. Accordingly, for the first
12-30022 (E) 190412

*1230022*

S/2012/238

time in more than one year, a cessation of violence was declared and went into
effect across the Syrian Arab Republic at 6 a.m. on 12 April 2012. This was an
important step by all parties in de-escalating the situation. It now must be
effectively sustained.
The engagement of many States with influence on the parties was and remains
critical to furthering this process. The Security Council has spoken with one voice
through its presidential statements of 3 August 2011, 21 March and 5 April 2012 and
resolution 2042 (2012) of 14 April 2012. The continued unity of the Council is also
of critical importance in seeking a pacific settlement of the crisis.
Developments since 12 April 2012
Given the lack of presence on the ground other than the first members of the
advance team who arrived three days ago, it remains a challenge to assess accurately
unconfirmed and conflicting reports of developments in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Nevertheless, it appears that levels of violence dropped markedly on 12 April 2012
and the following days, with a concomitant decrease in reports of casualties.
However, the Syrian Government has yet to fully implement its initial obligations
regarding the actions and deployments of its troops and heavy weapons, or to return
them to barracks. Violent incidents and reports of casualties have escalated again in
recent days, with reports of shelling of civilian areas and abuses by government
forces. The Government reports violent actions by armed groups. The cessation of
armed violence in all its forms is therefore clearly incomplete. At the same time, in
accordance with their acceptance of the six-point plan, the parties have continued to
express their commitment to a cessation of armed violence in all its forms and have
agreed to cooperate with a United Nations supervision mechanism to observe and
strengthen both sides’ commitment to a cessation.
The advance team of up to 30 unarmed military observers authorized by the
Security Council in paragraph 7 of resolution 2042 (2012) began to deploy on
16 April 2012. It has commenced liaison with the parties and is beginning to report
on the cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties. This team is led by
a Colonel and will be swiftly augmented by the necessary mission support
personnel, including ordnance experts and United Nations security officers.
The team visited Deraa on 17 April 2012. During its two- to three-hour
presence in the city, it enjoyed freedom of movement. It observed no armed violence
or heavy weapons in the city. It observed no major military concentrations, but
several points were occupied at section level, and buses and trucks with soldiers
were dispersed throughout the city. The team visited Jobar, Zamalka and Arbeen in
Rif Damascus today. It reported military presence at checkpoints and around some
public squares and buildings in all three locations. In Arbeen, one armoured
personnel carrier was hidden, covered by a plastic sheet. The situation in Arbeen
became tense when a crowd that was part of an opposition demonstration forced
United Nations vehicles to a checkpoint. Subsequently, the crowd was dispersed by
the firing of projectiles. Those responsible for the firing could not be ascertained by
the United Nations military observers. No injuries were observed by the United
Nations advance team. One United Nations vehicle was damaged slightly during the
incident. The team expects to visit Rif Daraa tomorrow. The team’s initial request to
visit Homs was not granted, officials claiming security concerns.

2

12-30022

S/2012/238

Action on other aspects of the six-point plan remains partial and, while
difficult to assess, does not yet amount to the clear signal expected from the Syrian
authorities. Regarding the right to protest peacefully, it is known that numerous
demonstrations were organized on 13 April 2012 after Friday prayers, one day after
the date of the cessation of violence. Reports issued by local opposition groups
suggest that these were met with a more restrained response than in previous
incidents of protest, but there were nevertheless attempts to intimidate protesters,
including reports of incidents of rifle fire by government troops. With regard to
detainees, on 5 April 2012 the International Committee of the Red Cross announced
that it had agreed with the Syrian Government on procedures for visits to places of
detention and that this would be put into practice with a visit to Aleppo prison.
However, the status and circumstances of thousands of detainees across the country
remain unclear and there continue to be troubling reports of significant abuses.
There has been no significant release of detainees. On 12 April 2012 the Syrian
Government said entry visas were granted to “53 Arab and foreign journalists”
between 25 March and 12 April 2012. We have no further information on this. All
journalists must have full freedom of movement throughout the country.
Meanwhile, on the issue of humanitarian access, while the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation needs assessment report identified
1 million people in need of humanitarian assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic, no
substantive progress has been achieved over the past weeks of negotiations on
access to those in need, or in increasing the capacity of organizations on the ground.
Developments since 12 April 2012 underline the importance of sending a clear
message to the authorities that a cessation of armed violence must be respected in
full, and that action is needed on all aspects of the six-point plan. Actions on the
ground must be consistent with stated commitments to carry out the six-point plan.
At the same time, the very fragility of the situation underlines the importance of
putting in place arrangements that can allow impartial supervision and monitoring.
A United Nations monitoring mission deployed quickly when the conditions are
conducive with a clear mandate, the requisite capacities, and the appropriate
conditions of operation would greatly contribute to observing and upholding the
commitment of the parties to a cessation of armed violence in all its forms and to
supporting the implementation of the six-point plan.
Proposed mission
An expanded mission, UNSMIS, would comprise an initial deployment of up
to 300 United Nations military observers. They would be deployed incrementally
over a period of weeks, in approximately 10 locations throughout the Syrian Arab
Republic. It would be a nimble presence that would constantly and rapidly observe,
establish and assess the facts and conditions on the ground in an objective manner,
and engage all relevant parties. It would be headed by a Chief Military Observer at
the rank of Major General. UNSMIS would in addition comprise substantive and
mission support personnel with a range of skills, including advisers with political,
human rights, civil affairs, public information, public security, gender and other
expertise. These elements would be essential to ensure comprehensive monitoring of
and support to the parties for the full implementation of the six-point plan. Given
the size of the country and the challenges on the ground, the mission would need to
maximize the effectiveness of its supervision and observation responsibilities with

12-30022

3

S/2012/238

effective informational awareness and information management so that it uses its
resources effectively. UNSMIS would be funded through the peacekeeping account.
Pursuant to paragraph 5 of resolution 2042 (2012), UNSMIS should monitor a
cessation of armed violence in all its forms by all parties and relevant aspects of the
Joint Special Envoy’s six-point proposal. Regarding a cessation of armed violence,
it should be noted that the Syrian Government’s full implementation of and
adherence to its obligations to cease troop movements towards population centres,
cease all use of heavy weapons in population centres, and begin the pull-back of
military concentrations in and around population centres are critical, and that the
withdrawal of all troops and heavy weapons from population centres to their
barracks is important to facilitate a sustained cessation of violence. Equally, all
parties, including both the Government and the opposition, must sustain a cessation
of armed violence in all its forms. These will be the areas of monitoring by the
military observers, who, in the course of their duties to supervise the cessation of
violence, will pay due regard to other aspects of the six-point plan.
It should also be noted that human rights abuses have characterized much of
the fighting over the past 13 months, and that any cessation of armed violence must
necessarily encompass a cessation of such abuses, including torture, arbitrary
detentions, abductions, sexual violence and other abuses against women, children
and minorities. The free movement of journalists throughout the country and the
respect of freedom of association and the right of Syrians to demonstrate peacefully
as legally guaranteed will also be critical. The release of persons arbitrarily detained
is a key commitment of the Government under the six-point plan that would provide
a significant signal of the serious intent of the Government effectively to implement
the plan in its entirety and create the conditions for a political solution through
peaceful dialogue.
UNSMIS would not be involved in the delivery, coordination and monitoring
of humanitarian assistance. The coordination of humanitarian assistance is the
responsibility of the Emergency Relief Coordinator. It should be noted in this regard
that all parties, particularly the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, must allow
immediate, full and unimpeded access of humanitarian personnel to all people in
need and cooperate fully with the United Nations and relevant humanitarian
organizations to facilitate the swift provision of humanitarian assistance.
A supervision mission that has the capacity, through military observers and
civilian personnel, to monitor and support a cessation of violence in all its forms
and the implementation of the remaining aspects of the six-point plan could help to
create the conditions for a comprehensive political dialogue between the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the whole spectrum of the Syrian
opposition. Such a supervision mission would be important to sustain peace and a
meaningful political process in the country. This would provide important support
for the Joint Special Envoy’s efforts to facilitate a Syrian-led political transition that
meets the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people and brings about a political
solution to the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic.
In committing itself to the six-point plan, the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic has indicated its consent to an effective United Nations supervision
mechanism. As at 18 April 2012, discussions with the Syrian Government on
preliminary understandings to provide the basis for a protocol governing the
deployment of the advance team and of a United Nations supervision mission have

4

12-30022

S/2012/238

made progress and are continuing. Other parties to the conflict have indicated their
readiness to work with a mission. It is essential in this regard that the actions of the
Government in particular are in full conformity with its commitment and with the
fundamental principles necessary to enable an effective mission as embodied in
resolution 2042 (2012). As called for by resolution 2042 (2012), it is incumbent
upon the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to facilitate the expeditious and
unhindered deployment of the personnel and capabilities of the mission as required
to fulfil its mandate; to ensure its full, unimpeded, and immediate freedom of
movement and access as necessary to fulfil its mandate; allow it unobstructed
communications; and allow it to freely and privately communicate with individuals
throughout the country without retaliation against any person as a result of
interaction with the mission. The Syrian authorities have the primary responsibility
for the safety of the mission, which should be guaranteed by all parties without
prejudice to its freedom of movement and access. This freedom of movement will
need to be supported by appropriate air transport assets to ensure mobility and
capacity to react quickly to reported incidents. Consultations have taken place to
explain these principles to the Syrian Government, including fundamental principles
of United Nations peacekeeping regarding selection of personnel.
I will seek to conclude with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic an
agreement concerning the status of UNSMIS within 30 days of the adoption of the
resolution establishing UNSMIS, taking into consideration General Assembly
resolution 58/82 on the scope of legal protection under the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel. In accordance with the customary
practice of the United Nations, pending the conclusion of such an agreement, the
model status-of-forces agreement dated 9 October 1990 (A/45/594) shall apply
provisionally.
Member States, in particular the neighbouring States, should assist the advance
team and UNSMIS by ensuring the free, unhindered and expeditious movement to
and from the Syrian Arab Republic of all personnel, as well as equipment,
provisions, supplies and other goods, including vehicles and spare parts.
The mandate and operational posture of the mission proposed herein, including
its deployment and structure, would establish an effective observer mission, with the
configuration and functions described above. I would intend to further develop and
define the mission’s mandate, scope and methods of work based on the initial
deployment, the evolution of conditions on the ground, and engagements with all
relevant parties. Proposals in this regard would be contained in a report to the
Security Council as soon as practicable but not more than 90 days after the
establishment of UNSMIS.
I should be grateful if you could bring this letter urgently to the attention of
the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-30022

5
