asdf

United Nations

S/PV.6859

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6859th meeting
Monday, 12 November 2012, 3.20 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Bertoux
Mr. Eick
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Moraes Cabral
Mr. Ilichev
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Menan
Mr. Parham
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2012/765)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-58507 (E)

*1258507*

S/PV.6859

I would like to begin by saying that it is an honour
for me to be here today to share with the Security
Council the great progress that Timor-Leste has made
since 1999. When I arrived there for the first time in
that year, the country had literally been burned to the
ground. I returned in 2006 and witnessed how the
country’s initial gains had been put to the test. What
I see today is a young country of resilient people, with
great potential, led with dedication and vision.

The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Timor-Leste
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (S/2012/765)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Australia, Brazil, Japan,
Mozambique, New Zealand and Timor-Leste to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. José Luís Guterres, Minister of State and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the Democratic
Republic of Timor-Leste.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Finn
Reske-Nielsen, Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy Head
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/765, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.
I now give the floor to Mr. Reske-Nielsen.
Mr. Reske-Nielsen: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to introduce the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), covering
the period from 7 January to 20 September 2012
(S/2012/765). I would like to acknowledge the presence
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation,
Mr. José Luís Guterres, an old friend with whom I have
worked closely over the years.

2

Let me first thank the members of the Security
Council for the consideration they exhibited for
Timor-Leste through the visit of their mission from
3 to 6 November. That visit, along with the visit of
the Secretary-General from 15 to 16 August, served
as a powerful symbol of international recognition for
the notable progress made by the people of TimorLeste since UNMIT was established, in 2006. It also
served as a reminder of the importance of ensuring
the international community’s commitment to
support Timor-Leste beyond 31 December, when,
with the Council’s concurrence, the United Nations
peacekeeping presence in Timor-Leste will end.
The end of peacekeeping operations in TimorLeste is justified by the successful completion of
critical benchmarks and the generally positive security
situation we have seen this year. The assumptions laid
out in the Joint Transition Plan signed by UNMIT
and the Government in September 2011 have been
met — stability prevails; the 2012 national elections
took place in accordance with international standards;
a Government was formed based on the outcome of
the elections; and the political opposition has space to
operate in line with democratic principles.
As detailed in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, there has also been substantial progress in
achieving the benchmarks set forth in the mediumterm strategy, as requested by the Security Council in
resolution 1802 (2008). If I may remind the Council,
those benchmarks were designed to help measure
progress in addressing the underlying challenges that
gave rise to the UNMIT mandate. They are divided
into four areas, ensuring, first, security and stability;
secondly, justice, the rule of law and human rights;
thirdly, a culture of democratic governance and
dialogue; and, fourthly, socioeconomic development.
Several events this year exemplify Timor-Leste’s
continued progress. Perhaps most notable, from the
perspective of UNMIT’s mandate, was the ceremony

12-58507

S/PV.6859

on 31 October during which Prime Minister Kay Rala
Xanana Gusmão and I signed an exchange of letters
marking the certification of the full reconstitution
of the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL). That
was an acknowledgement that the PNTL was fully
capable of conducting all police functions throughout
the country. As the Council may remember, the PNTL
took on responsibility for policing in March of last
year, with UNMIT police subsequently providing
operational support, as required and requested, as well
as support for capacity-building and the institutional
strengthening of the PNTL. That ceremony also marked
the end of what was known as the reconstitution phase
of the PNTL. It also marked the end of UNMIT Police
operational support to the PNTL and the beginning of
the drawdown of UNMIT’s police personnel.
The certification was the result of considered
assessment processes described in the report of the
Secretary-General, conducted jointly between the
Government and UNMIT. On 5 October, the joint
working group created to assess PNTL capacity
submitted its report to the PNTL General Commander
and UNMIT’s Police Commissioner. The report was
generally positive about the PNTL’s development, while
candidly pointing out areas where further strengthening
was needed. The General Commander and Police
Commissioner endorsed the working group’s findings
in a joint letter dated 12 October addressed to the Prime
Minister and to me. On that basis, the Prime Minister
and I agreed that the exchange of letters could proceed
on 31 October. At the ceremony, the President and the
Prime Minister spoke graciously about the support
that UNMIT Police had given since the Mission’s
establishment. The Government also expressed its
gratitude for the services of the international security
forces, a sentiment that I would like to second here
today.
Despite the ongoing drawdown of UNMIT
Police, capacity-building activities based on the
Joint Development Plan of PNTL and UNMIT Police
continue. The plan will be 95 per cent implemented by
the end of November. As of today, over 1,100 training
activities have been completed under the Plan.
The reconstitution of the police service of TimorLeste is a milestone that marks the great advances of
the PNTL and civilian oversight authorities since 2006.
That is not to say that the PNTL is a perfect police
service. Significant capacity challenges remain, which
have been identified jointly by the Government and

12-58507

UNMIT. I am sure the members of the Security Council
would agree that building an effective and responsible
police service is an ongoing effort that stretches over
many years. As in other areas, Timor-Leste is now at a
stage where those long-term efforts can be better served
by other forms of international cooperation. United
Nations agencies will continue to provide some support
to the PNTL post-2012. However, I would like to take
this opportunity to urge Member States to continue
their strong engagement with the PNTL, including
through the “Friends of PNTL” initiative, which is an
important venue to mobilize and coordinate external
support. With the planned departure of UNMIT, their
engagement will become even more important.
As the report of the Secretary-General indicates,
the risk of confrontation within or between security
forces has diminished considerably since 2006. The
military and the police coordinated well during the
election period, and there have been no reports of
serious tension between the two for several years. The
relationship between the security forces is a crucial
element for the long-term stability of the country and
will require the continuation of clear policy guidance
and strong leadership. In the meantime, the military
continues its own institutional development initiatives
and, like the PNTL, continues to make contributions
to other peacekeeping missions. It deployed a further
two officers to the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan on 22 October, while 17 PNTL
officers have qualified for peacekeeping deployment,
in addition to two officers currently serving with the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
The other major event this year that highlighted
Timor-Leste’s progress was the conduct of the
presidential and parliamentary elections. The SecretaryGeneral’s report describes in detail the logistical,
security and political arrangements put in place for
the successful elections. I would just like to highlight
that in all of these areas, while the United Nations still
provided important support, it was much less than in
2007. The electoral management bodies demonstrated
their growing capacity, for the first time the PNTL
had policing responsibilities for national elections, and
Timorese institutions led the development of a political
pact signed by almost all of the registered political
parties and presidential candidates. The excellent work
of the electoral management bodies bodes well for
future elections.

3

S/PV.6859

The overall climate surrounding the elections
this year was very different from that of 2007. Five
years ago, Timor-Leste was still wrestling with the
immediate consequences of 2006, and there was still
a feeling of trepidation about security around the
elections. This year, there were no serious incidents
of political violence during the election period, the
few complaints of alleged misconduct were channeled
through the appropriate national mechanisms, the
results were accepted by the public and all major
political actors, and national and international ob erver
groups made positive assessments of the elections.
The election demonstrated that all communities and
political leaders were united in their desire to take the
necessary measures to promote the future prosperity
and development of the country.
Since the elections, the prevailing political
atmosphere has been calm. Since its formation
on 8 August, the governing coalition has already
demonstrated its stability. In addition to Parliament’s
consideration of the Government programme
mentioned in the report, on 17 October Parliament
approved a rectification to the 2012 State budget,
with all 40 of the coalition’s Members of Parliament
voting in favour. The next major Government initiative
will be the presentation of the 2013 State budget to
Parliament. Meanwhile, the opposition is playing an
active and responsible part in parliamentary debates
and proceedings. In a positive sign of the focus on the
areas outside of the capital, Dili, President Taur Matan
Ruak began a series of district visits, meeting with rural
communities to discuss their concerns and aspirations.
As part of the efforts to enhance a culture of
democratic governance, UNMIT has supported national
and local leaders throughout the country in organizing
events called democratic governance forums, where
national and local leaders meet with communities to
discuss relevant themes, such as accountability and
leadership. The last forum featured President Taur
Matan Ruak on 25 October. Over the past four years,
175 forums have been held throughout the country, with
almost 12,000 participants. I sincerely hope that this
dialogue between State institutions and citizens will
continue after UNMIT departs.
Since the report of the Secretary-General was
issued, there has been one important development
related to accountability for crimes committed in 2006
and mentioned in the report of the Independent Special
Commission of Inquiry (S/2006/822). On 19 October,

4

a court rendered a decision in the case of an arson
attack that resulted in the death of six people, including
four children under the age of 18. Twelve defendants
were acquitted, while two were sentenced to 24 years’
imprisonment for crimes, including murder. The two
sentenced individuals have appealed the decision.
The Mission is on track to withdraw by 31 December.
The phased drawdown of UNMIT has been moving
apace. One of the Mission’s regional offices has already
closed, with two to close later this month and the last
one in early December. The repatriation of UNMIT
police accelerated after the certification ceremony on
31 October, with only a residual presence to remain by
the end of November. The High-Level Committee on
Transition continues to oversee UNMIT’s drawdown,
having met twice since the closing date of the SecretaryGeneral’s report, with the participation of all the key
ministers and under the chairmanship of the President.
The implementation of the Joint Transition Plan is
proceeding well, and UNMIT is on track to complete
our activities and hand over priority activities and key
facilities in an orderly manner.
The only notable area where our work will not
be completed by the end of the mandate concerns the
investigations into cases relating to crimes against
humanity and other serious crimes committed between
1 January and 25 October 1999. Under the supervision
of the Office of the Prosecutor-General, the UNMIT
Serious Crimes Investigation Team has completed 319
of 396 investigations. It is projected that an additional
16 investigations will be concluded by 31 December,
leaving 61 investigations outstanding.
The United Nations and the broader international
community should and will, I am sure, remain engaged
in Timor-Leste beyond December 2012. Timor-Leste
still faces many challenges. However, in my opinion
a peacekeeping mission is no longer best placed to
support efforts to meet those challenges. Prime Minister
Gusmão himself noted in his letter to the SecretaryGeneral on 20 September (S/2012/736, annex) that
the country no longer requires a peacekeeping or
political mission. The time has come for Timor-Leste’s
interaction with the international community to be
guided through different structures and modalities. The
Government has expressed its wish for an innovative
working relationship with the United Nations after
UNMIT’s closure, and we are working closely with
the Government to shape that future partnership,
first and foremost through the work of the United

12-58507

S/PV.6859

Nations agencies, funds and programmes. Delivering
effective support to Timor-Leste’s development
and institution-building priorities will require the
continued commitment and financial contributions of
the international community.
In conclusion, I would like to say that it has been a
privilege for me to accompany the people of Timor-Leste
on their exceptional journey to peace and development,
and I wish them the best of luck as they continue to
move forward. I also wish to take the opportunity
to thank the Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Shigeru Mochida, and all the
dedicated staff of the United Nations who have served
and continue to serve in Timor-Leste.
The President: I thank Mr. Reske-Nielsen for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Guterres.
Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): We thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting on Timor-Leste during India’s
presidency of the Security Council.
Since December 1975, the issue of Timor-Leste
has been on the agenda of the Security Council.
Many Security Council resolutions have been adopted
on Timor-Leste and many United Nations missions
established by the Council. Looking back, we can say
that this United Nations organ has successfully fulfilled
its obligations and mandate under the United Nations
Charter.
The report of the Secretary-General before us
(S/2012/765) highlights developments in Timor-Leste,
and I am confident that the statement of the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
my dear friend Finn Reske-Nielsen, will enrich our
discussions today.
Just few days ago, a delegation from the Security
Council honoured our country and our people with an
historic visit. We deeply appreciate that visit and the
briefing that was just given.
Today, 12 November, we celebrate Timor-Leste’s
National Youth Day. It was established to honour
the courage and the dedication to freedom and the
independence of Timor-Leste shown by the students
and young people who marched in 1991 in Dili from
Motael Church to the cemetery of Santa Cruz to protest
the assassination of one of their comrades, Sebastião

12-58507

Gomes. Many were killed that day by the security
forces.
In May, we celebrated in Timor-Leste the tenth
anniversary of the restoration of our independence,
which followed the popular consultation of August 1999.
Ten years ago, the world witnessed the birth of a
new country. With hope, courage and a good dose of
optimism, we, together with the United Nations, started
the extraordinary work of building a new country.
We have learned from our problems. During the
2006 crisis, about 150,000 people were internally
displaced. We started a genuinely inclusive dialogue
among State institutions as well as with civil society. It
was important for us that our fragility be recognized,
a fragility due mainly to our inability to leave behind
our traumatized conflict-ridden past and to the fact
that our institutions were still being developed, as
peacebuilding and State-building had to go hand in
hand. In 2009, Timor-Leste’s Government proclaimed
a national motto — “Goodbye conflict, welcome
development” — enshrining the national spirit that
sought to end the cyclical problems that had plagued
the country in the past. For that policy to be effective,
we had to have local ownership and leadership, so as
to ensure that everyone would be an agent of our peace
and development.
We instituted critical reforms in the security
and defence sectors and established new institutions,
including an independent civil service commission
and an anti-corruption commission, and strengthened
the justice sector with the aim of promoting good
governance and the rule of law. In 2011, the Prime
Minister of the Fourth Constitutional Government,
Xanana Gusmão, launched a strategic development
plan, aimed at turning a low-income country into a
medium-high-income country by 2030.
Today, life expectancy at birth in Timor-Leste has
increased by more than two years and now averages
62.1 years. The gross national product per capita
increased 228 per cent during the same period to
more than $5,000. Average annual growth has been
double-digit for the last four years, and real non-oil
gross domestic product growth remains strong.
According to the 2010 national census, primary school
enrolment in Timor-Leste jumped from a modest 63 per
cent in 2006 to 90 per cent today. In the past three years
close to 200,000 adults have graduated from illiteracy

5

S/PV.6859

to functional literacy, and Timor-Leste will be able to
proclaim full adult literacy by 2015.
The visit in August of Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon, with Mr. Gordon Brown, the United Nations
Special Envoy for Global Education and former Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom, and Ms. Irina Bokova,
the Director-General of UNESCO, to launch the new
United Nations education initiative was a historic
moment for education in our country and around the
world. In that context, we would like to pay tribute today
to the courage and intelligence of Malala Yousafzai,
the brave young schoolgirl from Pakistan; she is an
inspiration to us and to the world, and may God help
her recover fully.
In the health sector, significant progress has also
been made. Mortality in infants and children under five
years old has been halved. The incidence of malaria
and dengue fever and the prevalence of poverty have
decreased significantly. The incidence of leprosy is now
lower than one case per 10,000 people, and the World
Health Organization considers it to have been medically
eliminated in Timor-Leste. The poverty rate has
declined, from 49 per cent in 2007 to 41 per cent today,
but it is still high and remains a major challenge for our
country. Access to clean water, sanitation, public health
and education, and investment in infrastructure are key
priorities that the Fifth Constitutional Government will
work towards in the next five years.
The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative
rates Timor-Leste one of the best performers in Asia,
and third in the world, in terms of accountability and
transparency in the management of our petroleum
resources. We have a dynamic multi-party democracy,
with four parties represented in the national Parliament.
Thirty-three per cent of the elected members of
Parliament are women, and several women hold key
ministerial portfolios. We have ratified all major
international human rights treaties and complied with
our reporting obligations. In Timor-Leste we have one
of the freest media in our region.
We understand, of course, that that success is
not only ours; it is also a United Nations success and
a success for the international community. From the
beginning, the United Nations, through its various
missions and agencies, has provided important
assistance in the areas of the rule of law, governance,
justice and human rights.

6

We remain strongly committed to fighting
corruption. Education and prevention are on the agenda
of the Anti-Corruption Commission. Mr. Aderito de
Jesus, the Anti-Corruption Commissioner, announced
recently that next July Timor-Leste will host the
Asia-Pacific Anti-Corruption Initiative of the Asia
Development Bank and the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development.
In March 2011 the Government of Timor-Leste
applied formally to the Chair of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) for membership
in ASEAN. In consideration of the importance of
becoming part of ASEAN, the Fifth Constitutional
Government has appointed a Secretary of State for
ASEAN Affairs responsible for the preparations for
joining ASEAN.
This year we held peaceful and credible presidential
and parliamentary elections. A new President was
elected, and we witnessed a peaceful transfer of
power from Nobel laureate Mr. José Ramos-Horta to
the former Commander of the armed forces, Mr. Taur
Matan Ruak. The new Parliament was inaugurated and
the new Government appointed, with Xanana Gusmão
as Prime Minister.
On behalf of the President of the Republic, Mr. Taur
Matan Ruak, the President of our National Parliament,
Vicente Guterres, Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão, and
of our people, we would like to express our profound
gratitude to the Security Council and all its members,
the General Assembly, the Secretary-General and the
Secretariat, the Special Representatives and Deputy
Special Representatives, the commanders of the United
Nations military and police forces and all the members
of the United Nations missions and the countries that
have contributed to peace and stability in Timor-Leste.
We thank our neighbouring countries of Indonesia,
Australia and New Zealand, the countries of ASEAN,
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries and
the core group for their continuing support to TimorLeste.
As a token of our profound appreciation, in May
next year the State and the people of Timor-Leste will
decorate every country that has sent citizens to TimorLeste, as a way of honouring their contributions and as
a sign of our deep gratitude to the United Nations.
As a Member of the United Nations, we will
continue to do our best to guarantee peace and stability
in Timor-Leste, to share our experiences and lessons

12-58507

S/PV.6859

learned, as we are doing now through the Group of
Seven Plus, and to continue to contribute in a modest
way to United Nations missions and the work of United
Nations agencies.
As an expression of our solidarity today, Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmão announced in Haiti that
Timor-Leste will contribute $1 million to peacebuilding
and development initiatives in Haiti.
The Fifth Constitutional Government will
continue to count on the invaluable contribution of
political parties, religious communities, the media,
non-governmental organizations and traditional leaders
in order to develop the country for the benefit of all of
its citizens, based on the rule of law, social justice and
inclusion, gender equality, peace and harmony.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
members of the Security Council who wish to make
statements.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): My delegation wishes
to welcome to the Security Council once again His
Excellency Mr. José Luís Guterres, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste,. We welcome his insightful
views on the progress attained by his country. We also
wish to thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, for his
comprehensive briefing on the latest developments in
Timor-Leste.
South Africa is pleased to extend its congratulations
to Timor-Leste on the 10-year anniversary of the
restoration of its independence and the thirteenth
anniversary of the popular consultation. It is not only
a milestone for the Government and people of TimorLeste, but also a victory for all the peace-loving people
of the world, who continue to champion the right to
self-determination. Today, 12 November, is especially
significant, as it is a day on which the people of TimorLeste commemorate the Santa Cruz massacre, one of
the bloodiest days in the history of that nation. Over the
past 21 years since that tragic day in 1991, the country
has undergone a dramatic shift from the struggle for
independence through the teething challenges of a newly
independent nation to what we find today, namely, a
vibrant nation that has made significant strides towards
peace and development. Throughout that period,
the United Nations — through its various missions,
including the current United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) — has closely partnered with
the people of Timor-Leste on their journey.

12-58507

As we meet to consider the situation in the country
and to dwell on the future United Nations role as
peacekeepers prepare to depart, we must consider the
significant progress made over recent years. Particularly
notable is the successful holding of presidential
and parliamentary elections earlier this year, the
confirmation of a new Government, a stable security
situation and the resumption of all policing responsibility
by the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL). The
final certification of the full reconstitution of the PNTL,
which marked the end of operational support by United
Nations police (UNPOL) to the PNTL, is particularly
significant. It is an indication that the PNTL has the
capacity to fulfil its responsibilities. Gaps remain,
as noted in the PNTL-UNPOL joint working group
report. However, the senior leadership of the PNTL and
the political will of the Timorese authorities give us
confidence that those gaps will be overcome. As Prime
Minister Gusmão stated at the certification ceremony,
“the resolve and wisdom of our people manage to draw
strength from weaknesses”.
As an indication of Timor-Leste’s remarkable
transition, it has gone from a country hosting a
United Nations peacekeeping mission to one that
has deployed personnel to such missions in other
countries, such as the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon and the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan. That is a testament to the
strengthened capacity of the Falintil-Forças Armadas
de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL) and the will of the
Timorese authorities to make a positive contribution to
international peace and security. During the Security
Council’s visit there was an opportunity to witness the
tremendous progress made by the F-FDTL and PNTL.
Those institutions are well equipped to address the
security needs of the country.
The adoption by the Government of its five-year
programme and the Timor-Leste Strategic Development
Plan for the period 2011 to 2030 highlights the emphasis
on efforts to address socioeconomic challenges and
to promote equitable and inclusive development
throughout the country, especially for peasants in
rural areas, women and young people. The leadership
role of the Government of Timor-Leste in the Group
of Seven Plus fragile States and its active leadership
in promoting the implementation of the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States are commendable.
In resolution 2037 (2012), the Council made it
clear that it is for the Timorese authorities to decide

7

S/PV.6859

on the future role of the United Nations in the country.
The Government of Timor-Leste has made its views
very clear. It does not seek to remain on the agenda
of the Security Council. Instead, it seeks an innovative
relationship with the United Nations, focused on
development and institutional strengthening.
It is the view of South Africa that Timor-Leste has
made significant strides towards peace and stability
and that the situation there does not pose a threat to
international peace and security. It is therefore time
for the matter of Timor-Leste to be removed from the
agenda of the Security Council.
We recognize the challenges faced by the Timorese.
They include human resource capacity constraints,
the need to strengthen State institutions and national
judicial capacities, reparations for crimes of the past,
security sector strengthening and socioeconomic
development. Those are challenges that many of
our countries face. They are not challenges that can
be addressed overnight. We are confident that the
institutional arrangements in place in Timor-Leste are
adequate to address those challenges.
The international community should remain a
partner to the Timorese people. Bilateral and multilateral
partnerships with the country are essential to address
institutional capacity-building and development. The
United Nations country team should continue with
its sterling efforts to assist in the development of the
country.
We take note of the Government request for an
innovative partnership with the United Nations, while
we remain cognizant that such a relationship falls
outside of the mandate of the Security Council. We urge
the Timorese authorities and the Secretariat to consult
on the modalities for such a relationship.
Addressing the crimes of the past remains a challenge
for Timor-Leste. We recognize the willingness of the
Government to forge ahead in a spirit of reconciliation
and to move forward in a positive relationship with its
people and neighbours. During the Security Council
visit, the Government and the Prosecutor-General were
aware of that issue, which the country is addressing
through its own processes.
Developments in the recent past have shown — as
confi rmed during the Security Council mission to TimorLeste — the desire of the Timorese people to own
their future focused on development. That focus on

8

national ownership can been seen in the manner in
which the Timorese people have begun to assert control
over their destiny and in their willingness to address
shortcomings. We in the international community
should support that noble endeavour.
Timor-Leste is a success story for the United
Nations. For its part, South Africa will continue to
support the people of Timor-Leste in their quest for
sustainable peace and development.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to welcome the presence and
participation of His Excellency Mr. José Luís Guterres,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste, and to
congratulate him on the significant progress made in
his country with the assistance of the United Nations
and the international community. I would also like
to welcome Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in Timor-Leste
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), as well as to congratulate
him and his team on the remarkable work they have
accomplished in support of peace and stability in
Timor-Leste.
The report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(S/2012/765) comes at a moment when the country is at
an important and crucial turning point in its history and
is envisioning the future with confidence and optimism.
During the reporting period, positive developments
took place in Timor-Leste, as evidenced in the
success of the presidential and legislative elections.
Those elections reflected the country’s ability to hold
pluralistic, uncontested elections with a high turnout.
That said much about the population’s commitment to
the democratic process. The recognition of the results
by all parties, in the Government and the opposition
alike, bolstered the vote’s credibility.
The reporting period was also marked by the
Timorese Parliament’s adoption of a five-year
programme primarily directed at women’s active
involvement, fighting corruption, promoting human
rights and integrating moral values into political life.
All that progress, which has greatly benefitted the
people of Timor-Leste, would not have been at all
possible without the positive and active commitment of
neighbouring countries to support peace and stability
in the entire region.

12-58507

S/PV.6859

The Council’s adoption of resolution 2037 (2012), in
February, which endorsed the definitive withdrawal of
UNMIT, and the adoption by the High-level Committee
on Transition, which includes the members of UNMIT
and the Timor-Leste authorities, of a Joint Transition
Plan, prepared the ground for a transformation of the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste. The recent
visit by the Security Council delegation to TimorLeste — in which I, unfortunately, could not participate
due to the impact of Hurricane Sandy — confirmed the
meritorious efforts of the Timorese people and their
leaders’ desire to turn the page of the United Nations
presence in the country.
However, despite the progress achieved, TimorLeste still requires the assistance of the international
community in a number of areas, such as in rebuilding
State institutions, strengthening the security
sector, especially the Timor-Leste national police,
strengthening rule of law, and access to justice. That
assistance must take into account the desires of the
country’s authorities and the need to build on the
achievements of recent years. We believe that from now
on it is essential to respect the wish expressed by the
Timor-Leste Government regarding the status, scale
and nature of the United Nations presence in TimorLeste.
The assumption by the Timorese authorities of
essential State functions and their determination and
commitment to ensure those functions and take them
on with the assistance of their regional partners and the
United Nations should encourage the Security Council
to terminate, as stipulated in resolution 2037 (2012),
UNMIT’s mandate and to assess, together with the
Government, the best formula for reaching a mutual
agreement to strengthen capacities and support the
country’s efforts.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen
for introducing the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) (S/2012/765), and to
congratulate him for the work he has done in taking
over the responsibilities of Ms. Ameerah Haq. I also
wish to welcome to New York His Excellency Mr. José
Luís Guterres, Minister of State and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Timor-Leste. His presence among us
testifies to the importance that his Government attaches
to today’s debate, which enables him to exchange his
views with the Council on the future of Timor-Leste.

12-58507

Six years after the establishment of UNMIT,
by resolution 1704 (2006), significant progress has
been achieved. The results obtained in strengthening
democracy and the rule of law are extremely
encouraging, particularly since the adoption of
resolution 2037 (2012), which extended UNMIT’s
mandate to 31 December 2012. We were able to assess
for ourselves the reality on the ground during the
Council’s mission to Timor-Leste from 3 to 6 November,
in which I was privileged to participate and which has
just been exhaustively described by the representative
of South Africa (see S/PV.6858). On that occasion, we
were able to observe the high degree of partnership
and trust between the United Nations, in particular
UNMIT, and the Government, on the one hand, and
the entire Timorese political class, on the other. My
country especially welcomes that.
With respect to political progress, the Timorese
Government has successfully met the challenge of
organizing, in accordance with the requisite standards
and with the participation of all, the presidential
election won by Mr. Taur Matan Ruak, and transparent
parliamentary elections whose results were accepted
by all parties. Consequently, the legitimacy of the new
Government, led by Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão,
has been endorsed by the people, while the opposition
continues to actively participate in parliamentary
debates.
The Government’s regular consultations with
political parties not represented in Parliament is another
initiative that should be encouraged. Togo particularly
welcomes the strengthened climate of trust, cooperation,
dialogue and reconciliation among Timorese political
stakeholders who presided over the organization this
year of commemorative demonstrations, such as those
marking the tenth anniversary of the country’s return
to independence and the thirteenth anniversary of the
popular referendum.
Similarly, we note that democratic governance has
been strengthened, in particular through the adoption
of the Decree Law setting out the rules concerning
the planning, implementing and funding of public
projects in all districts of the country. In parallel,
the Timorese authorities have pursued their efforts
to strengthen the mechanisms of the fight against
corruption. The Anti-Corruption Commission in the
country plays a remarkable and vital role in that area.
However, as indicated by the Secretary-General in
his report, it is appropriate to urge the Government to

9

S/PV.6859

make further progress in adopting precise rules and
making operational the Audit Chamber of the High
Administrative Tax and Audit Court.
Togo has many reasons to welcome the situation in
Timor-Leste, all the more so since the security issue is
no longer a cause of grave concern. In that regard, the
report under consideration shows that UNMIT police
spared no effort to provide support for institutional
development and for strengthening the capacity of the
Timor-Leste national police. However, every effort must
be made to halt not only domestic and gender-based
violence, but also incidents linked to the illegitimate
use of firearms. That is why my country keenly hopes
that the national police, already fully operational, will
steadily be provided with competent human resources
and appropriate logistical resources so as to strengthen
its capacities in all areas, particularly in disciplinary
investigations.
Moreover, we call for open cooperation between
the armed forces and the national police, with
responsibilities clearly allocated between them in order
to avoid possible future conflicts.
In the area of human rights and national
reconciliation, despite important progress, the
Government must strengthen its effort to protect the
rights of its citizens and guarantee access to justice for
all, with particular attention to the cases of those who
have disappeared and their families. It is also necessary
to resume the development of ethics courses for judges,
prosecutors and lawyers.
The tasks entrusted to UNMIT, pursuant to
resolution 2037 (2012), will soon come to an end. As a
prelude to that, we gladly note that the Joint Transition
Plan will be duly carried out until the drawdown of
UNMIT on 31 December, as attested by the fact that
several projects are being carried out jointly by the
Government and the United Nations system.
With regard to the statement of the Timorese
authorities that United Nations support through a
political or peacekeeping mission would no longer be
necessary after 2012, my country hopes that the new
cooperation in the strengthening and developing of
institutions will not skirt such essential matters as the
resolution of socioeconomic problems to achieve the
equitable and sustainable development of Timor-Leste.
It is appropriate to protect gains achieved at such a cost.

10

In conclusion, I reiterate the gratitude of my
country to UNMIT, the United Nations and its
specialized programmes and funds for their importanty
work, which has made the renaissance of Timor-Leste
possible. I am also grateful to South Africa for the
important role it has played as the leading country in
managing the Timorese situation. Finally, I thank the
troop — and police-contributing countries to UNMIT
and the International Stabilisation Force for the great
sacrifices they have made to bring stability to the
people and Government of Timor-Leste, the true worth
of which we can appreciate today.
The new Timor-Leste still needs the United Nations,
as the Head of the Government stated in his letter of
20 September 2012 (S/2012/736, annex). That is to be
expected from a country emerging from so many years
of sociopolitical conflict and which remains fragile.
Mr. Ilichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We thank the Acting Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, for his
briefing on the final stage of the work of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT)
and the situation in the country. We welcome the
successful conclusion of the Mission’s work, which
was made possible by the sustained stabilization of the
situation in Timor-Leste in almost all of its parameters.
Moreover, we underscore that it would not have been
possible if the Timorese people themselves had not
sought to overcome conflicts with their neighbours
and within their own society and to build their own
State, capable of solving its problems independently.
The political maturity of Timor-Leste was confirmed
by this year’s parliamentary and presidential elections,
which were conducted without hindrance.
The security situation is also stable. The transfer of
the Mission’s law enforcement mandate to the Polícia
Nacional de Timor-Leste in March was justified.
During the electoral period, local security services duly
fulfilled their tasks. The overall situation in TimorLeste, the strengthening of peace in the country and the
successful establishment of State authorities, including
the national police, are good examples of effective
United Nations peacekeeping and peacebuilding as a
whole.
We welcome the decision of the Timorese to
share their own experiences and to make a significant
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping by
providing military and police officers. We believe that

12-58507

S/PV.6859

the political and security situation in the country will
enable us to draw down the Mission by the end of this
year and to remove Timor-Leste from the Security
Council’s agenda.
Timor-Leste is prepared to shoulder its full
responsibilty for the processes in the country. That was
confirmed in a letter to the Secretary-General from the
Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Xanana Gusmão
(S/2012/736, annex). The Security Council’s recent
mission to the country came to the same conclusion.
With regard to the modalities of a future United
Nations presence in Timor-Leste, the final decision
must be taken by the country’s leadership.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to welcome the presence at this meeting
of the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. José Luís
Guterres, and to thank him for his statement. We are
also grateful to the Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, for
his briefing and for presenting the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2012/765) on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
Azerbaijan welcomes the continued progress
and impressive advances in achieving a secure and
stable political situation in the country. During our
recent visit to Timor-Leste, we had an opportunity to
witness those encouraging developments. Along with
maintaining a stable security situation and low crime
rate, Timor-Leste has managed to advance the country’s
democratic agenda. The presidential and parliamentary
elections held earlier this year were major milestones
in the country’s political life in 2012. We commend
the Timorese authorities for successfully carrying out
the three rounds of elections in a peaceful and credible
manner, and convey our congratulations to the newly
elected Government and President of the country.
The Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), with
the support of UNMIT, played a major role in providing
security throughout the electoral process, and thereby
proved to be capable of ensuring stability and security
in the country. It is encouraging to note that public
confidence in the PNTL has significantly increased.
We note that UNMIT has continued to support the
institutional strengthening and capacity-building of
PNTL, focusing on five priority areas, as outlined in the
PNTL-UNMIT Police Joint Development Plan. UNMIT
has also continued to provide operational support to the
PNTL, including by conducting joint patrols.

12-58507

Azerbaijan welcomes the progress made in
strengthening the country’s institutional and human
resources capacities and the role of State institutions
in safeguarding stability and democracy. There is
nevertheless a need for further support from the
international community in that regard. Although
relatively high economic growth has been observed
in Timor-Leste this year, the country is still facing
substantial challenges in tackling poverty, malnutrition
and unemployment. We support the Government’s
efforts to address those challenges and to ensure
economic sustainability.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
the Government and UNMIT, together with other
stakeholders, has continued to collaborate and advance
further in the transition process, as well as to facilitate
the completion of UNMIT’s mandate. We take note of
the view of the Government on the post-2012 presence
of the United Nations in Timor-Leste, which was
expressed in the letter dated 20 September, 2012, from
the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/736, annex). We support
the desire of the Government of Timor-Leste to turn
a new page in its relations and cooperation with the
United Nations by switching from the presence of the
United Nations peacekeeping or political mission to
enhancing the relationship with a focus on institutional
strengthening and development.
Despite remarkable achievements, Timor-Leste
continues to face a number of challenges, with remaining
weaknesses and gaps. Further efforts are required to
develop sustainable national capacities, strengthen
State institutions and tackle socioeconomic challenges.
We agree with the Secretary-General that it is critical to
continue to support national efforts so as to preserve the
gains made today. The commitment of the Government
and the people demonstrated so far convince us of their
firm determination to resolve the remaining issues and
to move forward in building a prosperous future based
on sustainable peace, development and the rule of law.
Mr. Briz Gutiérrez (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, allow me to welcome to the
Council the Minister of State and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, Mr. José Luís
Guterres. His statement today was very encouraging.
We also thank Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),

11

S/PV.6859

for presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/765) and his up-to-date information.

after UNMIT’s drawdown — for example, investigating
crimes against humanity and other serious crimes.

The progress achieved by Timor-Leste over the past
13 years deserves our admiration. We are honoured to
share this historic moment with that friendly country.
We congratulate the people and the Government
of Timor-Leste and we thank bilateral donors and
the international security forces for their ongoing
commitment to peace and stability in that country.

Like many developing countries, Timor-Leste
confronts socioeconomic challenges, but it has
significant natural resources. Continued and proper
management of those resources will be vital for
the sustainable development of the country. More
investment in areas such as education and youth
employment is, in our view, necessary.

We welcome the fact that this year, which marks
the tenth anniversary of the independence of TimorLeste, the Secretary-General visited the country, as
did a Security Council delegation as recently as last
week. In that connection, we would like to thank the
representative of South Africa for his report on that
subject (see S/PV.6858).

The leadership of Timor-Leste as Co-Chair of the
Group of Seven Plus fragile States and its status as a
troop-contributing country reflect the hope that this
young nation offers to the international community. We
are pleased to see that the endeavours of the international
community to bring about conflict resolution and postconflict peacebuilding are achieving positive results.
The situation in Timor-Leste is a very good example
of that.

We are aware that consolidating democracy and
building a system of governance is a long-term process.
Although many challenges remain, the successes in
the political, economic and security situations and
in connection with the rule of law reflect the firm
commitment and goodwill of the leaders and people of
Timor-Leste.
This year, Timor-Leste succeeded in organizing
presidential and parliamentary elections in a peaceful
and orderly fashion. We welcome the fact that the
Parliament has become an important and inclusive
political forum. We also welcome the comprehensive
rebuilding of the Timorese national police and
acknowledge the progress made in allocating tasks
between the police and the army.
We would like to acknowledge the important role
played by the United Nations in Timor-Leste since
1999. Guatemala, as a country that has also benefited
from United Nations peacekeeping, emphasizes how
important it is for the new Government of Timor-Leste
to adopt a timely decision on the future presence of
the United Nations in Timor-Leste after the drawdown
of UNMIT. We believe that the United Nations will
remain an important partner in the country through the
Resident Coordinator’s team.
We know that the support of the international
community will continue to be necessary after
UNMIT’s drawdown, particularly in consolidating the
young institutions in Timor-Leste, such as those in the
security sector. We believe it is important to continue
and follow up on the outstanding tasks that will remain

12

Guatemala once again would like to commend
UNMIT peacekeeping forces for their work and
their contributions. We also thank the international
community for its multilateral and bilateral support of
Timor-Leste, as well as the Timorese people themselves
for their unwavering devotion to peace and security in
their country.
Mr. Eick (Germany): Let me begin by welcoming
His Excellency Mr. José Luís Guterres to the Council.
I would also like to join colleagues in thanking Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Finn
Reske-Nielsen for his briefing today.
As the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) will come to its conclusion
by the end of the year, Germany expresses its sincere
gratitude for the excellent work of the United Nations,
both in Timor-Leste and in New York, in support of the
Timorese people.
We align ourselves with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union later
in this debate.
Germany continues to be entirely confident that
the people of Timor-Leste, with the support of the
United Nations and its international partners, are on
the right track. We congratulate them on the progress
made since independence a decade ago. Both the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/765) and today’s
briefing underpin our optimism. In its tenth year of
independence, Timor-Leste has successfully conducted

12-58507

S/PV.6859

presidential and parliamentary elections in a peaceful
and calm environment, marking a milestone in the
transition of the country, and formed a new Government
based on the outcome of those elections.
As we have stated in the Council before, the
successful completion of the three rounds of elections
marks the right moment to end UNMIT’s presence in
Timor-Leste. We therefore entirely concur with the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that UNMIT
continue to proceed with its drawdown until its
completion at the end of the year. Timor-Leste has
made impressive progress in many fields, in particular
with regard to the continuously calm and stable
security situation, which leads us to believe that
UNMIT’s presence has served its purpose and is no
longer required. Considerable progress has also been
made in strengthening the institutional capacities of
State institutions, including in the security, justice and
governance sectors, providing a sound institutional
framework for a peaceful and prosperous future for
Timor-Leste.
At this stage, it will be key to ensure that the full
transfer of UNMIT’s responsibilities to the Government
of Timor-Leste or its bilateral and multilateral partners
is smooth and that stability prevails. We laud the
respective efforts thus far, including in the framework
of the Joint Transition Plan, and assure the Government
of Timor-Leste of our continued support to that end.
In that regard, we stand ready to support our
Timorese partners, in the expectation of maintaining
a close link to the Council for as long as it is deemed
necessary. We want to see a smooth transition that
secures the important achievements made by UNMIT
in coordination with the Timorese authorities, including
in the security field and the area of the rule of law and
human rights, along with economic progress.
Future cooperation needs to be designed to counter
the remaining challenges described in the SecretaryGeneral’s report and to further advance and consolidate
socioeconomic progress and reconciliation efforts,
while building on those undertaken by the Government
of Timor-Leste thus far.
I would like to express once more the sincere
appreciation of my Government for the efforts and
commitment of UNMIT in supporting Timor-Leste,
and to commend the dedication and service of its staff
on the ground.

12-58507

Let me conclude by wishing Minister Guterres,
the Government under Prime Minister Gusmão and
all Timorese all the best for years to come. Let me
assure them that they will not have to shoulder that
responsibility alone. Germany highly values its close
friendship with Timor-Leste and will continue to stand
by Timor-Leste during the transition and thereafter.
Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me, first, to welcome His Excellency Mr. José
Luís Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, and to thank him
for his statement to the Council. I would also like to
highlight the work carried out by Ms. Ameerah Haq.
As the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) until 9 June 2012, she did her
job with admirable devotion and commitment.
We also welcome Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, the
Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. I commend the work of UNMIT and the United
Nations country team for its support of the efforts of the
people of Timor-Leste to consolidate peace, stability
and development — conditions that are essential to the
strengthening of the State. I also thank our colleague
Ambassador Baso Sangqu of South Africa for his
briefing on the visit of the Security Council to TimorLeste, which he led. We very much regret that we were
not able to participate in that visit.
This has been a particularly important year for
Timor-Leste. The holding of successful presidential
and parliamentary elections led to the formation of a
new Government and the renewal of Parliament. The
country celebrated the tenth anniversary of its restored
independence and the thirteenth anniversary of the
1995 referendum. Timor-Leste has also asssumed a
new regional leadership role, including in co-presided
the International Dialogue on Peacebuilding and
Statebuilding, together with the Group of Seven Plus
fragile States. Those are commendable milestones. As
President Ruak has said, the key to those achievements
lies in the unity and resolve of the people of TimorLeste.
The United Nations, through a series of operations
and missions, has worked for more than 10 years in
close cooperation with the authorities and people
of Timor-Leste, supporting their efforts to emerge
from conflict and to build lasting peace and security,
creating robust democratic institutions, and developing

13

S/PV.6859

an inclusive and equitable socioeconomic system. The
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste will
come to an end on 31 December, but we wish to say that
we will continue to support the Government and people
of Timor-Leste in consolidating the successful process
of institution-building.

socioeconomic development and the creation of a
more inclusive and equitable system. My country
welcomes the establishment of the working group to
start discussions with the United Nations on matters
identified in the Joint Transition Plan for the post-2012
period, and of the National Planning Matrix.

Timor-Leste has made much progress since
regaining independence and particularly since the 2006
crisis, which led to the creation of UNMIT. Tangible
proof of that is the progress made in restoring stability
and security, the return of thousands of internally
displaced persons, and the gradual reintegration into
civil life of the excluded members of the Falintil-Forças
Armadas de Defesa de Timor-Leste (F-FDTL). The
Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) is continuing
to mature and to extend its reach throughout the country,
which has led to a drop in the crime rate. We have also
seen institution-building and human resources grow
in other State sectors, such as the judiciary, security
and governance. We have also seen the Parliament
become a dynamic forum for parliamentary debate,
with the participation of the Government coalition
and the opposition. All those achievements reflect the
unwavering commitment of the leadership and people
of Timor-Leste to democracy, the rule of law and the
creation of a secure and stable State.

The United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste is one of the most successful examples of United
Nations efforts to enhance stability, promote a culture
of democratic governance and facilitate political
dialogue. Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão’s letter to the
Secretary-General on 20 September (S/2012/736, annex)
expressed the sincere gratitude of his Government
for the support it has received and stated that, as
of 31 December, there will no longer be a need for a
United Nations peacebuilding mission in Timor-Leste,
but that his country wants an innovative cooperative
partnership with the United Nations, focusing on
strengthening institutions and development. Successful
and effective collaboration among the people of TimorLeste, UNMIT and the United Nations country team has
made a decisive contribution to the successes obtained.
Now comes the consolidation process. Cooperative
work will have to continue to ensure the full fruition of
a sustainable, lasting peace.

Many challenges remain in Timor-Leste’s path,
particularly in the four priority areas of UNMIT’s
mandate. Certain gaps remain to be filled, due in part
to the ongoing limitations in available capacity and
human resources. We acknowledge that much progress
has been made in the security sector through legislation
defining the respective competencies of the F-FDTL,
the PNTL and other institutions. Sustainable capacitybuilding is required in the justice sector, the economy
and the PNTL through the training of prosecutors,
judges, public defenders and private lawyers and
support for the Legal Training Centre and the Office of
the Provedor for Human Rights and Justice.
It is important to enhance access to justice,
especially for the most vulnerable groups, and to
promote accountability, especially for crimes against
humanity. It is therefore important for Parliament to
promptly resume the pending debates on legislation
on restitutions and to establish the institutions that
are to replace the Commission for Reception, Truth
and Reconciliation and the Commission of Truth and
Friendship. The Timor-Leste Strategic Development
Plan for 2011-2030 is a major step towards full

14

Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
today’s debate. I listened carefully to the briefing of
Ambassador Sangqu of South Africa on the Security
Council’s visit to Timor-Leste. I also wish to thank
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Reske-Nielsen for his briefing. We also welcome
Mr. José Luís-Guterres, Minister of State and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, to
today’s meeting.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of TimorLeste’s restored independence. China is very happy
to see that, through the efforts of the Government
and people of Timor-Leste and with the support
of the international community, Timor-Leste has
made continuous progress. Nation-building efforts
are on track and economic and social development
is proceeding steadily. Successful presidential and
parliamentary elections have been held, establishing
a new parliament and Government and promoting the
maintenance of stability and development. As TimorLeste’s national development enters a new stage, the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste

12-58507

S/PV.6859

(UNMIT) peacekeeping operation is about to close
successfully.
I would like to emphasize three points. First, China
highly appreciates the fact that the Polícia Nacional
de Timor-Leste is now officially and fully responsible
for domestic security. Th efforts of the Government
to build national institutions and improve governance
capacities have made encouraging progress. China
staunchly supports the Government of Timor-Leste
in its efforts to enhance capacity-building in national
institutions and to safeguard national security and
stability.
Secondly, economic development and improved
standards of living are crucial if countries are to achieve
long-term stability and security. The international
community should support Timor-Leste in improving
its capacity for independent development and help
the Government to strengthen development in areas
such as infrastructure, education and health care in
order to encourage inclusive, equitable socioeconomic
development. China hopes and trusts that Timor-Leste
will return to the path of sustainable development as
soon as possible.
Thirdly, since its inception UNMIT has worked
very effectively and contributed enormously to the
maintenance of security, stability and the promotion
of economic and social development. It is a successful
example of United Nations peacekeeping. Following
the withdrawal of UNMIT, we hope that the United
Nations, fully consulting and respecting the opinions
of the Government of Timor-Leste, will jointly discuss
future cooperation between them.
As a friend and cooperation partner of Timor-Leste,
China will continue to provide assistance and support
to Timor-Leste within our capacity.
Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Allow me at the
outset to congratulate the members of the Security
Council that were elected this morning to the Human
Rights Council and to wish them well in that important
endeavour.
I will deliver my statement in Portuguese, which,
as members know, is a very beautiful language.
(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the
delegation)
I welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste and thank him for his important

12-58507

statement. In this historic year, in which Timor-Leste is
seeing a decisive cycle in its history come to a positive
conclusion, the presence of the Minister is particularly
symbolic and auspicious as regards future cooperation
between the United Nations and Timor-Leste.
Portugal naturally subscribes to the views expressed
in the statements to be made by the Ambassador
of Mozambique on behalf of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and by the observer of
the European Union.
I thank in particular the Acting Special
Representative, Mr. Reske-Nielsen, not only for his
assessment of the situation in Timor-Leste, but also for
the important work carried out by the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) during
the past six years to bring about democracy, stability,
security and development in Timor-Leste.
In that regard, our well-deserved appreciation goes
to all those who have worked and continue to work
with such dedication within UNMIT, as well as to
those who have headed the mission in the past, namely,
Special Representatives Atul Khare and Ameerah Haq,
as well as United Nations police commanders, whose
personal commitment, perceptiveness and professional
experience were so often decisive in overcoming
the most complicated challenges. All deserve our
recognition for their achievements.
Timor-Leste is a success story in terms of its
people, its authorities, its democracy and human rights.
It is also a success on the part of the United Nations, as
should be duly noted, as well as the successful outcome
of an international cooperation based on solidarity,
clearly understood and well carried out.
The parliamentary and presidential elections of
2012 marked the end of a decisive cycle in the history of
Timor-Leste. As has typically been the case in TimorLeste, the elections took place in an environment of
democratic normality and transparency, in keeping
with internationally accepted standards. The Timorese
people once again demonstrated their high level of
civic responsibility and their political parties’ maturity.
Together with the process of the formation of the
new Government, the elections clearly showed that
parliamentary democracy has taken root in TimorLeste and that the country’s representative institutions
have been consolidated.

15

S/PV.6859

Timor-Leste has also made significant progress in
capacity-building and State responsibility in the areas
of security, justice, education, health and the protection
and promotion of human rights and a true democratic
culture.
Timor-Leste’s relevance in the international arena
has also increased as a result of its participation in
peacekeeping missions; its preparations for its accession
to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which
we hope will come about very soon; the strengthening
of its actions in several international forums; and the
development of its bilateral relations with a growing
number of States, with a constant reaffirmation of its
commitment to peace, progress and multilateralism.
It is time for the Timorese to dedicate themselves,
with that same strength and capacity, to the challenges
remaining on the country’s path towards social and
economic development. The road map and objectives
set out in the Strategic Development Plan are already
a clear indication of that goal, which Timor-Leste, on
the basis of the political stability that the country has
already shown, will be able to achieve.
Now that the goals mutually agreed between the
United Nations and Timor-Leste for the last year of
UNMIT’s mandate have been achieved, according to the
Joint Transition Plan, it is time to look to the future. In
that context, the mission that the Security Council sent
to Timor-Leste last week was particularly timely and
contributed to the verification of the progress already
made and to the identification of the role that the United
Nations will play in supporting the initiatives of the
Timorese Government.
The transfer of responsibilities and capacities
from UNMIT to the Timorese authorities is taking
place at a steady pace, and as a result UNMIT’s main
tasks may now, to a large extent, be undertaken by the
Timorese authorities or by the latter in coordination
with international partners.
In addition to in-depth strategic planning, the
application of policies and effective coordination with
the United Nations and bilateral partners, the national
ownership and leadership of the transition process
assumed by the Timorese authorities are the elements
underlying the success of this process.
In that regard, Timor-Leste has shown its capacity
to discharge on its own the fundamental mandates
of the State, as well as to cooperate productively in

16

those areas where national capacities are not yet fully
developed.
For all of those reasons, the decision of the Timorese
Government conveyed to the Secretary-General in the
letter dated 20 September 2012 (S/2012/736, annex)
deserves our full support.
Allow me nonetheless to underline the fact that
the reconfiguration of the presence and activity of the
United Nations in Timor-Leste, concentrating efforts
and resources on the United Nations country team and
the United Nations Development Programme, should
not and must not translate into a reduction of the
international community’s involvement with TimorLeste. On the contrary, this will be an opportunity
to intensify the work already carried out in different
formats, to consolidate the progress achieved and to
find new modalities for the international cooperation
that Timor-Leste may still need.
For our part, I wish to reaffirm to the Minister that
Portugal will continue to do everything in its power
to support Timor-Leste on its path towards progress,
stability, peace and democracy. We will do so, as
always, with complete respect for the priorities defined
by the Timorese Government and by remaining true to
the solidarity and fraternity that binds us together.
Timor-Leste and Portugal share centuries of
common history — a history that, as any other, is made
up of darker and brighter moments, of good and bad
times. We share a common language that, for TimorLeste, is also an element of national identity and unity,
as was frequently mentioned by the Timorese authorities
during the recent mission of the Security Council.
The new cycle that is beginning now will not
jeopardize Portugal’s commitment to Timor-Leste,
which has always been characterized by a refusal to
remain silent before, and therefore an accomplice to,
oppression and the violation of human rights.
Today is a time to highlight the brighter moments
in the history of Timor-Leste. In concluding, I would
recall, with deepest respect, the difficult path that has
brought the Timorese people to independence, freedom,
justice and democracy.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I wish at the
outset to thank the Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for his briefing. We very much
appreciate the presence here of the Minister for Foreign

12-58507

S/PV.6859

Affairs of Timor-Leste and his participation in today’s
debate.
This has been a pivotal year for Timor-Leste. It
has marked the tenth anniversary of its independence
and conducted a landmark general election that
resulted in a democratic and peaceful transfer of
power to a new Government. That election was held
against the backdrop of an increasingly stable security
environment. It conformed to international standards,
and its outcome was accepted by all parties. We
commend the Government and the people of TimorLeste on those achievements. They are significant
milestones in Timor-Leste’s continued development
and represent real progress in consolidating their State.
The United Nations has played an essential role in
that progress, helping the people of Timor-Leste get back
on their feet. Because of that progress, it is right that
the international community’s relationship with TimorLeste should continue to evolve. Indeed, this year has
seen a real shift in the United Nations relationship with
Timor-Leste, with the planned departure of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
We welcome UNMIT’s successful drawdown and look
forward to its full withdrawal by the end of this year.
The level of cooperation between UNMIT and
the Timorese Government throughout the Mission’s
mandate has been exemplary. The Joint Transition
Plan has set the benchmark for future transitions, with
the United Nations and the host State working closely
together and producing a comprehensive, detailed plan
for safeguarding the future stability of the country.
The Joint Transition Plan will need to be looked
at again in the light of the proposal that changes the
engagement of the United Nations from a peacekeeping
Mission to a country team. For that change to be smooth,
we must adequately plan to scale up the United Nations
country team and ensure that it has the capabilities that
it needs.
UNMIT’s departure is a key test for Timor-Leste.
To date, we have ensured that the Mission’s drawdown
proceeds effectively and efficiently while safeguarding
stability. That can be a difficult balance to strike.
But the drawdown has been an example of effective
disengagement, establishing sound principles for future
successful transitions elsewhere.
The lessons learned from that process should
be incorporated into the guidance on transition and

12-58507

mission drawdown that the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is now developing. A great deal of thought
has already gone into what shape the United Nations
follow-on role should take. We support the TimorLeste Government’s desire to see the Organization’s
efforts in Timor-Leste led by a United Nations country
team, as set out in Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão’s
September letter to the Secretary-General (S/2012/736,
annex). At the same time, it is right that the Security
Council should remain informed on the situation in
Timor-Leste. We therefore propose that the SecretaryGeneral give due consideration to how best that might
be achieved.
As the United Nations Mission draws down and
transitions into a country team, we also welcome the
willingness demonstrated by the Timorese Government
and people to take responsibility for their development
and for safeguarding their hard-won security. In that
regard, we applaud the Timor-Leste leadership in
promoting the implementation of the New Deal for
Engagement in Fragile States, its role as a co-Chair of
the Group of Seven Plus fragile States, and its decision
to act as a pilot country for the New Deal.
While UNMIT, along with the people and
Government of Timor-Leste, has laid firm foundations
for peace and security, we will need to remain vigilant
to protect that progress. Relapses into conflict can be
all too sudden. The United Nations should keep the
Council informed of any warning signs in that regard,
perhaps through the reports of a special envoy or the
horizon-scanning conducted by the Department of
Political Affairs. Hard-won gains in security and
stability should not be lost for want of keeping alert to
and acting upon signs of renewed fragility.
Almost exactly 10 years ago, Timor-Leste was
the 191st State to join the United Nations family. The
intervening years have been turbulent and tough. It
is a tribute to the people of Timor-Leste and to the
commitment of the international community that a
country, while still fragile, is able to take another step
towards sustained peace and stability.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We welcome the Minister of
State and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Timor-Leste to the Security Council. We thank the
Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT) for his briefing. We are also
grateful to Ambassador Baso Sangqu for his briefing

17

S/PV.6859

and for his able leadership of the Security Council
mission to Timor-Leste. We note the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (S/2012/765).
The successful conclusion of the electoral process
in Timor-Leste is a major accomplishment. It is a
sterling example of the remarkable progress made by
the country in the short period since its independence.
We congratulate the leadership and the people of TimorLeste on that achievement.
In that regard, we particularly acknowledge the role
of former President Mr. José Ramos-Horta, under whose
leadership the elections were held. The turnaround in
Timor-Leste would not have been possible without the
support of UNMIT. We therefore commend the efforts
of the Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and of the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Ameerah Haq. The Security
Council can take due satisfaction from the fruit of its
involvement in Timor-Leste.
Over the past 10 years, Pakistan has contributed to
three peacekeeping missions in Timor-Leste, including
UNMIT. The last Pakistani formed police unit is due
to depart from the country on 14 November. We are
proud of the contribution made by our peacekeepers
towards the peace and stability of Timor-Leste. One
of them, Ms. Shahzadi Gulfam, was awarded the 2011
International Female Police Peacekeeper Award in
recognition of her outstanding performance as the team
leader of the Vulnerable Persons Unit in Dili.
I would like to touch upon five issues. First, the
elected leadership of the country has expressed its
desire for Timor-Leste to be taken off the agenda of the
Security Council. That message was clearly conveyed
to the Security Council mission by different sections
of the Timorese polity and civil society. The recent
developments, as well as the palpable confidence of the
Timorese, demonstrate that the country stands ready to
assume control of its affairs.
Secondly, in his letter addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/736, annex), Prime Minister Gusmão
notes that Timor-Leste would like to establish an
innovative working relationship of cooperation for
the future that focuses on institutional strengthening
and development. The United Nations can continue to
contribute to the future development of the country.
The future shape of the United Nations involvement in

18

the country must be decided in close consultation with
the Timorese authorities.
Thirdly, the implementation of the Joint Transition
Plan is proceeding satisfactorily. It is important to
ensure that the transfer of the functions and assets of
UNMIT to the Timorese Government takes place in a
systematic and coordinated manner.
Fourthly, we are encouraged by the economic
performance of Timor-Leste, as noted in the
Secretary-General’s report. The country has made
continued progress towards meeting the objectives
and benchmarks of its medium-term strategy related
to socio-economic development. However, it faces
challenges in ensuring sustained improvement in
livelihoods, in increasing employment opportunities
in rural areas and for young people, and in eradicating
poverty. The Government must make efforts to use
the natural resources effectively to promote inclusive,
equitable and sustainable growth in the country.
Fifthly, the Secretary-General’s report and the
Security Council mission have highlighted other
challenges, including human resources capacity
constraints, strengthening State institutions and the
national judicial capacity, security sector review and
socio-economic development. The support of the
United Nations and of Timor-Leste’s bilateral partners
would be crucial to addressing those challenges.
In conclusion, we would like to underscore the fact
that the international community has played its part
in helping the people of Timor-Leste. That provides a
solid foundation for the Timorese leadership and people
to build upon for a better future of peace and prosperity
for their country.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Reske-Nielsen for his briefing. I commend
him on his strong leadership and commitment in the
final but very crucial phase of the presence of the
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT). I also wish to thank the Government of
Timor-Leste, represented here by Foreign Minister José
Luís Guterres and Ambassador Sofia Mesquita Borges,
for its unwavering dedication in ensuring that stability
continues to prevail in Timor-Leste and in undertaking
its thoughtful and thorough planning for the handling
of the drawdown of UNMIT and its anticipated
withdrawal.

12-58507

S/PV.6859

For more than a decade, the United Nations has
been present in Timor-Leste, working hand in hand with
the Timorese Government and people to support their
efforts to emerge from conflict and to build sustainable
peace and security. Today is an important opportunity
to reflect on UNMIT’s achievements during the past
six years, to consider its lessons in United Nations
peacekeeping and to look ahead to the United Nations
future role in that young democracy, which celebrated
the tenth anniversary of its independence this year.
Timor-Leste has come a long way since the
establishment of the first United Nations mission there
in 1999. In March 2011, the Polícia Nacional de TimorLeste (PNTL) assumed executive policing authority
from UNMIT and the United Nations police. Since
that time, the PNTL has exercised responsibility for
all police operations in the country. On 31 October,
UNMIT ceased operational support to the PNTL — one
of the last major milestones as the Mission withdraws
by the year’s end.
UNMIT also coordinated closely with TimorLeste during the three rounds of presidential and
parliamentary elections in 2012. The elections were
free, fair and peaceful and included high levels of
participation. They and the resulting peaceful transfers
of office stand as major achievements for Timor-Leste.
Finally, we should recall that the essential State
institutions in the security, justice and Government
sectors, which today play crucial roles in safeguarding
stability and democracy, did not exist 13 years ago.
Despite its impressive progress, however, TimorLeste continues to face many challenges that must be
addressed to avoid a return to conflict and instability.
The United States wants to see Timor-Leste
maintain stability, deepen democracy, respect
human rights and improve the delivery of justice. We
support the Government of Timor-Leste’s continued
engagement on the world stage through its leadership
in the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative,
the New Deal for Engagement in Fragile States,
UN-Women and United Nations peacekeeping. We
commend Timor-Leste for its strong leadership as
one of the Chairs of the International Dialogue on
Peacekeeping and Statebuilding and of the Group of
Seven Plus coalition of fragile States. As we prepare
for a significant transition in the United Nations role
in Timor-Leste, we must focus on what will promote

12-58507

lasting peace and security in Timor-Leste for decades
to come.
First, through the Serious Crimes Investigation
Team within UNMIT, significant strides have been
made to investigate and safeguard information into
crimes against humanity committed in 1999. The
team’s work has not been completed, however. We
therefore strongly encourage the Secretariat to identify
a path forward for the investigation team to complete its
work. The investigations are important for promoting
reconciliation and continued accountability.
Secondly, we should continue to work with the
Government of Timor-Leste to help bolster human
rights institutions and to infuse human rights into
key institutions, such as the police and military. As
UNMIT withdraws, the United Nations should consider
other ways to assist with institution-building and
provide specialized technical assistance, as needed and
requested by the Government of Timor-Leste.
Finally, we must consider providing the Government
of Timor-Leste with the appropriate United Nations
tools to identify potential rising political and security
tensions. It is crucial for the United Nations to work in
conjunction with the Government to undertake a bigpicture analysis of sources of fragility, in order to foster
reconciliation and social cohesion while preventing
future instability.
This is a positive moment in United Nations
peacekeeping history, and we, as the Council, are
presented with the unique opportunity to study
UNMIT’s success story and look for ways to replicate
the lessons learned in UNMIT to help guide Security
Council actions in other post-conflict and postpeacekeeping missions. As we prepare for a significant
transition of the United Nations presence in TimorLeste, we have to look beyond today and tomorrow
and consider the United Nations tools that will most
assist the people and the Government of Timor-Leste
in further advancing peace, stability and development.
The United States applauds the Timorese people
and its leaders for the progress they have achieved in
building their country and joins other Council members
in welcoming the developments that make it possible
for Timor-Leste to enter a new phase in its relationship
with the United Nations.
Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Reske-Nielsen for his presentation

19

S/PV.6859

and to welcome the presence and the statement of
Mr. José Luís Guterres, Minister of State and Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste.
My country aligns itself with the statement that
will be made by the observer of the European Union.
At the outset, I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of South Africa for having
led the Security Council’s mini-mission to Timor-Leste,
for his report (see S/PV.6858) and, more generally, for
his work in the Security Council on this matter. My
country would also like to thank the United Nations
staff members who have worked in the Mission in
Timor-Leste since its deployment, the successive
Special Representatives and those nations that have
participated in stabilizing the country, in particular,
Portugal, Australia and New Zealand.
We would like to congratulate the authorities
of Timor-Leste for organizing free and democratic
legislative and presidential elections, which were
held in a peaceful climate with a high turnout. The
transfer of power was peaceful, which gives shape to
the entrenchment of democracy and the solidity of the
country’s institutions. The transfer of responsibility for
security to the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL)
took place in good conditions and without an increase
in crime. The certification of the full reconstitution
of the PNTL paves the way for a cut in staff levels of
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and an end to the Mission on 31 December
2012, as stipulated in resolution 2037 (2012). The
country’s diplomacy is displaying great dynamism, as
demonstrated by its role in the Group of Seven Plus
coalition of fragile States and its growing interaction
with regional organizations in the area, an aim that we
too are pursuing for our territories in the Pacific. The
security situation has been stable for some years now,
and everything points to it remaining so.
The challenges that the Timorese must tackle today
include combating poverty, economic development,
discrimination against women, the scourge of
corruption and bolstering justice and accountability for
serious crimes committed in the past. The challenges
should be met with the assistance of the international
community, and no longer with the support of a United
Nations peacekeeping operation.
The effective departure of UNMIT is approaching
and taking final shape. The preparations for UNMIT’s
withdrawal and the Joint Transition Plan are, in our

20

eyes, a model to be followed in other theatres. We
have taken due note of the wishes expressed by Prime
Minister Gusmão on the nature of the relation between
his country and the United Nations after the withdrawal.
It is clear that the type of presence that the United
Nations will maintain on the ground should be defined
in concert with the local authorities and with their full
agreement. We should also bear in mind its budgetary
implications. We are also ready, as requested by the
Timorese authorities, to see the agenda of the Security
Council evolve in order to reflect the new situation in
Timor-Leste. We nonetheless are prepared to join all
the parties concerned in considering the outlines of
a future relationship between the United Nations and
Timor-Leste.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I join others in extending a very warm welcome to
the Security Council to His Excellency Mr. José Luís
Guterres, Minister of State and Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste, and to thank
him for his statement. I would also like to thank the
Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Timor-Leste, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen,
for introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/765).
The visit of the Security Council’s mini-mission to
Timor-Leste last week, in which India also participated,
offered Council members an opportunity to interact
with the Government and see first-hand the progress
that the country has made towards sustainable peace
and security. Timor-Leste has made multifaceted
progress since the establishment of the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) in 2006.
The year 2012 has been an important milestone in the
consolidation of democratic transition in Timor-Leste.
This year the country celebrated the tenth
anniversary of restoration of its independence.
Presidential and parliamentary elections were also
held in a calm and stabile security environment.
Timorese police and armed forces have conducted
themselves professionally and in a responsible manner.
We compliment the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) for its efforts aimed at continuing to strengthen
its institutional development and capacity-building. The
final certification of the full reconstitution of the PNTL
took place recently, marking the end of the United
Nations police’s operational support for the PNTL.

12-58507

S/PV.6859

We appreciate the resilience and determination of
the Timorese people and its leadership in firmly taking
their country forward on paths to long-term peace,
stability and development. The active engagement
of all political parties in the democratic process is an
encouraging indicator of their abiding commitment to
democracy. We would also like to commend UNMIT
for its overall support to that end and for making the
Mission a success story.
As stated by Ambassador Baso Sangqu of South
Africa, who led the Council’s mission, and as indicated
in Prime Minister Gusmão’s letter to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2012/736), there has been an unambiguous
message from the Timorese people that the country
should no longer remain on the Council’s agenda and
that UNMIT should withdraw as planned by the end
of this year. We are particularly pleased that there is
consensus among all stakeholders that UNMIT should
withdraw as scheduled.
As UNMIT draws down, it is important that the
contours of the post-transition United Nations presence
should be finalized in accordance with the wishes and
priorities of the Government. Timorese ownership and
leadership are essential to building on the progress
achieved so far. We have noted with satisfaction that
overall economic growth, including proceeds from
the oil and gas sector, continues to be robust. The
Government’s continued focus on infrastructure and
capital development should certainly help to usher in
a rapid socioeconomic transition in the country. The
international community must support the Government
in its efforts to achieve socioeconomic development,
eradicate poverty and strengthen its institutions.
India attaches great importance to its relations
with Timor-Leste. We have sought to contribute
to its development by providing expertise and
training in areas of our competence and where we
see complementarities in their application. India has
extended its support to the Government of Timor-Leste
in the areas of socioeconomic development and human
resources development. We are also partnering with the
Government of Timor-Leste within the India-BrazilSouth Africa framework. India fully supports the
Timorese Government’s efforts to expand its bilateral
and regional cooperation.
Before I conclude, I would like to express our
appreciation for the leadership shown by the Acting
Special Representative of the Secretary-General

12-58507

for Timor-Leste, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, during
the transition, and for the dedication of his team in
supporting the Government and people of Timor-Leste.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mrs. Ribeiro Viotti (Brazil): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this debate, and, like
the Ambassador of Portugal, I would like to deliver my
statement in Portuguese.
(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the
delegation)
I would like to welcome Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation José Luis Guterres, who
honours us with his presence at this historic moment
for Timor-Leste. His presence attests to how important
the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) and the United Nations are to Timor-Leste,
as well as the earnestness with which the Timorese
Government views the new phase in its relations
with the United Nations after 2013. I also thank the
Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, for his briefing and
insightful comments. I would also like to express our
appreciation to Ms. Ameerah Haq for her extraordinary
work with UNMIT, and to congratulate South Africa
for its excellent coordination of the core group for
Timor-Leste. In that connection, we thank Ambassador
Sangqu for his briefing on the Security Council mission
to Timor-Leste (see S/PV.6858).
The year 2012 is a milestone in the recent
history of Timor-Leste. Ten years after the country’s
independence, the Timorese people have been able to
organize and hold two very important elections and to
ensure a smooth transfer of power.
Sustained progress has also been made in other
areas. In the security sector, the transfer last year
of policing responsibilities to the national police of
Timor-Leste was a very important step. Economic
growth has accelerated, and a base for investment
and for development of the country’s infrastructure
has been established. The Timorese have worked
hard to strengthen mechanisms for the protection of
human rights, implement anti-corruption programmes,
promote transparency and ensure social progress
and good governance. The participation of women in
Timor-Leste’s nation-building process is also notable.

21

S/PV.6859

In the 2012 parliamentary elections, quotas established
through electoral legislation resulted in women
occupying 38 per cent of seats, which, as highlighted
by the Secretary-General, is the highest percentage in
the Asia-Pacific region. Brazil commends UNMIT’s
important contribution in helping Timor-Leste in its
efforts to overcome the obstacles in its path towards
peace, stability and development.
In this new stage in Timor-Leste’s history, it is
essential that the international community and the
United Nations continue to cooperate with the Timorese
in order to consolidate the positive results obtained
in areas such as security and institutional capacitybuilding. We are confident that, as has been the case
so far, the future relationship of the United Nations
with the Government of Timor-Leste will be based on a
mutually beneficial dialogue focused on the country’s
priorities and concerns.
Brazil supports the vision formulated by
the Timorese Government of an innovative and
cooperative relationship with the United Nations,
aimed at strengthening Timor-Leste’s institutions and
socioeconomic development. We encourage the prompt
beginning of discussions on issues identified in the
Joint Transition Plan for a post-2012 agenda. Brazil
will continue to develop its strong ties with TimorLeste. We will maintain our support to the Timorese
Government through cooperative projects in areas such
as agriculture, education, justice and security.
We are also proud of the work that Sérgio Vieira de
Mello, a Brazilian national, was able to do, as Head of
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor, in supporting the country in the early stages of
its independence.
The commitment and dedication of the Timorese
people have been at the heart of the achievements we
celebrate today and constitute a solid base for an even
stronger partnership between Timor-Leste, the United
Nations and the international community in the years
ahead. Timor-Leste can continue to count on Brazil.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to begin by
extending a warm welcome to Mr. José Luis Guterres,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, and by thanking
him for his participation in this debate and for his
statement. I would also like to express my appreciation
to Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen for his comprehensive

22

briefing to the Council in his capacity as Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General.
I also want to sincerely compliment the people of
Timor-Leste on their outstanding achievements, which
include, among other things, the successful conduct of
two rounds of presidential and parliamentary elections
this year. I believe that those achievements will enable
them to enjoy peace and prosperity as they harvest the
fruits of democracy.
We have witnessed a process whereby a close
partnership between the host country and the United
Nations has led that country on a promising path. In
that regard, I would like to make special mention of
the role played by successive earlier United Nations
operations in Timor-Leste, which will come to a close
at the end of this year with the drawdown of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).
After Timor-Leste became independent, the United
Nations missions operating in the country evolved in
step with the country’s progress. They maintained close
relations with the Timorese and supported the people
in their efforts. To that end, the Security Council
has played a very important role in synchronizing
the missions’ mandates with the progress in TimorLeste. Such experiences give us confidence regarding
the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping for
international peace and security. The achievements in
Timor-Leste give us great hope for those who suffered
in the aftermath of conflict there and should serve to
encourage them as they move forward towards their
future.
Japan feels privileged to have been a part of United
Nations efforts in Timor-Leste. Japan’s engineering
units participated in the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor and the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor, and helped to
establish a foundation for the country’s development. In
addition, Japan dispatched its civilian police personnel
to support Timorese efforts to build their policing
capacity and strengthen their security institutions.
Japan also supported the national electoral process
by sending election observers. Up until September,
Japan continued to assist UNMIT by contributing two
military liaison officers to the Mission. The success
of Timor-Leste assures us of the effectiveness of our
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping. On the
basis of our experience in Timor-Leste, Japan would like

12-58507

S/PV.6859

to intensify its efforts in working towards international
peace and security.

Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Sao Tome and Principe,
Portugal and Timor-Leste.

The achievements of the Timorese have opened the
door to a new stage of further development. In order
for Timor-Leste to begin its efforts on the right track
in that new stage, a successful and seamless transition
is vital. In that regard, I would like to emphasize the
importance of ongoing joint efforts by Timor-Leste and
UNMIT for a smooth transition. Japan firmly believes
that the strong partnership between Timor-Leste and
UNMIT will add a successful transition to their success
story.

We welcome His Excellency Mr. José Luis
Guterres, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of Timor-Leste, whose presence in this debate reflects
the strong commitment of his country to the effective
implementation of provisions for cooperation with the
United Nations system, in particularly under auspices of
the Security Council. We therefore align ourselves with
the content of his statement, as we support the range of
efforts that Timor-Leste has undertaken with a view to
consolidating peace, stability, democratic institutions
and promoting sustainable economic development.

I believe that the key to the Timorese success is a
spirit of unity, which has been fully exercised not only
among the Timorese people but also among all entities
working on the ground, including UNMIT, the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations
Population Fund, UN-Women, UNICEF and TimorLeste’s bilateral partners. The future will require more
coordinated, harmonized and strengthened efforts by
all relevant entities, under the strong ownership of the
Timorese with their enhanced spirit of unity working
towards the country’s future prosperity.
In conclusion, Japan will do its utmost to support
the further development of the country. As an old
friend of Timor-Leste, going back to the days before
independence, Japan supported its nation-building
efforts, while also supporting its development of human
resources, infrastructure and agriculture. Japan will
continue to assist Timor-Leste and further deepen its
support, together with our friends responsible for the
future of the Asia-Pacific region and the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mozambique.
Mr. Gumende (Mozambique): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for having invited us to participate in
this debate. Like my colleagues from Portugal and
Brazil, I seek your indulgence to deliver my statement
in Portuguese.
(spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the
delegation)
Allow me, at outset, to thank you, Sir, for having
given Mozambique the opportunity to address this
important organ of the United Nations in its capacity as
the Chair of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP), which also includes Angola, Brazil,

12-58507

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Integrated Mission in TimorLeste (S/2012/765), presented at this meeting, which
in general indicates remarkable progress in important
sectors of the political, economic and social spheres in
the country that should be a cause for rejoicing and pride
for the leadership and the people of Timor-Leste. Two of
the important events that characterize the progress and
deserve special mention are the presidential elections in
March and April and the parliamentary elections in July,
both of which the international community judged to
have been free and fair. We are aware that those positive
developments reflect the will and determination of the
people of Timor-Leste to continue in their quest for a
future of lasting peace and leading to the realization of
their noble aspirations.
The implementation of the framework of
cooperation between the United Nations and TimorLeste — in particular, the success of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT),
which is now drawing down — demonstrates a positive
experience in the stabilization of the country and has
brought new advantages. At present, Timor-Leste
participates actively in peace efforts as a contributor
to United Nations peace and security missions around
the world, thereby assisting in the solution of conflicts
and the building of an increasingly peaceful and
stable world. We therefore reiterate our appeal to the
international community to continue to provide its
valuable contribution to the political, economic and
social development of Timor-Leste, a country with
great potential for growth and development.
In that regard, we would like to acknowledge the
importance of the visit paid by the members of the
Security Council to Timor-Leste at the beginning of this

23

S/PV.6859

month, as well as the visit of the Secretary — General
last August. Such visits, among other initiatives, will
help to identify, in turn, better ways to overcome
the challenges the country still faces, such as the
promotion of economic and social development and the
capacity-building of State institutions, areas in which
the international community can still play an important
role.
Alongside the efforts of the international
community, CPLP member States continue to redouble
efforts aimed at strengthening the political and
economic stability of Timor-Leste in order to harness
the experience of this sister country so that it can
continue to be an increasingly important partner in
building peace and development at the regional and
global levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): In September 1999,
Asia-Pacific leaders gathered in Auckland, New
Zealand, for the annual Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) Summit. Less than two weeks
earlier, the people of Timor-Leste had overwhelmingly
chosen independence in a United Nations-supervised
popular referendum, following which the territory was
plunged into violent chaos. As the death toll mounted,
APEC leaders discussed options for ending the violence,
and, on 13 September, they agreed urgently to deploy
an international peacekeeping force to stabilize the
situation. So began a process that, three years later, saw
Timor-Leste’s emergence as an independent country.
With this nation’s birth playing out so
dramatically on my own country’s soil, so also
began New Zealand’s partnership with the
Timorese people. New Zealand participated in the
International Force for East Timor (INTERFET), which
was dispatched to Timor-Leste following that APEC
Summit. We have played a significant role in every
international force in the country since then, including,
most recently, the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste.
Since 1999, more than 6,000 New Zealand military
personnel have served there. Indeed, at INTERFET’s
peak in 2001, approximately half of New Zealand’s
land forces were involved in some way in servicing
that deployment. That was in addition to the hundreds
of police and civilian personnel from our diplomatic,
overseas development, customs, corrections and other

24

agencies who, over the past decade or so, have also
contributed towards building this young country.
In short, New Zealand was proud to be one of
the first countries to commit to supporting the postreferendum transition to independence. Since then, we
have been privileged to walk with the Timorese people
on their journey out of conflict and fragility. We have
gained a lot from that engagement ourselves. It has
taught us about the nature and demands of complex
peace operations and of post-conflict peacebuilding,
not least in our own region. Opportunities to live, work
and serve in Timor-Leste have enriched the lives of
many of our people.
Firm bonds have been forged between our peoples.
I will give just one example, which is all the more
touching as it is an example of triumph transcending
tragedy. The parents of a New Zealand soldier killed
in Timor-Leste in 2000 established, in his honour, a
charity to educate Timorese children — a charity that
has changed more than 40 lives in just one village.
Timor-Leste and its partners have encountered
setbacks in this journey. But today we have the
opportunity to acknowledge and celebrate its many
achievements. Great strides have been made since 1999
in healing the wounds of the independence struggle.
Former combatants have been demobilized and
reintegrated. Displaced populations have returned, and
communities reconciled. Core Government institutions
and conventions of democratic governance have been
steadily built and consolidated. We also commend all of
Timor-Leste’s neighbours, most particularly Indonesia,
for the readiness with which they have welcomed it into
their regional community.
In 10 short years, we have seen Timor-Leste move
from being conflict-ravaged to itself being a contributor
to United Nations peace operations. We have watched
as it has provided inspiration and voice for fragile States
seeking more focused and accountable international
assistance.
The orderly conduct of this year’s elections was a
tribute to Timor-Leste’s political maturity. It stands as
a testament to what post-conflict countries can achieve
through vision, leadership and determination. New
Zealand is one of many countries that supported those
efforts, most recently by sending election observers.
Over the past four years, Timor-Leste has also
enjoyed impressive levels of economic growth, which,

12-58507

S/PV.6859

together with careful stewardship of oil and gas
revenues, has enabled progress in tackling poverty and
laying foundations for a for a more prosperous future.
Remarkable progress has been made in confronting
other challenges, such as domestic violence and
women’s political empowerment.
Overall, today Timor-Leste is more stable, more
peaceful and more prosperous and its future appears
brighter than at any other time in its history. TimorLeste can take pride in those achievements. Its friends
can also take pride and, indeed, the Council should take
pride, in what has been achieved under its mandate.
As of 1 November, leadership and responsibility for
Timor-Leste’s security is now in the hands of Timorese
national police, supported by the nation’s defence
force. Given that both the United Nations police and
the International Stabilisation Force have ceased their
residual security roles, and that the reconstitution of
the Polícia Nacional de Timor-Leste has now been
fully certified, with UNMIT scheduled to withdraw
by the end of the year, Timor-Leste will enter a new
phase, including in terms of its relationship with the
international community.
As the Secretary-General noted in his report
(S/2012/765), the process will entail many daunting
challenges. Access to health and education services
must be enhanced. Greater inroads are needed to
counter malnutrition, and the benefits of development
must be felt beyond Dili. Above all, jobs are urgently
needed for Timor-Leste’s young and rapidly growing
population, which will require support for an emerging
vibrant sector in the non-oil economy.
Recent gains in the areas of security and democratic
governance must also be consolidated and extended.
And further progress is needed so that all of the gains
are anchored in strong and wise leadership, as well as in
effective, resilient and sustainable institutions.
Particular priority is needed to strengthen core
institutions of the security and justice sectors, and
among those responsible for Government oversight and
accountability.
The challenges are common to many countries
and we believe that Timor-Leste has the vision and the
determination to meet them successfully. In all of those
endeavours, it will have the support of its many loyal
friends, and New Zealand is just one of the friends.

12-58507

We will remain a reliable partner to Timor-Leste
as it writes the next chapter in its history, through
our $22 million bilateral development assistance
programme. Over the next three years we will
contribute to the construction of a stable, democratic
and prosperous country by fostering private sector
investment, strengthening the security and justice
sectors, including through our recently launched
bilateral community policing programme, and by
supporting education and training.
Support from the United Nations system will also
be vital. The new Timorese Government has articulated
what it regards as the most appropriate form, scope and
focus for its post-UNMIT relationship with the United
Nations. We support efforts by both sides to develop
the modalities for that more fully nuanced relationship.
Finally, in what we expect to be the last meeting
of the Council on the situation in Timor-Leste, I pay
tribute to the United Nations personnel, from the Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General on down, and
to the men and women from many nations who have
worked over the past 13 years to provide Timor-Leste
with a more peaceful and prosperous future.
Above all, I pay tribute to the courage and
determination of the people of Timor-Leste itself, which
has carried that young country such an extraordinary
distance since the dark and dramatic days of 1999.
We truly wish the Minister’s country well. We
wish it well as it begins the next phase of its remarkable
journey. I assure the people of Timor-Leste that we will
walk with them on that journey.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. King (Australia): Thank you very much,
Mr. President, for convening this debate. I would like
to acknowledge the presence of the Foreign Minister
of Timor-Leste, Mr. José Luís Guterres. I would also
like to acknowledge the presence of the Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and to thank
him for his briefing this afternoon. The Australian
Government has very much appreciated his strong
leadership of the United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT). As this may be the last
Council debate on UNMIT, we would also like to
highlight the important contribution of former Special
Representatives Atul Khare and Ameerah Haq and

25

S/PV.6859

their able deputies. Each performed their role with
great professionalism.
It is clear that Timor-Leste, working closely with
UNMIT and bilateral partners, has made great progress
since the events of 2006. The Polícia Nacional de TimorLeste has been fully reconstituted, the threat posed by
disaffected groups has dissipated and the Timorese-led
political reconciliation process has contributed directly
to peaceful elections this year. We agree with Prime
Minister Gusmão that security conditions in TimorLeste have improved markedly and that, following the
very successful elections held during the course of the
year, it is time for the international security forces to
depart.
As the Council has heard during numerous debates,
Timor-Leste authorities have worked to achieve an
extended period of peace by maintaining stability
and enhancing political and social cohesion. Australia
agrees with the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that UNMIT should conclude its mission at the
end of the year.
Many members today have commented on the
success of the 2012 elections. The Timorese electoral
authorities, security services, political parties and civil
society deserve to be commended for that success.
We acknowledge the crucial role played by UNMIT
and the United Nations Development Programme in
helping to build the capacity of the Timorese electoral
management bodies to the level that we witnessed this
year.
We are pleased that members of the Council
were able to visit Timor-Leste last week and witness
first-hand the achievements of the Timorese and the
significant contribution made by UNMIT — as did
the Secretary-General when he visited in mid-August.
The Mission has successfully integrated the many
functions of the United Nations into a single mission
structure. That will provide useful lessons for future
peacekeeping operations. Beyond its important task of
reconstituting and supporting the PNTL, UNMIT has
also promoted and supported political reconciliation
and the development of human rights standards and
institutions, including building an awareness of
justice issues. We encourage the Mission’s leadership
to continue working with the Timorese Government
to manage the economic impact on Timor-Leste
resulting from the closure of UNMIT, particularly on
employment in Dili.

26

The end of the United Nations peacekeeping and
political presence should not signal the end of United
Nations engagement with Timor-Leste. Timor-Leste
wants to shape an innovative development relationship
with the United Nations. Australia will support the
country in that endeavour.
We commend Timor-Leste for its Strategic
Development Plan for the period 2011-2030, which
sets out long-term principles to underpin development.
Australia was the first development partner of TimorLeste to commit to the New Deal for Engagement in
Fragile States. Our partnership is now firmly rooted
in those principles. For example, we are partnering
with the Ministry of Finance to provide development
assistance directly through the Ministry’s systems.
We encourage future United Nations engagement with
Timor-Leste to be aligned with those principles.
We would also like to recognize the very
effective relationship between UNMIT and the
International Stabilisation Force (ISF). The division
of responsibility for providing security assistance to
Timor-Leste — shared between the United Nations
police and the ISF — provides useful lessons in the
effective demarcation of responsibility as well as unity
of purpose, which may serve to assist the Council
in developing mandates for future peacekeeping
operations.
Australia will begin to carry out the drawdown
of the ISF, in close coordination with the Government
of Timor-Leste, the Government of New Zealand and
UNMIT. We would like to take this opportunity to thank
our ISF partner, New Zealand, as well as Portugal and
Malaysia, with whom we worked so closely in 2006,
ahead of the establishment of UNMIT.
The coming departure of the ISF does not signal
the end of Australia’s security cooperation with TimorLeste. We will continue our work with Timor-Leste’s
police force and our defence cooperation programme in
support of the country’s defence force.
Our relationship with our close neighbour and
friend will continue to deepen and broaden as we work
in partnership with Timor-Leste to alleviate poverty,
provide education and employment opportunities
to young Timorese people and build on the strong,
extensive and enduring community links between our
countries.

12-58507

S/PV.6859

The Timorese people have shown tremendous
resilience over the past decade as they set about
building a new nation. While UNMIT and the ISF have
made their contribution, the real credit for the peace
and progress enjoyed today must go to the Timorese
people themselves.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Deputy Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
acceding country Croatia, the candidate countries the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Iceland and Serbia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Albania
and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the
Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
First and foremost, I congratulate the current and
preceding Timor-Leste Governments for the tremendous
progress made towards stabilization and recovery
since the restoration of independence in 2002. On the
eve of the departure of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT), I would also like to
express our sincere gratitude to the successive Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and to all
UNMIT personnel for their substantial contributions.
Finally, I join others in thanking Acting Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Finn
Reske-Nielsen, for his briefing and the Minister of
State and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation
of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste, Mr. José
Luis Guterres, for his statement.
Over the past decade, Timor-Leste has accomplished
impressive progress in terms of stability, democracy,
the rule of law, human rights and economic growth.
Since the Security Council debate on UNMIT in
February (see S/PV.6720), Timor-Leste has witnessed
several new milestones, including successful and
peaceful presidential and parliamentary elections, as
observed by an EU election observation mission. The
withdrawal of UNMIT by the end of this year, 10 years
after the country regained its independence, is a logical
step on that path and a clear sign of Timor-Leste’s
national commitment to consolidate the capacity of its
institutions.
However, as noted by the Secretary-General in his
latest report (S/2012/765), several challenges remain,

12-58507

in particular as a result of persisting human resource
capacity constraints, namely, in socioeconomic
development and justice. To address those challenges it
is important, in our view, to build on the progress already
made and to focus on the effective implementation of
the remainder of the Joint Transition Plan, as well as
the reforms already endorsed. We welcome the new
Government’s five-year programme, as well as the
Strategic Development Plan, which aims to further
advance the previous Government’s actions and to set
a course for a sustainable future. In that regard, we
underline the importance of a continuous focus on the
rule of law, human rights and access to justice. In that
context, it will be important to maintain the engagement
of, and support by, the international community.
We furthermore firmly believe that reconciliation
is an important precondition for long-term
stability. We therefore look forward to the National
Parliament’s renewed discussions on the two draft
laws on the memorial institute and reparations, and
on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation.
We believe that, following UNMIT’s departure, the
United Nations presence in Timor-Leste for the coming
years should be designed to support the ongoing
consolidation efforts and to build on the significant
achievements of UNMIT’s activities to date, in close
coordination with the Timorese authorities. We
acknowledge the preferences expressed by Timor-Leste
in that regard and stand ready to support the outcome
of the discussions between Timor-Leste’s Government
and the United Nations.
We commend Timor-Leste’s achievements at the
regional and international level, in particular through
establishing strong and cordial ties with its neighbours
and through its driving role as co-Chair of the Group of
Seven Plus (g7+). We welcome Timor-Leste’s candidacy
for membership of the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, its active role within the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and its integration into
the Pacific through cooperation under the Pacific Island
Forum’s regional programme.
In conclusion, we have stood by Timor-Leste’s
side through challenging times and remain committed
to do so in the future. We are currently preparing
our development support for 2014 to 2020 in close
consultation with national authorities, which will, of
course, be based on Timor-Leste’s National Strategic

27

S/PV.6859

Development Plan. It will also ensure alignment with
the new deal of the g7+.

leadership in institution-building and socioeconomic
development.

As the focus is shifting from security and stability
to development issues, we encourage others to remain
strongly engaged as well in support of Timor-Leste’s
development process. We are confident that Timor-Leste
will continue to be a successful example of national

The President: There are no further names
inscribed on the list of speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

28

The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

12-58507
