68

General Assembly-Thirty-fourth Session

Taking note of the draft declaration on the inadmissibility of intervention and interference in internal affairs
of States,1° 4
Considering that it was not possible to conclude negotiations on this draft in time for the adoption of such a
declaration at the thirty-fourth session,
1. Expresses the hope that negotiations will continue
and be intensified with a view to the adoption, at the
thirty-fifth session, of a declaration on the inadmissibility
of intervention and interference in the internal affairs
of States;
2. Decides to set up an open-ended ad hoe working
group of the First Committee at the commencement of
the thirty-fifth session with a view to elaborating and
finalizing the declaration;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Review of the
implementation of the Declaration on the Strengthening
of International Security".
103rd plenary meeting
I 4 December I 979

34 / 102.

Settlement by peaceful means of disputes between States

The General Assembly,
Having examined the item entitled "Settlement by
peaceful means of disputes between States",
Recalling that, under the Charter of the United Nations, the Member States have expressed the determination of their peoples to practise tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours
and to unite their strength to maintain international
peace and security,
Recalling also that the Member States have pledged
under the Charter to settle their international disputes
by peaceful means in such a manner that international
peace and security and justice are not endangered,
Reaffirming the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations, 105
Recognizing the important role of the United Nations
in promoting the peaceful settlement of international
disputes and preventing the outbreak of armed conflicts
among States and in bringing about by peaceful means,
in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, adjustment or settlement of international
disputes or situations which might lead to a breach of
the peace,
Bearing in mind the report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on the
Strengthening of the Role of the Organization, 106 especially the consensus contained in it, 101 namely, that the
idea of preparing a declaration on peaceful settlement
of disputes to be adopted by the General Assembly
awakened special interest and is one on which general
agreement may be possible,
Recognizing the importance of the elaboration of a
declaration of the General Assembly on the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States,
104 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 46, document A/34/827, para. 9.
105 Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
106 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. 33 (A/34/33).
107 Ibid., para. 13.

Taking into account the opinions and suggestions submitted at the thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly regarding the content of a declaration on the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States, as well as those
made on the subject by Member States in connexion
with the work of the Special Committee,
1. Calls upon all States to adhere strictly in their
international relations to the principle that States shall
settle their international disputes by peaceful means in
such a manner that international peace and security and
justice are not endangered;
2. Urges all States to co-operate in the elaboration
of a declaration of the General Assembly on the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States;
3. Invites Member States to transmit to the SecretaryGeneral their opinions, suggestions and proposals regarding the elaboration of a declaration on the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States and to bring up
to date their views on this subject submitted in pursuance
of General Assembly resolution 3499 (XXX) of 15 December 1975;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fifth session a report containing the opinions, suggestions and proposals regarding
the declaration on the peaceful settlement of disputes
between States;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-fifth session an item entitled "Peaceful settlement of disputes between States".
103rd plenary meeting
14 December 1979

34/103.

Inadmissibility of the policy of hegemonism
in international relations

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the primary responsibility of the United
Nations to promote and strengthen international peace
and security on the basis of strict respect for the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, especially
the principle of sovereignty, sovereign equality and national independence of States,
Recalling the duty of States to refrain in their international relations from military, political, economic or
any other form of coercion aimed against the sovereignty,
political independence or territorial integrity of any
State,
Noting that hegemonism is a manifestation of the
policy of a State, or a group of States, to control, dominate and subjugate, politically, economically, ideologically or militarily, other States, peoples or regions of the
world,
Considering that imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism, racism including zionism and apartheid are all
forces which seek to perpetuate unequal relations and
privileges acquired by force and are, therefore, different
manifestations of the policy and practice of hegemonism,
. Concerned that hegemonism, global as well as regional, pursued in the context of the policy of division
of the world into blocs or by individual States, manifests itself in the use or threat of use of force, foreign
domination and intervention,
Concerned also that hegemonism seeks to limit the
freedom of States to determine their political systems
and pursue economic, social and cultural development
without intimidation, hindrance or pressure,

m.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

Convinced that hegemonism, global and regional, in
all its different forms, leads to a serious threat to international peace and security,
Considering that it is the common desire of all peoples to oppose hegemonism and to preserve the sovereignty and national independence of all States,
Bearing in mind the importance and urgency of creating a new and equitable system of international relations based on the equal participation of all States in
the solution of international problems and the maintenance of international peace and security, one which ensures equal security for all States, and progress and
prosperity for all peoples, through the establishment of
the new international economic order,
1. Condemns hegemonism in all its manifestations,
including that conducted at the global, regional or subregional level, pursued in the context of the policy of
division of the world into blocs or by individual States;
2. Declares that no State or group of States shall,
under any circumstance or for any reason whatsoever,
pursue hegemony in international relations or seek a
position of dominance, either globally or in any region
of the world;
. 3. Rejects all forms of domination, subjugation,
mterference or intervention and all forms of pressure,
whether political, ideological, economic, military or
cultural, in international relations;
4. Resolutely condemns policies of pressure and
ll;Se or threat ?f use of force, di~ect or in~irect aggression, occupation and the growmg practlce of interference and intervention, overt or covert in the internal
affairs of States;
'
5. Re~o~utely condemns imperialism, colonialism,
neo-colomahsm, apartheid, racism includingzionism and

69

all other forms of foreign aggression, occupation, domination and interference, as well as the creation of
spheres of influence and the division of the world into
antagonistic political and military blocs;
6. Calls upon all States, in the conduct of international relations, to observe strictly the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and those regarding respect for the sovereignty, sovereign equality, national
independence, unity and territorial integrity of States,
non-interference in their internal affairs, non-aggression,
peaceful settlement of disputes and co-operation, as well
as the right of peoples under colonial and alien domination to self-determination;
7. Calls for the withdrawal of all occupation forces
back to their own territories, so as to enable the peoples
of all States to determine and administer their own
affairs;
8. Further calls for strict respect for the right of all
States to determine their political and socio-economic
systems and pursue their national economic, social and
other policies without intimidation, hindrance or interference from outside;
9. Resolves to continue the endeavour to estaolish
a new and equitable system of international relations
based on the equal participation of all States in the solution of international problems and the maintenance of
international peace and security;
10. Further resolves to continue the endeavour for
the establishment of the new international economic
order, so as to ensure the economic emancipation and
freedom of all nations, in particular the developing
countries.
103rd plenary meeting
14 December 1979
