UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1892) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Request by Mozambique under Article 50 of the Charter of the United Nations
in relation to the situation which has arisen as a result of its decision to
impose sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in full implementation of the
relevant decisions of the Security Council:
Telegram dated 10 March 1976 from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mozambique to the President of the Security Council (S/12009) . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1892

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security ,Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in ‘yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1892nd MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday,
President:

Mr. Thomas

S. BOYA (Benin).

Adoption

2.

Reauest bv Mozambiaue
under Article 50 of the
Charter of the United- Nations in relation to the
situation which has arisen as a result of its decision
to impose sanctions against Southern Rhodesia
in full implementation
of the relevant decisions of
the Security Council:
Telegram dated 10 March 1976 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mozambique
to the President of the Security Council (S/12009)
The meeting

2. Mr. LECOMPT
(France) (interpretation
from
French): Mr. President, first of all I wish to congratulate you and to express the very special satisfaction
of the French delegation at seeing you as President of
the Council for the month of March. My delegation
wishes you the greatest success for the good of your
country, to which France has for many years been
bound by links of friendship, as well as for the good
of Africa and the Organization as a whole.

agenda (S/Agenda/l892)

1.

of the agenda

3. I should also like to take this opportunity to request
the representative of the United States to convey to
Ambassador Moynihan our ,most sincere congratulations on the authority
and courtesy with which he
presided over our work during the month of February.
4. The question ‘on our agenda leaves no room for
controversy.
The situation is clear: one of *the new
Members
of the Organization,
Mozambique,
has
announced its decision to implement fully the sanctions against Rhodesia. That decision is all the more
courageous and deserving of praise because Mozambique has inherited by its history and its geography
a situation of close natural dependence on Southern .
Rhodesia, particularly
in the fields of economics and
~
transportation.

was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption

1976, at 3.30 p.m.

the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional

17 March

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
Request by Mozambique under Article 50 of the Charter
of the United Nations in relation to the situation
which has arisen as a result of its decision to impose
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia in full implementation of the relevant decisions of the Security
Council:
Telegram dated 10 March 1976 from the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mozambique to the President
of the Security Council (S/12009)

5. Each of us has applauded the determination
shown
by the Government in Maputo, and each of us has been
aware of the magnitude of the challenge which it has
to face. The French delegation
wishes to assure
Mozambique of its total support in its efforts to render
more effective the decisions of the United Nations
and thus contribute to the establishment of justice and
freedom in Southern Rhodesia.

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1890th
meeting, 1 shall now invite the representative
of
Mozambique
to take a place at the Council .table.
I shall also invite the representatives of Egypt, Jamaica,
Kenya and Zambia to participate in the discussion
without vote.

6. It is only just, as many speakers before me have
stressed; in particular the representative of Jamaica
speaking in the name of the Commonwealth
[t890th
meeting],
that the international
community
should
provide assistance to one of the Governments which
has imposed the heaviest sacrifices on itself in the
application of sanctions against Rhodesia. The Security
Council had already, in the operative part of resolution 253 (1968), requested Member States

At the invitation
of the President,
Mr. Chissano
(Mozambique)
took a place at the Council table. and
Mr. Ahdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. Thompson (Jamaica)
Mr. Muina (Kenya) und Mr. Kamana (Zambia) took

“to extend assistance to Zambia as a matter of
priority with a view to helping it solve such special
1

economic problems as it may be confronted with
arising from the carrying out of these [sanctions]“.

11. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
from Russian): In conformity with the excellent tradition that has already
grown up, let me first, on behalf of my country, thank
you, Mr. President, and wish you success in the
responsible tasks that you will have to discharge
during the month of March as President of the Security
Council. We not only hope, we are convinced that your
experience, your knowledge and your attitude with
respect to questions of decolonization
will have
a beneficial effect on the solution of the very complex
problems which must be discussed by the Council in
the remaining weeks of this month.

It was part of the logic and the spirit of that resolution
that the same urgent measures should be taken with
respect to independent Mozambique.
7. My delegation has listened with great attention to
the information given to us by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mozambique
[ibid.]. The many different
problems raised by the decision taken by his Govemment and by the inevitably short time accorded us
of course make it impossible for us to take a decision
right now on the requests which have been submitted.

12. I should also like to pay a deserved tribute to
your predecessor, although we frequently disagreed
with him, but that is inevitable when States with different social structures and ideologies meet around
the Council table. Nevertheless,
together with his
colleagues in his delegation, his month was marked by
events that will go down in the history of the activities
of the Council.

8. The accession of Mozambique
to independence,
after all, is quite recent, and France has not yet been
able to establish continuous bilateral relations with
that country. For this reason our knowledge of the
local situation is somewhat unclear at this time. At
any rate, it appears desirable to us that the SecretaryGeneral should proceed with Member States to an
exchange of information as soon as his experts have
assessed precisely the most urgent needs in Mozambique and the most appropriate means of meeting them.
I should like, of course, to assure the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mozambique
that my Government
will consider the problems of his country with the
greatest understanding as soon as actual contacts have
been established between the authorities in Mozambique and the future representative of France.

13. The valiant decision taken by the Government of
Mozambique
in introducing
sanctions against the
racist minority regime in Southern Rhodesia is dictated
by a number of reasons, and primarily by a sense of
international
solidarity felt by the people of Mozambique with the struggle being waged by all other
peoples of former colonial countries, and primarily of
solidarity with the people of Southern Rhodesia, or,
as this part of Africa which is still under colonial
domination
is rightly called, Zimbabwe. This is why
that decision of the Government of Mozambique
was
everywhere highly commended and was respected by
all States which are trying to destroy colonialist
domination,
neo-colonialism,
racism, apartheid and
other such phenomena
that still remain from the
colonial past.

.9. The decision of the Council to impose sanctions
against Rhodesia reflects, by its exceptional character,
the seriousness of the situation we must face. The
Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mozambique
has
reminded us that a disquieting
situation of tension
prevails in the region. The causes of that tension
are well known to the United Nations. They lie in the
opposition of the Ian Smith regime to the unanimous
decisions of the Council. That is why, regardless of
whatever disappointment
may have been felt at the
relative ineffectiveness of the sanctions against Rhodesia, they should be applied and even reinforced. As
has been emphasized by the representative of Tanzania [ibid.], they reflect the determination
of the intemational community
not to allow the perpetuation of an
illegal and unjust regime.

14. In the telegram addressed to you, Mr. President,
the Government of Mozambique
“appeals to the Security Council to take the
necessary steps to help the people of Mozambique
defend itself by every means against the aggression
to which it has been subjected by the rebel Ian
Smith” [S/12009].

10. My delegation has repeatedly recalled the fact that
the problem with which we are now confronted is
political. It concerns the authority of the unanimous
international
community
and the dignity of Africa,
which clearly belongs first and foremost to the
Africans. My Government
strongly hopes that the
Salisbury regime will wake up to the fact that the
situation in Southern Rhodesia since 1965 is not
accepted by any nation, that it cannot be defended by
anyone and that that majority rule must be established
as soon as possible. For all these reasons, my delegation will whole-heartedly
vote in favour of the draft
resolution [S/f20131 to be put to the vote.

In his statement here yesterday when he spoke at the
meeting of the Security Council, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mozambique
adduced additional
convincing facts demonstrating
the criminal activities
of the racist minority in Southern Rhodesia against
the People’s Republic of Mozambique.
In the statements of a number of representatives
to which we
have listened carefully here, and primarily those of the
countries of Africa, in the statements made by the
representatives
of Kenya and Zambia, as well as
Jamaica, Sweden, Pakistan and others, additional
convincing
proof was produced showing that the
racist regime of Ian Smith is perpetrating
armed
2

aggression against a member State ofthe Organization
of African Unity and a Member of the United Nations.

“Our Party supports and will continue to support
peoples fighting for their freedom. In so doing, the
Soviet Union does not look for advantages, does
not hunt for concessions, does not seek political
domination,
and is not after military bases. We act
as we are bid by our revolutionary
conscience, our
communist convictions.”

15. As the telegram of the Secretary-General
of the
Organization
of African Unity of 12 March shows
[S/12004/Add.I,
para. 21, this situation is alarming and
is threatening peace and security in the area. The
same telegram goes on to point out that the decision
of 3 March regarding the unswerving implementation
of international sanctions whereby the Government of
Mozambique would sever all road, air, and rail communications with Southern Rhodesia is in full accord
with resolutions of the United Nations.

I would repeat that what our Party and our Govemment said is that we fully practise what we preach.
19. In our opinion, the draft resolution presented to
the Council [S/12013] contains some very important
provisions which we hope will be unanimously
supported by the Security Council. This draft quite
properly points out that the Council is gravely concerned at the situation created by the provocative
and aggressive acts committed by the illegal minority
regime in Southern Rhodesia against the security and
territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Mozambique. It also indicates the need to condemn the
heinous policy of provocation
pursued by the Ian
Smith regime. The draft resolution
appeals to all
States to’ provide immediate financial, technical and
material assistance to Mozambique
so that Mozambique can carry out its economic development
programme normally.

16. As is known, the Government
of Mozambique
also appealed to the United Nations to display solidarity with the people of Mozambique
in this very
difficult hour for that Republic. The appeal of the
Government
of Mozambique
has been heard with
sympathy by all those who are in favour of the speedy
eradication of the colonial past and the removal of.the
colonialist
and racist regimes existing in southern
Africa. The countries of Africa and all those which
fully understand the problem of the complete and
final abolition of colonialism
have stated that they
regard the aggression by Southern Rhodesia against
Mozambique
as tantamount to aggression against all
States Members of the United Nations and members
of the Organization
of African Unity, and they have
assured Mozambique that they fully support its efforts
to guarantee the freedom and independence of that
country.

20. In this connexion, we should like to state that the
Soviet Union is not only lending moral support is
already but is rendering the necessary substantial
material assistance to the People’s Republic of Mozambique as well. A month ago a number of agreements
were signed between our Government and the Govemment of Mozambique,
according to which it is planned
that economic, technical and other assistance needed
at this time will be given to the People’s Republic of
Mozambique.

17. In the Security Council and in other bodies of
the United Nations, the Soviet delegation has frequently had the occasion resolutely to condemn the
existence of the illegal racist regime in Southern
Rhodesia and has also condemned its aggressive acts
against the peoples of African countries, including
those perpetrated against the People’s Republic of
Mozambique.
Precisely because of this position which
we hold, we feel it is essential that the Council should
take effective steps to implement
United Nations
resolutions aimed at enabling the people of Southern
Rhodesia, of Zimbabwe, to exercise their inalienable
right to self-determination
and independence.

21. Finally, as the Soviet delegation has frequently
stated here in discussing questions of decolonization,
it would be only right for the Security Council, in
adopting a resolution on assistance to be given to
African States in connexion with the application
of
sanctions against the racist minority rkgime, to bear in
mind the possibility
of making those States are, in
fact, politically responsible for maintaining
the racist
regime in Southern Rhodesia, those States which
continue to maintain close economic and other contacts
with that country, bear the burden of compensation
for damage caused. Certain representatives and certain
States could be asked today why they continue to
entertain these contacts and why they continue to
assist the illegal regime in Southern Rhodesia and help
it to perpetrate its miisdeeds against neighbouring
countries.

18. In this connexion,
the position of the Soviet
Union is quite clear. It has always been clear on the
question of decolonization
since the United Nations
first adopted its well-known Declaration on decolonization [Grnertrl Assetnh1.y r.esolution 1514 (XV)].
We are firmly and consistantly
in favour of colonialism being abolished everywhere, once and for all.
We are firmly in favour of all peoples having complete
political and economic independence. We are, and have
been, in favour of assistance to every country fighting
for its independence against all forms of repression
and exploitation.
The Soviet State has always pursued
this policy and will continue to do so. At the recent
25th Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet
Union, the General Secretary of the Party’s Central
Committee, Comrade Brezhnev, said in his report:

22. Unfortunately,
I cannot fail to say something
about the statement made by one representative at this
morning’s meeting [189/sr meeting]. That representative touched upon a question which has no relation
at all to the item before us. He discussed the question
3

of Angola, once again repeating the sort of malicious
nonsense which we have come to expect from the
representatives of his country in various organs of the
United Nations. The Chinese have a saying which we
always recall: if you want to know someone, look at
his friends first. Who have been the-friends of that
delegation during the well-known events in Angola?
The racists in South Africa and a number of imperialist
circles from those countries which did not help Angola
to become independent but struggled against the independence of Angola, against the legitimate Government
of Angola, helping the illegal and fractious elements
and mercenaries.
These .were China’s friends in
Angola.
23. As to the Soviet Union’s attitude towards the
peoples’ struggle for liberation, this is what is said in
the report of the General Secretary of our Party,
Mr. Brezhnev, to the 25th Congress in connexion
with Angola:
take the People’s Republic of Angola. As soon
as it was born, this progressive State became on
object of foreign intervention,
the handiwork of
imperialism
and South African racists, the mortal
enemies of independent Africa, and also those who
undertook the unseemly role of their henchmen.
That was why Angola’s struggle for independence
was supported by the world’s progressive forces,
and the success of this struggle testified once again
that nothing can crush the peoples’ the aspiration
to freedom.
. . .

“The Soviet Union’s attitude to the complicated
processes taking place within the developing countries is clear and definite. The Soviet Union does not
interfere in the internal affairs of other countries
and peoples. It is an immutable
principle of our
Leninist foreign policy to respect the sacred right of
every people, every country, to choose its own way
of development.
But we do not conceal our views.
In the developing countries, as everywhere else,
we are on the side of the forces of progress,
democracy and national independence and regard
them as friends and comrades in struggle.”
The Soviet Union has frequently repeated tliis position. Our country has also been pursuing this policy
in Angola by helping the fraternal people of Angola to
defend and strengthen its independence.
24. You know who are the friends of the country of
the representative who spoke this morning: the group
which opposed the legal Government and disbanded,
since it had become clear to all that its struggle was
criminal, illegal and against the interests of the people.
25. I should like to finish here, because we shall have
another occasion to talk about this subsequently.
26. Mr. SAITO (Japan): Mr. President,, I should
like to’begin by congratulating you upon your ass‘ump-

tion of the presidency. My delegation feels confident
that your diplomatic
skill and experience will enable
you to guide our deliberations
successfully and that
with you in the chair the Council will live up to its
responsibilities
in the month of March.
27. I wish also to pay. a tribute to Ambassador
Moynihan
of the United States for his excellent
service as President last month. My delegation regrets
his decision to return to his duties at one of the great
American universities, but was delighted that he was
able nevertheless to continue his duties as President
of the Council during February. We should be grateful
if Ambassador Sherer would be kind enough to convey
our gratitude and good wishes to Mr. Moynihan.
28. I should like to extend a very warm welcome
to His Excellency Mr. Chissano, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the People’s Republic of Mozambique.
29. The delegation of Japan welcomes the decision
of the Government of the People’s Republic of Mozambique to close its borders and enforce sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia, effective from 3 March, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions.
I am confident that this courageous decision will prove
to be a fatal blow to the.Smith regime, whose overseas trade is dependent to a great extent upon Mozambique for access to world markets.
30. In 1968 the Security Council imposed mandatory
sanctions against Southern Rhodesia for the first time
in the history of the United Nations. Nevertheless,
the Smith regime has managed to withstand the effects
of concerted international
action by means of gaps
which resulted from the non-compliance
with sanctions
by South Africa and Portugal, which administered
Mozambique until it became independent last year.
..
3 1. My delegation has long believed that mandatory
sanctions of any kind will not have maximum effectiveness if they are not applied faithfully by all States,
without exception. In this context we believe that the
recent decision by the People’s Republic of Mozambique, which has close economic ties with Southern
Rhodesia through their common border, will have a
great impact on the Smith regime. It demonstrates
also the firm support of the people of Mozambique
for the people of Zimbabwe in their struggle for justice
and human dignity, which have so long been denied
them:
32. My delegation, however, recognizes at the same
time how seriously the people of Mozambique
wiiI be
affected economically
and socially by their decision.
Because of its geographical location, Mozambique’s
economy is ciosely related to that of Southern Rhodesia. This fact, and the serious consequences of the full
application of sanctions against Southern Rhodesia,
were eloquently explained by the Foreign Minister of
Mozambique
in his statement yesterday before the
Council. Inevitably, .Mozambique’s
decision to close

the border will markedly
affect Mozambique’s
economy as well. My delegation took note with the
utmost sympathy of the appeal made by the Foreign
Minister of Mozambique
for material assistance from
the international
community.

assistance. Hence those countries which are not
familiar with the types and methods of assistance
required can rely upon his advice regarding Mozambique’s most pressing needs.
38. Yesterday the Foreign Minister of Mozambique
gave us a most useful outline of the economic sacrifices
that his country’s decision to apply sanctions will
entail and the outside help that will be needed.

33. In fact, the international
community
has
applauded the decision of the People’s Republic of
Mozambique
and has already expressed its preparedness to supply the necessary assistance. The Organization of African Unity has appealed. for “massive
assistance’*. The Commonwealth
Sanctions Committee has made recommendations
impressing upon the
Commonwealth
Governments
the need to react
urgently in accordance with the agreement reached
at the Kingston heads of Government meeting.

39. In those circumstances
my delegation finds it
desirable that the. Council take urgent action calling
upon the international
community
to provide speedy
economic and financial assistance to Mozambique.
The Council’s adoption of a resolution to that effect,
and the full implementation
of that resolution by Memher’ States, will give another demonstration
of the
unshaken determination
of the United Nations to
establish justice and human dignity in Southern Rhodesia, where the people of Zimbabwe are still subjected
to white-supremacy
rule. Nobody will doubt that in
giving support to the people of Mozambique
we are in
fact .supporting the people of Zimbabwe in this just
cause. We are confident that the Council is united
in following this course, and that the international
community
will respond positively with moral and
material assistance to Mozambique.

34. In view of this background,
it is timely and
appropriate for the Security Council to take urgent and
concrete action, in response to the decision by the
People’s Republic of Mozambique,
to lighten the
additional
burden it assumed as a result of this
enormous sacrifice in the cause of justice.
35. My delegation is prepared to support any proposal
calling upon Member States to help meet the urgent
needs of Mozambique
which have arisen from its
implementation
of United Nations mandatory sanctions. Indeed, my delegation
hopes that Member
States, bearing in mind Articles 49 and 50 of the
Charter, will provide the necessary economic and
financial assistance to Mozambique
to enable it to
continue *to implement
fully the sanctions against
Southern Rhodesia. Therefore, I hope that Member
States will respond favourably to the Security Council’s appeal for assistance to Mozambique.
My delegation hopes that the Secretary-General
likewise will take
the urgent measures necessary to arrange systematic
assistance of all kinds to Mozambique
by organizing
the United Nations family to provide it, as he did
for Zambia in 1973.

40. In this spirit Japan has become a sponsor of
draft resolution S/12013, and we hope that it will be
adopted unanimously.
Japan has strongly supported
economic sanctions against Southern Rhodesia. We
responded quickly to the urgent needs of Zambia in
1973 by providing substantial amounts of assistance.
In the case of Mozambique,
Japan will do its best to
respond to the Council’s resolution by co-operating
with the international community.
In order to facilitate
that co-operation,
Japan is looking forward to the
earliest possible establishment of full diplomatic relations with the Government of Mozambique.
41. Let us now strengthen our solidarity with the
people of Zimbabwe and step up the pressure of the
international
community
by tightening the sanctions
against Southern Rhodesia. Let us help those who
suffer as a result of the implementation
of these
sanctions. Prompt and effective action by the Council
to help the people of Mozambique assuredly will bring
us a step nearer to a solution of the problem of Southern
Rhodesia, which is more urgent than ever.

36. As a general rule it is useful, as a first step,
to keep the international
community informed on the
pressing needs of a country that requires international
assistance. Accordingly,
my delegation believes that
from a practical point of view it is preferable to send
a mission to Mozambique to discuss with the People’s
Republic the types of goods urgently needed, the
quantities,
the priorities and other matters, so that
the assistance can be promptly
and effectively
provided.

42. Mr. BENNETT
(‘United States of America): Let
me first *congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council. My delegation looks
forward to working very closely with you and to giving
you every feasible support as the Council discusses
problems of major importance to us all.

37. However, we are fully aware of the gravity of
the situation and the necessity for the speedy supply
of assistance to Mozambique,
as has been emphasized
by the Foreign Minister of Mozambique
and other
speakers. We were delighted, therefore, to note that
after the adoption of the draft resolution under consideration, the Secretary-General
intends to send his
representative. to Mozambique
to discuss with’ the
Government methods of providing speedy and effective

43. I would like also to express appreciation for the
kind and generous remarks made by you and by other
members of the Council in respect to the Presidency of
the Council during the month of February. I am also
5

grateful for the statements of gracious wishes in regard
to Ambassador Scranton, the new Permanent Representative of the United States, who will be arriving
here this week to take up his new duties. I shall with.
much pleasure convey those wishes to him.

heavy financial burdens that it will incur by closing its
border with Rhodesia.
50. The United States remains unequivocal
in its
support for the efforts of the British Government to
bring an end to the rebellion in Rhodesia. We continue
to believe strongly that majority rule is a vital and
urgent necessity in Rhodesia. I call the Council’s
particular attention to the statement in Chicago by
President Ford on 13 March:

44. The delegation of the United States is pleased
to join with the other delegations that have spoken to
commend the Government
of Mozambique
for its
decision to enforce fully mandatory sanctions against
the illegal Government
in Rhodesia. We believe this
decision represents a major step forward in the efforts
of the United Nations to enforce sanctions and,thereby
bring an end to minority rule in Rhodesia.

“The United States is totally dedicated to seeing
to it that the majority becomes the ruling power in
Rhodesia.‘*

45. It is the sincere hope of my Government that the
enforcement
of sanctions by Mozambique
will be
coupled with the adoption by the Council of a resolution on assistance to Mozambique
which is placed
in the context of Article 50 of the Charter. We believe
that the support of the ‘Council for Mozambique will be
a clear sign to the regime in Salisbury that the United
Nations is committed
to the peaceful transition to
majority rule which ‘is so urgently needed in that
country.

The President

added:

“If we believe in the right of the majority to rule
in that situation, there has to be a change in the
power as far as the Government
is concerned.
Whether it can be done is a question that we have
to face. The British Government has tried for years
to get Smith to move. The United States has been
pushing. I think they just have to move, and if they
don’t... we have to be on the right side morally,
and the right side morally is to be for majority rule.”

46. Accordingly, the United States will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before us [S/12013], because
we take its purpose to be twofold: first, to issue an
appeal for assistance to Mozambique under Article 50
of the Charter, as Mozambique
has properly and commendably imposed sanctions on Rhodesia’s minority
Government
and accordingly
has reason to seek
recourse under Article 50; and secondly, to demonstrate that the Council speaks with one voice on
Rhodesian matters. There should be no doubt that
the Council favours the urgent implementation
of
majority rule in Rhodesia.

On 16 March-yesterday-Secretary
singer made the following statement
Foreign Relations Committee:

of State Risto the Senate

“In Southern Rhodesia we are not supporting the
white Government or the white authorities...
I; in
this statement before the Committee,
again made
clear that we stand for majority rule and we will do
nothing to support the white minority to continue
to exercise authority in Rhodesia.
“So what we can do about it in any given
instance depends on the circumstances, but we have
to make clear what we stand for, and then we have
to work towards it.”

47. I shall have to say frankly that we are disappointed
that the draft resolution contains a number of elements
which do not bear on its main objectives. The charges
of aggression in the third paragraph of the preamble
and in operative paragraph 2 undoubtedly
deserve
careful attention.
But my Government
wishes to
make clear that it does not regard them as related to
the appeal which the Council is making on behalf of
Mozambique
under Article 50. We view that appeal
as premised solely on Mozambique’s
compliance with
resolutions 232 (1966) and 253 (1968) and the costs
which ensue from that compliance.

5 1. I believe these statements make very clear where
the United States stands on the Rhodesian question.
It is time for true self-determination
and for majority
rule in Rhodesia.
52.

Mr. BOYD (Panama) (interpretafion from SpanSir, in speaking for the first time in the month
of March, it is my very pleasant duty to convey to
you the most cordial greetings of the delegation of
Panama on your assumption of the Presidency of the
Security Council, as well as to assure you of our full
co-operation for the success of your delicate mission.

ish):

48. We would normally have abstained on this draft
resolution because of the insertion’of those references.
In fact, we did so in a similar situation in the Council
in 1973. Today, however, we shall vote in favour,
with the explanation I have just given, in order to leave
no doubt that we support the principal purpose of this
draft resolution as well as the purpose of resolutions
232 (1966) and 253 (1968), which it reinforces.

53. We should like to express our thanks to the
outgoing
President,
Ambassador
Daniel
Patrick
Moynihan,
for the appropriate manner in which he
discharged his functions during the month of February,
a period during which he guided our debates with
fairness and skill.

49. My Government
will give favourable consideration to assistance to Mozambique
in offsetting the
6

once again its strong anti-colonialist
position against
all forms of discrimination,
in particular against racial
discrimination.

54. In considering the request of the Government of
Mozambique
contained in the agenda, we should like
to commence ,our statement by expressing our warm
thanks for the presentation
of the situation made
yesterday afternoon by the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Mozambique,
Mr. Joaquim Albert0 Chissano, who
came to New York especially for that purpose. We
also thought it was very good to have the reminder
given us by the Minister for External Affairs of
Jamaica, Mr. Dudley Thompson, of the meeting held
at Kingston in May 1975, in which there was a
discussion of, among other things, methods of assistance to Mozambique
in connexion with its present
situation vis-&is
Southern Rhodesia.

60. From the very outset we supported the sanctions
against the illegal regime of Ian Smith. And, although
we do not believe that the sanctions imposed against
the Salisbury Government
by the international
community have had the desired effect on that racist
regime, we do believe that prolonged isolation has
been fostering a situation of progressive deterioration
which in becoming increasingly -more serious for the
oppressors. The attitude adopted by Mozambique
will be of considerable
assistance in getting the
usurping regime, in one way or another, to abandon
its policy of exploitation
and slavery of the majority
of the population,
which alone should decide the
destiny of Southern Rhodesia.

55. The decision taken on 3 March by the newly
independent
People’s Republic of Mozambique
to
implement
fully the sanctions called for in United
Nations resolutions
against the illegal regime in
Rhodesia, such as the closing of borders and the
suspension of all forms of communication
with that
country, has had considerable impact on some of the
basic sectors of Mozambique’s
economy.

61. Panama has suffered for almost all of this century
because of the discriminatory
policy that has been
followed by the Government of the United States in the
so-called Panama Canal Zone. We know what racial
discrimination
is when it comes to wages and opportunities! to education, to housing and any kind of
discrimmation
for reason of skin colour, because we
have suffered it in our own flesh and on our own
soil.

56. As we all know, the colonial type of economy
developed by Portugal in Mozambique had established
close links between that country and the racist regimes
of South Africa and Rhodesia. The ports and the whole.
communications
network . between South Africa,
Rhodesia and Mozambique
are very closely interwoven. Mozambican
manpower
was utilized
in
Rhodesia and South Africa for work in the mines
and on farms in return for ridiculously
low wages.
Mozambique
supplied raw materials and fuel to those
countries at low prices and, as a result, was the
logical market for South African and Rhodesian
products.

62. The Government
of Panama is of the view that
the economic sanctions against Southern Rhodesia,
even though they are .not as effective as we would
want, do constitute a form of pressure against the
rebellious regime, and we advocate that these sanctions
be applied in the broadest and most rigorous possible
manner.

57.. Mr. Chissano explained to us in clear and specific
terms why it has become necessary to transform the
economy of his country, for which purpose annual
compensation
equivalent
to $49 million
will be
required. I believe I speak for Panama and all Latin
America in saying that it is up to the United Nations
and all Member States to fulfil the obligation
of
assisting Mozambique, just as was done in the similar
case of Zambia, in order to offset the adverse economic
consequences and the problems which it has to confront as the result of the closure of its borders with
Southern Rhodesia.

63. We have co-sponsored with great sympathy draft
resolution
S/12013, which aims at putting .forward
concerted measures on the part of the international
community
to provide
financial,
technical
and
material assistance on an emergency basis to Mozambique. We have no -doubt that the adoption of this
draft resolution will have a favourable impact in the
struggle to reaffirm the inalienable right of the people
of Zimbabwe to self-determination
and independence.
64. The present Revolutionary
Government
of
Panama, conscious of its anti-colonialist
position and
being an advocate of any policy which runs counter to
any type of discrimination,
takes this opportunity
to
state once again that it wishes to help the Government and people of Mozambique
in their valiant
attitude in the face of the illegal regime of Ian Smith,
at the same time as we express solidarity with the
people of Zimbabwe, which we hope will very soon be
legitimately
represented in the United Nations.

58. I am certain that the Security Council is in favour
of giving the Secretary-General
the necessary authorization to study, by joint agreement with the Govem-merit of Mozambique,
the means to provide the
necessary technology
and to make the necessary
efforts to obtain appropriate
financing in order to
carry out those projects which would make it possible
to create in Mozambique
new structures and sources
of employment.

65. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpretcrtion
from French):
I will now make a statement in my capacity as representative of BENIN.

59. In connexion
with the problem of Southern
Rhodesia, the delegation of Panama wishes to restate
7

66. My delegation
is gratified that our brother
Joaquim Albert0 Chissano, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the People’s Republic of Mozambique,
is
participating in our discussions. His clear and precise
statement has, without a shadow of a doubt, made it
possible for all Council members to have a very clear
idea of the immediate and long-term needs of Mozambique as a result of the courageous and historic decision taken by the Government and the people of that
young People’s Republic, mobilized
by FRELIMO
[Front jiw fhe Liberation
of ‘Mozambique], to apply
the economic sanctions imposed by the United Nations
against the rebellious racist minority regime of Ian
Smith, which was illegally set up by a handful of whites
in Zimbabwe.
My delegation
would ,also like to
welcome the participation
in our discussions of the
Minister for External Affairs of Jamaica, -Mr. Dudley
Thompson. His statement to the Council yesterday is
an eloquent proof of the commitment
of his country,
which is a member of the non-aligned movement and
which hosted the last Commonwealth
Conference,
where the important
decision was taken to help
Mozambique,
once it became independent, if it were to
seek’to, apply the sanctions of the Council against
Rhodesia as ,part of its struggle against the minority
regimes in southern Africa. My delegation welcomes
that decision taken by the Commonwealth
heads of
State, which was a very forward-looking
one and
which will undoubtedly have a practical impact.

Ian Smith as it continues indefinitely
to defy our
Organization,
We cannot but be proud of the courage
and the patriotism evinced by the People’s Republic
of Mozambique.
69. This is a serious warning to the minority regimes
in southern Africa.‘Smith
and his regime will have to
understand that this is no longer the time for political
manceuvres to mislead national opinion and that the
time has now arrived for serious negotiations with the
overwhelming
black majority, in order to set up in
Zimbabwe a Government which reflects the real social
physiognomy of the country. Smith and his regime must
understand that the noose is tightening closer and
closer around them, and as certain delegations have
suggested, it is necessary to take advantage of the last
chance for a transfer of power to the black majority
without too much bloodshed. Smith and his regime
must understand that the incursions of their police
forces into the territory of Mozambique
will not be
enough to intimidate an entire people which is resolute
and mobilized side by side with the Zimbabwe liberation movement and that, as Mr; Chissano has said,
the people of Mozambique is prepared to answer any
acts of provocation coming from Southern, Rhodesia.
70. As I said at the beginning of this statement,
Mozambique’s
record is clear and we must act so that
Smith may realize that Mozambique
enjoys the
effective support of the international
community as a
whole, and that, thanks to its national will and the
various kinds of assistance our community
is giving
it, it is determined to wage a long and decisive struggle
which will lead the black majority of Zimbabwe to
final victory. Serious warnings must be given to Smith
and his regime in the form of a resolute condemnation of the acts of aggression against Mozambique,
and all of Africa and the international
Organization
must commit themselves to give that country the
military and material support necessary to rebuff any
incursion and, if need be, to carry the war into the
heart of Southern Rhodesia.

67. ,Jf any doubt existed earlier about its importance
and scope, I think that now, after having heard the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mozambique,
we can
appreciate the full measure of the sacrifice involved in
the decision of the Government of Mozambique which
was publicly announced by President Samora Machel
in his statement of 3 March [S/12005]. The People’s
Republic of .Benin warmly welcomes that heroic act,
which will go down as an important date in the history
of the decolonization
of southern Africa, and pledges
itself to render this fraternal country all the necessary
political, material and moral assistance which it needs
to pursue its new national policy which is in accordance
with the main policies of the Organization of African
Unity and the decisions of the United Nations. For its
part, the Central Committee of the People’s Revolution
Party of Benin, which met on 9 March, proclaimed
“its militant. support to Mozambique
in its struggle
against racism, apartheid and neo-colonialism”.

71. That is why my delegation hopes that the draft
resolution now before the Council, which our brother
Ambassador Salim of Tanzania introduced
so eloquently yesterday, will be unreservedly
supported
and unanimously
adopted, so that the SecretaryGeneral can immediately get down to the work required
in order to give the People’s Republic of Mozambique
urgently needed help pending an assessment and future
action on the part of the Organization.
This text is
the very least Africa could ask for in the present
,
context.’

68. The political act just accomplished
by Mozambique will be better understood if it is realized that the
economy of that country is closely linked with the
economy of the racist minority regimes which have
been set up in southern Africa and whose time is now
running out. Furthermore,
if we take into account the
fact that certain other countries, .which because of
their distant locations and their economic power would
have ‘no’ difficulty in applying these economic sanctions to give force and credibility to the decisions of
the Council, take pleasure in a flagrant violation of the
sanctions, thus supporting the rebellious regime of

72. -Before concluding my remarks, I should like to
draw the attention of the members of the Council to
the. fact that the Co-ordinating
Committee
of NonAligned Countries met in New York on Tuesday,
16 March, and published the following declaration:
“The Co-ordinating
Committee
of Non-Aligned’
Countries met in New York on Tuesday, 16 March
8

1976. On that occasion, it heard the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mozambique,
who gave an
account of the situation prevailing in his country.

social imperialists
in their intervention
and aggression in Angola. Therefore, I am not going to say much
now.

“The
Minister
for Foreign Affairs informed
members of the aggression which has been perpetrated by the illegal regime of Salisbury against
the People’s Republic-of Mozambique
and recalled
the steps taken by his Government
against Rhodesia ‘pursuant to the pertinent resolutions. of the
General Assembly and the Security Council.

76. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
I call on the representative of the Soviet Union, who
wishes to exercise his right of reply.
77. Mr. KHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation
$0,
Russian): The only
thing I agree with is that there will be a time when
we shall speak about this in the open with the representative that has just spoken. He should be afraid of
such a discussion. He will appear in a very bad light.
All we will have to say is that those they helped have
refused their assistance. The legitimate Government of
Angola is developing
its economy and is growing
stronger. But we shall return to this. I do not know
why he needs to say all this. Perhaps he is afraid of
suffering the fate of certain other politicians who have
experienced misfortune in China. That is their own
internal affair; we shall not intervene in it.

“The Co-ordinating
Committee expresses fervent
indignation
at the cowardly aggression which has
been visited upon Mozambique
by the illegal regime
of Salisbury.
“The Coordinating
Committee
expresses its
active and total solidarity with the Government and
people of Mozambique
in their struggle to consolidate their independence
and their territorial
integrity.
Therefore
it supports the courageous
steps taken by the Government
of the People’s
Republic of Mozambique
which are designed to
strengthen the sanctions adopted by the United
Nations and are ,an important and positive contribution to the struggle waged by the people of Zimbabwe
for its liberty and its independence.

78. As far as Africa is concerned, I should once
again like to say that we shall continue the policy
announced at the 25th Congress of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union. In Africa, we want only
one thing: to help the peoples to liberate themselves
from the colonial yoke, from neocolonialism,
racism
and uparthrid.
We want nothing else in Africa. We
have said so clearly, and I repeat once more that-we
shall continue to pursue this policy.

“On this occasion, the Co-ordinating
Committee,
in accordance with the decisions taken by the heads
of State,and Government of Non-Aligned Countries,
reaffirms its indefatigable support for the liberation
struggle waged by African peoples which are the
victims of colonial oppression and domination.
It
makes an urgent appeal to all members of the nonaligned movement
and to the international
community as a whole to provide immediate and effective assistance’ in order to shore up the economy
of the ‘young Republic of Mozambique
and to step
up aid to the movement
for the liberation
of
Zimbabwe.”

79. As far as. statements of the representative of
China are concerned, he is simply repeating what
we have already heard dozens of times from him and
of which everyone has hed enough. Repetition does
not make a lie true. Repetition of untruths never have
and never will convince anyone.
80. The PRESIDENT
(intermetution
from French):
As no other representative wishes to speak, I take -it
that the -Council is now ready to proceed to a vote
on the draft resolution contained in document S/12013.

73. In mv canacitv as PRESIDENT.
I now call on
the representaiive
of China, who wishes to exercise
his right, of reply.
r

*

A vote wus taken by show of hands.

74. Mr. HUANG
Hua (China) (trunslufion
from
Chinese): The crimes committed by the Soviet social
imperialists in Angola represent a big exposure of the
policy of expansion they are pushing in southern
Africa. They constitute a new evidence of the ambitious
new Tsars’ feverish quest for world hegemony. No
matter what justification
the Soviet representative
made, he could never erase the above criminal record.

The resolution

wus adopted unanimously.1

81. The PRESIDENT
(interprerurion fi&
French):
The Secretary-General
has expressed the wish to make
a statement, and I now call on him.
82. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
The decision
by the Government of Mozambique to close its borders
with Southern Rhodesia and to join in the imposition
of sanctions against that country, as well as the action
which has now been taken by the Council in support
of that decision, are developments which will doubtless
have a profound effect on the course of events in
Southern
Rhodesia.
These developments
will be
welcomed by the international
community,
since they

75. As to the slanderous charges made by the Soviet
representative,
they cannot do the slightest harm to
the image of the Chinese Government and people. On
the contrary, they can only reveal the despicable
nature, of a liar. We believe that there will be opportunities to expose the crimes committed by the Soviet
9

,

add a new impetus and dimension to the measures
already taken by the United Nations to end the illegal
regime in that country.

has given us on the steps he intends to take to implement the resolution that has just been adopted.
90. I now call on the Minister
of Mozambique.

83. The Foreign Minister of Mozambique,
Mr. Chissano, has given the Council a clear picture of the
social and economic consequences of his country’s
decision to apply sanctions, and we can have no
doubt about the special nature and the magnitude of
the problems which now confront Mozambique. There
is obviously an urgent need for a generous programme
of international
assistance commensurate
with the
realities of the situation.

for Foreign

Affairs

91, Mr. CHISSANO
(Mozambique):
As we draw
near the end of the work of this meeting, I should like
to express our appreciation for the way in which the
work was carried out and for the interest shown in
our problem by the member States of the Council as
well as by other delegations that participated in the
debate. We did not expect other than this result,
since the problemdiscussed
here concerns all mankind,
because the liberty won by the people of Mozambique
and the struggle for the liberation of Zimbabwe are
at stake today.

84. I am happy to state that a number of countries
have already indicated their willingness to provide
financial and material assistance on either a bilateral
or a multilateral
basis. However, it is my earnest
hope that there will be a prompt and most favourable
response from all Member States to the appeal of the
Council.

92. In our initial intervention
[189&h meeting], we
drew the attention of the Council to the grave crisis
that my country is undergoing because of the application of sanctions. However, we did not and could not
go into all the details. We only touched on the essential
points. Meanwhile our description of the situation has
been enriched by the precious contributions
made by
the various speakers during their interventions.

85. I need not underline the fact that the co-operative
effort and shared responsibility
demanded by this
situation derive their validity from Articles 49 and 50
of the Charter, since Mozambique
is without doubt
confronted, in the words of Article 50, “with special
economic problems arising from the carrying out of
[enforcement]
measures”.

93. It is a pleasure for us to record the fact that the
international
community closely follows the evolution
of the situation in our part of the world. We are
returning home with confidence, for we know that the
international community understands very well that the
solution of this crisis does not depend on temporary
measures, but on basic ones which are capable of
altering the nature of the economic structure existing
in Mozambique.
From the various statements we have
noted that the Council is aware of the need to delve
deeply into the causes of the crisis and not merely to
examine them superliciaily.
The Council is’ also aware
of the need to tackle the roots of the evil, namely,
the economic structures inherited from Portuguese
colonialism.

86. Let me assure the Council that I will do everything I can to organize all possible assistance to
Mozambique
in accordance with the terms of the
resolution adopted ‘a few minutes ago. I will certainly
undertake this task in close consultation
with the
Government of Mozambique and in collaboration with
the appropriate agencies of the United Nations system.
87. I have taken careful note of the special needs
of Mozambique
which have been outlined by the
Foreign Minister with such clarity. I will continue
my talks with him while he is here in New York,
and it is my intention to dispatch a mission to Maputo
without delay so that detailed discussions can be held
with the Government
of Mozambique.
The mission
will have as its prime objective the organization of
an effective programme of financial, economic and
technical assistance, geared to the immediate and longterm needs of the country. On the basis of those discussions, I shall not fail to address myself again to the
international
community
and to provide detailed
information
on the requirements
of Mozambique
to
enable it to cope with the new situation.

94. We are certain that in addition to the contribution of $57 million
requested by my country for
immediate
assistance, the international
community
will not fail to pool its efforts to help Mozambique
in
solving many problems, the quantification
of which
has not yet been possible. Examples include compensation to maintain the prices of goods previously
imported from Rhodesia; support for the establishment of alternative
airports; compensation
for the
increase of telephone tariffs and for the suspension of
our airline services; support for solutions of the
problem of electric power which came from Rhodesia
to some of our towns; support for the creationof new
employment
by establishing communal villages, the
construction
of new communication
infrastructures
and the thorough exploration and proper utilization of
natural resources; support for the development
of
alternative ways of communication
and transport for
the Mozambican products which were previously sent
across Rhodesia to various parts of our country.

88. Finally, special care will be taken by my off&
to ensure maximum co-ordination among the various
United Nations agencies in order to extend to the
Government and the people of Mozambique
the most
efficient help and assistance.
89. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
jkom French):
I thank the Secretary-General
for the clarification he
10

95. I should like to thank those countries that have
expressed commitments
to assist us on a bilateral
basis, in addition to their multilateral
contributions.
I thank all the countries that sponsored the draft
resolution just adopted. The fact that it was adopted
unanimously encourages us and assures us that it will
be supported by all Member States representing the
international
community.

efforts and sacrifices made by the people of Mozambique on behalf of international
peace and security
and for the liberation of mankind.
98. I should like to assure the Council that Mozambique will spare no effort to support the liberation
struggle of the peoples still under colonial domination,
and particularly
the struggle of the people of
Zimbabwe.

96. We are convinced that the Secretary-General,
to
whom we repeat our confidence, will exert all efforts
in co-operation with us in order to find a solution to
the problems which I have just enumerated, without
prejudice to the task of channelling immediate support
valued at $57 million, as immediate assistance for the
solution of the already quantified problems.

99. Finally, Mr. President, we should like to express
our appreciation for the brilliant manner in which you
conducted these meetings. We are convinced that the
success of these deliberations is due to a great extent
to your efforts. We- would like to congratulate you for
that.

97. I should like to seize this opportunity to express
our thanks for the kind words addressed to our country
and people, as well as to our President, Comrade
Samora Machel. Such words are a guarantee that the
international
community fully appreciates the modest

The meeting

rose at 5.40 p.m.
Notes

1 See resolution

11

386 (1976).

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans Ies librairies et les agencesdepositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adresser-vous t : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK

IIOXY’INTb

HSAAHHR

OPI-AHH

3AIVUi

OlYFaE~RHEHHhIX

HAIUiR

H3naKKK OpraKu3axtKK 06ze~aKe~~~x
HautrR MOIKHO rynw~b a KHHIKHLIX YaraxiHaK H ar%%iTelaax ao Kcex pakoxax Mapa. HaBonsTe CnpaBKu 06 AJABHRRX B
BarneM KHWXHOM MarasKKe HUH nK~l&i~e no anpecy : OpraHKsauna 06zeAHHeHtrbrX
Has&. Ce~u~n no X’XpO$WBCe
HWtaKKR, HLK)-MOPK ells XeHetra.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicacioncs de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librerias y u~sas distribuidoras en
todas panes del mundo. Consulte a su libre.ro o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United Nations, New York

00300

83-60801-4&y

1984-2,200
