V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

(d) To identify, through the programmatic approach, emerging environmental problems and to
propose solutions;
(e) To manage a separate environment fund as
an integral part of the programmatic process;
(f) To advocate and articulate the interdependence of environment and development;
(g) To respond to the environmental problems
of both developed and developing countries;
( h) To respond to the environmental problems
of human settlements, which are an integral part of
the human environment;
3. Decides to maintain at this stage the present
arrangements, without prejudice to any decision the
General Assembly might take as regards the restructuring of the economic and social sectors of the United
Nations system.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976

31/113.

Specific measures to meet the need for
a decent living environment for the
most vulnerable groups of society

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind that Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, in its recommendations
A.4, B.3, B.12, C.4, C.14, C.15 and E.4, called for
specific measures to be taken to meet the need for a
decent living environment for the most vulnerable
groups of society, 33
Considering that human settlement policies are inseparable from the goals of the social and economic
sectors, and that consequently solutions to the problems
of such settlements must be conceived as an integral
part of the development process of individual nations
and the world community,
1. Requests Member States and the SecretaryGeneral, when planning the implementation of the
aforementioned recommendations adopted at Habitat:
United Nations Conference on Human Settlements, to
bear in mind the measures that protect the decent living environment of the most vulnerable social groups,
such as children, youth, the elderly and the handicapped, so that they may live in an environment which
is equally accessible to all individuals;
2. Further requests the Secretary-General to report
to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session,
through the Economic and Social Council, on the
measures taken and the results obtained.
101 st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31/114.

Collaboration
between
the
United
Nations and non-governmental organizations with regard to world-wide intercommunal co-operation

The General Assembly,
Recalling the results of Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements,
33 See Report of Habitat: United Nations Conference on
Human Settlements (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.7 and corrigendum), chap. II.

61

Aware of the importance and global nature of the
phenomenon of urbanization,
Noting that uncontrolled urbanization is one of the
causes of the deterioration in living conditions in human
settlements,
Stressing the need for harmonization of intergovernmental action and intereommunal action with regard
to human settlements,
Recognizing the role that the competent non-governmental organizations can play in solving the problems
facing local communities,
Noting that non-governmental organizations such as
the United Towns Organization and the International
Union of Local Authorities, which are in consultative
status, in category I, with the Economic and Social
Council, have offered their collaboration with the United
Nations in the field of human settlements,
Recalling its resolution 2861 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 concerning world-wide intercommunal cooperation, which stressed the role played in that sphere
by the United Towns Organization,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution 1738 (LIV) of 4 May 1973 on international
co-operation between municipalities,
I. Invites the Secretary-General to ensure that the
international bodies responsible for implementing the
relevant recommendations of Habitat: United Nations
Conference on Human Settlements:
(a) Study the specific possibilities and effective
conditions for collaboration between the United Nations
and the non-governmental organizations concerned;
( b) Draw up with those organizations programmes
of collaboration;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Economic and Social Council at its sixty-fifth session
on the evolution of those programmes.
101st plenary meeting
16 December 1976
31; 115.

United Nations Audio-Visual Information Centre on Human Settlements

The General Assembly,
Noting resolution 5 of Habitat: United Nations Conference on Human Settlements on post-Conference use
of audio-visual material, 34
Expressing its appreciation for the support and assistance in preparing the audio-visual material for the
Conference provided by national and international organizations, particularly the United Nations Environment Programme,
Convinced that the audio-visual and related material
prepared for the Conference constitutes an information
resource of continuing value for the effective implementation of recommendations for national action, programmes for international co-operation and the realization of goals in the field of human settlements
established by the Conference,
Recognizing that prompt and effective utilization of
the information resource created for the Conference is
:;4 I bid., chap. 111.
