130

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

6. Requests the Government of France to consider
the result of the referendum in its totality, thus respecting the territorial integrity of the future State;
7. Demands that the Government of France withdraw its military base from the Territory without delay;
8. Further calls upon the Government of France to
allow and facilitate the return to the Territory of all
refugees who are bona fide c\tiz~ns of the T_erritory, _in
accordance with the Organization of African Umty
Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of Refugee
Problems in Africa of 10 September 1969 and the
Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951 ;73
9. Requests the Government of France, in order to
ensure the implementation of the request contained in
paragraph 8 above, to set up an ad hoe committee in
accordance with the recommendation of the FactFinding Mission of the Organization of African Unity;74
10. Reaffirms its resolution 3480 (XXX);
l l. Endorses all resolutions adopted by the Organization of African Unity on the question of so-called
French Somaliland (Djibouti), in particular resolutions CM/Res.431/Rev.1 (XXV) 75 and CM/Res.480
(XXVII) ,76 as well as the declaration adopted by the
Organization of African Unity Co-ordinating Committee for the Liberation of Africa, as approved by the
Council of Ministers at its twenty-seventh ordinary session and the Assembly of Heads of State and Government at its thirteenth ordinary session, and welcomes
the solemn declarations by the leaders of the delegations
of Ethiopia and Somalia before the Council of Ministers of the Organization of African Unity and before
the Fourth Committee of the General Assembly that
their Governments would recognize, respect and honour
the independence and sovereignty of so-called French
Somaliland (Djibouti) and its territorial integrity after
its accession to independence;
12. Calls upon all States to refrain from interfering
in the internal affairs of the Territory and to abstain
from any action likely to impede or adversely affect the
current process of the country's accession to independence;
13. Welcomes the statements by the representatives
of the people of so-called French Somaliland (Djibouti)
in which they declared that the Territory would become
a member of the United Nations and of the Organization of African Unity immediately after independence;
14. Endorses the decisions of the Organization of
African Unity and the United Nations to send representatives to observe the referendum and all subsequent
stages of the independence process to ensure that the
principle of self-determination in the Territory is carried out smoothly and in the most democratic manner; 77
73 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2545, p. 137.
7 4 See Organization of African Unity document CM/759

(XXVII), 1976.
75 See A/10297, annex I.
76 See A/31/ 196 and Corr. I, annex.
77 The Secretary-General subsequently announced (A/32/
66) that, in accordance with the understanding reached when
resolution 31/59 was adopted, he had carried out the necessary
consultations with the parties concerned and had appointed
Norway, Sri Lanka and Venezuela as members of the United
Nations Mission to Observe the Referendum and Elections in
French Somaliland (Djibouti), and that the three Member
States concerned had designated the following persons to represent them on the Mission: Mr. Ignatius B. Fonseka (Sri
Lanka), Miss Maria Clemencia Lopez (Venezuela) and
Mr. Tom Eric Vraalsen (Norway).

15. Urges all Member States, the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations
system, in co-operation with the admi1;1isteri~g Power,
to render all possible moral and material assistance to
the people of the Territory.
85th plenary meeting
I December 1976

31/146.

Situation in Namibia resulting from the
illegal occupation of the Territory by
South Africa

The General Assembly,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for Namibia 7 R and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 79
Having heard the statements of the representative of
the South West Africa People's Organization, who
participated in an observer capacity in the consideration
of the item by the Fourth Committee, 80
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling, in particular, its resolutions 2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19 May 1967
and subsequent resolutions of both the General Assembly and the Security Council relating to the question of
Namibia, as well as the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, 81 delivered
in response to the request addressed to it by the Council in its resolution 284 ( 1970) of 29 July 1970,
Taking into consideration the relevant resolution
adopted by the Council of Ministers of the Organization
of African Unity at its twenty-seventh ordinary session, 82 and subsequently endorsed by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its thirteenth ordinary session, held at
Port Louis from 2 to 6 July 1976,
Also taking into consideration the relevant part of
the Political Declaration and the resolution relating to
Namibia adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of
State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, 83
Reaffirming that the Territory and people of Namibia
are the direct responsibility of the United Nations and
that the Namibian people must be enabled to attain selfdetermination and independence within a united Namibia,
Strongly deploring South Africa's continued refusal
to comply with the resolutions and decisions of the
78 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24).
79 Ibid., Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chaps. I, II,
IV-VII and IX.
BO !hid., Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 30th and
45th meetings.
81 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence
of South Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding Security Council Resolution 276 (1970), Advisory Opinion,
I.CJ. Reports 1971, p. 16.
8 2 A/31/196 and Corr.l, annex, resolution CM/Res.SOO
(XXVII).
s3 A/31/197, annex I, paras. 52-55, and annex IV, sect. A,
resolution 3.

VII.

Resolutio1111 adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

United Nations, its continued illegal occupation of Namibia, its brutal repression of the Namibian people and
its persistent violation of their human rights, as well
as its efforts to destroy the national unity and territorial
integrity of Namibia,
Strongly condemning attempts by South Africa,
through the convening of a so-called constitutional conference, to perpetuate its colonial exploitation of the
people and resources of Namibia by misrepresenting
the genuine aspirations of the Namibian people,
Gravely concerned at the militarization of Namibia
by the illegal occupation regime of South Africa, its
threats and acts of aggression against independent African countries and the forceful removal of Namibians
from the northern border of the Territory for military
purposes,
Strongly deploring the policies of those States which,
despite the relevant decisions of the United Nations and
the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971, continue to maintain diplomatic,
economic, consular and other relations with South Africa, purporting to act on behalf of or concerning Namibia, as well as military or strategic collaboration, all
of which has the effect of supporting or encouraging
South Africa in its defiance of the United Nations,
Recognizing that the situation in Namibia constitutes
a threat to international peace and security,
Noting with satisfaction the opposition of the Namibian people to South Africa's illegal presence in the
Territory and to its oppressive racist policies and, in
particular, the progress of their struggle in all its forms
for national liberation under the leadership of the South
West Africa People's Organization,
Strongly supporting the efforts of the United Nations
Council for Namibia in the discharge of the responsibilities entrusted to it by the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination, freedom and national
independence in a united Namibia, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and as recognized in
resolutions 1514 (XV) and 2145 (XXI) as well as
subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly relating
to Namibia, and the legitimacy of their struggle by all
means at their disposal against the illegal occupation
of their Territory by South Africa;
2. Recognizes that the national liberation movement
of Namibia, the South West Africa People's Organization, is the sole and authentic representative of the
Namibian people;
3. Supports the armed struggle of the Namibian
people, led by the South West Africa People's Organization, to achieve self-determination, freedom and national independence in a united Namibia;
4. Appeals to all Member States to grant all necessary support and assistance to the South West Africa
People's Organization in its struggle to achieve independence and national unity for Namibia;
5. Requests all specialized agencies and other or~anizations 'Yithin 0e United ~ations system to prepare,
m consultation with the Umted Nations Council for
Namibia and within their respective spheres of competence, programmes of assistance to the people of
Namibia and their liberation movement, the South West
Africa People's Organization;

131

----------·----

6. Decides to increase the financial provisions in
the budget of the United Nations Council for Namibia
to finance the office of the South West Africa People's
Organization in New York, in order to ensure the due
and proper representation of the people of Namibia
through the South West Africa People's Organization
at the United Nations;
7. Decides to continue to defray the expenses of a
representative of the South West Africa People's Organization, whenever the United Nations Council for
Namibia so requires;
8. Strongly condemns South Africa for its persistent
refusal to withdraw from Namibia and for its manoeuvres to consolidate its illegal occupation of the Territory;
9. Strongly condemns the illegal South African administration for its aggression against the Namibian
people and their national liberation movement;
10. Strongly condemns the illegal South African administration for its massive repression of the people of
Namibia and their liberation movement with the intention of establishing, among other things, an atmosphere
of intimidation and terror for the purpose of imposing
upon the Namibian people a bogus constitutional structure aimed at subverting the territorial integrity and
unity of Namibia and perpetuating a ruthless policy of
racial segregation;
11. Strongly condemns South Africa for its military build-up in Namibia, its threats and acts of aggression against independent African countries and the
forceful removal of Namibians from the northern border
of the Territory for military purposes;
12. Strongly condemns South Africa for organizing
the so-called constitutional talks at Windhoek, which
seek to perpetuate the apartheid and homelands policies
as well as the colonial oppression and exploitation of
the people and resources of Namibia by misrepresenting
the genuine aspirations of the Namibian people for selfdetermination, freedom and national independence in a
united Namibia;
13. Urgently calls upon the international community, especially all Member States, to refrain from according any recognition to, or co-operation with, any
authority which the illegal occupation regime may install
under the current fraudulent constitutional talks or any
other circumstances in Namibia;
14. Strongly condemns the activities of all foreign
corporations operating in Namibia under the illegal administration of South Africa which are exploiting the
human and natural resources of the Territory, and demands that such exploitation cease forthwith;
15. Reaffirms that the activities of those corporations are illegal;
16_. . Decides that any independence talks regarding
Namibia must be between the representatives of South
Africa and the South West Africa People's Organization,
under the auspices of the United Nations, for the sole
purpose of discussing the modalities for the transfer of
power to the people of Namibia;
_17. Req~ests all ;Member States to co-operate fully
with the Umted Nat10ns Council for Namibia in discharging the mandate entrusted to it under the terms
and provisions of General Assembly resolution 2248
(S-V);
18. Condemns South Africa for its persistent refusal to comply with the pertinent resolutions of the

132

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

Security Council, in particular resolution 385 (1976)
of 30 January 1976;
19. Demands that South Africa put an end to extending apartheid in Namibia and to its policy of "bantustanization" of the Territory, aimed at destroying the
national unity and the territorial integrity of Namibia;
20. Demands that South Africa release all Namibian
political prisoners, including all those imprisoned or
detained in connexion with offences under so-called
internal security laws, whether such Namibians have
been charged or tried or are held without charge and
whether held in Namibia or South Africa;
21. Declares that, in order that the people of Namibia shall be enabled freely to determine their own
future, it is imperative that free elections under the
supervision and control of the United Nations be held
urgently in the whole of Namibia as one political entity;
22. Demands that South Africa accord unconditionally to all Namibians currently in exile for political
reasons full facilities for their return to their country
without risk of arrest, detention, intimidation or imprisonment;
23. Reiterates that the illegal occupation of Namibia
and the war being waged there by South Africa constitute a threat to international peace and security;
24. Declares that the continued illegal occupation
of Namibia by South Africa constitutes an act of aggression against the Namibian people and against the
United Nations as the legal authority to administer the
Territory until independence;
25. Urges the Security Council to take up again
the question of Namibia, which is still on its agenda,
and, in view of South Africa's failure to comply with
Council resolution 385 (1976), to impose a mandatory
arms embargo against South Africa;
26. Requests all States to cease and desist from any
form of direct or indirect military consultation, cooperation or collaboration with South Africa;
27. Requests all States to take effective measures
to prevent the recruitment of mercenaries for service in
Namibia or South Africa;
28. Requests all States to take steps to ensure the
termination of all arms licensing agreements with South
Africa and to prohibit the transfer to South Africa of
all information relating to arms and armaments;
29. Requests all States to cease and prevent:
(a) Any supply of arms and ammunition to South
Africa;
(b) Any supply of aircraft, vehicles or military
equipment for the use of the armed forces and paramilitary or police organizations of South Africa;
( c) Any supply of spare parts for arms, vehicles
or military equipment used by the armed forces and
paramilitary or police organizations of South Africa;
( d) Any supply of so-called dual-use aircraft, vehicles or equipment which could be converted to military use by South Africa;
( e) Any activities in their countries which promote
or are calculated to promote the supply of arms, ammunition, military aircraft or military vehicles to South
Africa and the supply of equipment or materials for the
manufacture and maintenance of arms and ammunition
in South Africa and Namibia;

(f) Any co-operation or activities by public or
private corporations in conjunction with South Africa
in the development, directly or indirectly, of nuclear
technology, including the development of a nuclear
capability by the racist regime in South Africa;
30. Requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
105th plenary meeting
20 December 1976

:H/147.

Programme of work of the United
Nations Council for Namibia

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Namibia,
Having examined the report of the United Nations
Council for N arnibia 84 and the relevant chapters of the
report of the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 85
Recalling its resolution 2248 ( S-V) of 19 May 1967,
by which it established the United Nations Council for
Namibia as the legal administering authority of Namibia
until independence,
Reaffirming that the Territory and people of Namibia
are the direct responsibility of the United Nations and
that the Namibian people must be enabled to attain
self-determination and independence within a united
Namibia,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the United
Nations Council for Namibia in the discharge of the
responsibilities entrusted to it by resolution 2248 ( S-V)
and subsequent resolutions of the General Assembly
relating to Namibia,
1. Approves the report of the United Nations Council for Namibia, including the recommendations contained therein, 86 and decides to make adequate financial
provision for their implementation;
2. Decides that the United Nations Council for
Namibia, in the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 2248 (S-V), shall, among other functions
required for the full implementation of its mandate,
continue to exercise the following functions and responsibilities:
(a)
As an organ of the United Nations, it shall:
(i) Review annually the political, military, economic and social conditions affecting the struggle of the Namibian people for self-determination, freedom and independence in a united
Namibia, and submit reports on the above
with appropriate recommendations for consideration and action by the General Assembly;
(ii) Represent Namibia to ensure that the rights
and interests of Namibia are protected, as
appropriate, in all intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations, bodies and conferences;
s4 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24).
85 Jbid., Supplement No. 23 (A/31/23/Rev.1), chaps. I, II,
IV-VII and IX.
8 6 Ibid., Supplement No. 24 (A/31/24 ), vol. I, paras. 272
and 273.
