THE SITUATION BETWEEN IRAN AND IRAQ76
Decision

Decisions

At its 2383rd meeting, on 12 July 1982, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Iraq to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled ''The
situation between Iran and Iraq"

On 15 July 1982, the President of the Council issued the
following statement: 78
"The Security Council met in informal consultations
this morning, 15 July 1982, to consider the recent developments in the situation between Iran and Iraq.
''The members of the Security Council expressed concern at the serious situation existing between Iran and
Iraq and at the fact that resolution 514 ( 1982) had not yet
been implemented. The Council remains actively seized
of this question. The President will remain in contact with
the two sides concerned, with a view to exploring all
possible means of advancing the efforts to achieve an end
to the fighting and to secure a settlement of the underlying
issues."

Resolution 514 (1982)
of 12 July 1982

The Security Council,
Having considered again the question entitled ''The situation between Iran and Iraq' ' ,
Deeply concerned about the prolongation of the conflict
between the two countries, resulting in heavy losses of human lives and considerable material damage and endangering peace and security,
Recalling the provisions of Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations, and that the establishment of peace and
security in the region requires strict adherence to these
provisions,
Recalling that by virtue of Article 24 of the Charter the
Security Council has the primary responsibility for maintenance of international peace and security,
Recalling its resolution 479 (1980), adopted unanimously
on 28 September 1980, as well as the statement of the
President of the Security Council of 5 November 1980, 77
Taking note of the efforts of mediation pursued notably
by the Secretary-General and his representative, as well as
by the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
1. Calls for a cease-fire and an immediate end to all
military operations;
2. Calls further for a withdrawal of forces to internationally recognized boundaries;
3. Decides to dispatch a team of United Nations observers to verify, confirm and supervise the cease-fire and
withdrawal, and requests the Secretary-General to submit
to the Security Council a report on the arrangements required
for that purpose;
4. Urges that the mediation efforts be continued in a
co-ordinated manner through the Secretary-General with a
view to achieving a comprehensive, just and honourable
settlement, acceptable to both sides, of all the outstanding
issues, on the basis of the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, including respect for sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and non-interference in the internal affairs of States;
5. Requests all other States to abstain from all actions
that could contribute to the continuation of the conflict and
to facilitate the implementation of the present resolution;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Security Council within three months on the implementation
of the present resolution.
Adopted unanimously at
2383rd meetm!(.

At its 2399th meeting, on 4 October 1982, the Council
decided to invite the -representatives of Iraq and Morocco
to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the item
entitled ''The situation between Iran and Iraq: letter dated
1 October 1982 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/15443)". 79

Resolution 522 (1982)
of 4 October 1982

The Security Council,
Having considered again the question entitled ''The situation between Iran and Iraq",
Deploring the prolongation and the escalation of the conflict between the two countries, resulting in heavy losses of
human lives and considerable material damage and endangering peace and security,
Reaffirming that the restoration of peace and security in
the region requires all Member States strictly to comply
with their obligations under the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 479 (1980), adopted unanimously
on 28 September 1980, as well as the statement of the
President of the Security Council of 5 November 1980, 77
Further recalling its resolution 514 (1982), adopted unanimously on 12 July 1982, and the statement of the President
of the Security Council of 15 July 1982,78
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General of 15
July 1982, 80
1. Urgently calls again for an immediate cease-fire and
an end to all military operations;
2. Reaffirms its call for a withdrawal of forces to internationally recognized boundaries;

the
'"S/152%.
9
'
See Official Records of the Security Council, Thirty-seventh Year.
Supplement for Ocrober, November and December /982.
0
•
Ibid .. Supplement for July, Au!(ust and September 1982. document
S/15293

76

Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by the
Council in 1980.
77
See Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1980, p. 23.

19

6. Reaffirms its request to all other States to abstain
from all actions which could contribute to the continuation
of the conflict and to facilitate the implementation of the
present resolution;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the Security Council on the implementation of the present
resolution within seventy-two hours.

3. Welcomes the fact that one of the parties has already
expressed its readiness to ~o-operate in the implementation
of resolution 514 (I 982) and calls upon the other to do
likewise;
4. Affirms the necessity of implementing without further
delay its decision to dispatch United Nations observers to
verify, confirm and supervise the cease-fire and withdrawal;
5. Reaffirms the urgency of the continuation of the current mediation efforts;

Adopted unanimouslv at
2399th meetmk.

th,·

COMPLAINT BY LESOTHO AGAINST SOUTH AFRICA 81
Decisions

and territorial integrity of the Kingdom of Lesotho, and its
consequences for peace and security in southern Africa.
Gravely concerned that this wanton aggressive act by
South Africa is aimed at weakening the humanitarian support given by Lesotho to South African refugees,
Deeply concerned about the gravity of the aggressive acts
of South Africa against Lesotho.
Grieved at the tragic loss in human life and concerned
about the damage and destruction of property resulting from
the aggressive act by South Africa against the Kingdom ol
Lesotho,
l. Strongly condemns the apartheid regime of South
Africa for its premeditated aggressive act against the Kingdom of Lesotho which constitutes a flagrant violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country;
2. Demands the payment by South Africa of full and
adequate compensation to the Kingdom of Lesotho for the
damage to life and property resulting from this aggressive
act;
3. Reaffirms the right of Lesotho to receive and give
sanctuary to the victims of apartheid in accordance with ib
traditional practice, humanitarian principles and its inter
national obligations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to enter into immc
diate consultations with the Government of Lesotho and
agencies of the United Nations to ensure the welfare of the
refugees in Lesotho in a manner consistent with their security:
5. Requests Member States urgently to extend all necessary economic assistance to Lesotho in order to strengthen
its capacity to receive and maintain South African refugees:
6. Declares that there are peaceful means to resolve
international problems and that, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations. only these should be employed:
7. Calls upon South Africa to declare publicly that it
will, in the future, comply with provisions of the Charter
and that it will not commit aggressive acts against Lesotho
either directly or through its proxies:
8. Requests the Secretary-General to monitor the implementation of the present resolution and to report regular Iv
to the Security Council as the situation demands:
9. Decides to remain seized of the matter_

At its 2406th meeting, on 14 December l 982, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Algeria, Angola,
Botswana, India, Lesotho and Zimbabwe to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the item entitled ''Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa: letter dated 9
December 1982 from the Charge d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Kingdom of Lesotho to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/l 5515)". 82

At its 2407th meeting, on 15 December 1982, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Egypt, Guinea, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Swaziland, Yugoslavia and Zambia to participate.
without vote, in the discussion of the question.

Resolution 527 (1982)
of 15 December 1982

The Security Council,
Taking note of the letter dated 9 December I 982 from
the Charge d'affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
Kingdom of Lesotho to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, 81
Having heard the statement by His Majesty King
Moshoeshoe II of the Kingdom of Lesotho,
Bearing in mind that all Member States must refrain in
their international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence of
any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations,
Gravely concerned at the recent premeditated aggressive
act by South Africa, in violation of the sovereignty, airspace
1
•
Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by the
Council in 1976 and 1977.
82 See Official Records of the Security Council. Thirty-seventh Year,
Supplement for October, November and D,,,-ember I f'!-12.
83
Ibid .. document S/15515.

Adopted unanimouslv
2407th meetinx

20

at

th,
