A /77/PV.60

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

60th plenary meeting

Friday, 24 February 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

Mrs. Ataeva (Turkmenistan): I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.53, entitled “Role
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia” .

Preventive diplomacy remains one of the main
priorities of the United Nations. The United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central
Asia is a special political mission to implement that
priority in practice with a prevention mandate — the
first of its kind — that was established in Ashgabat
in December 2007, at the initiative of the five Central
Asian countries. The Centre promotes a dialogue
among the national Governments on finding solutions
to emerging problems and eliminating potential
threats. It maintains regular contact with regional and
international organizations operating in the region, and
stimulates their peacemaking efforts and initiatives.
It also cooperates with other United Nations agencies
working in the field of conflict prevention. In January,
the Security Council considered the biannual report of
the Centre and clearly demonstrated its support for the
activities of the UNRCCA.

The draft resolution was submitted on behalf
of the five countries of Central Asia — Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and my own
country, Turkmenistan — in order to emphasize
the role of the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia (UNRCCA). The
Central Asian countries would like to underscore the
unwavering and broad interregional support of Member
States for the draft resolution and are honoured to
express their deep gratitude to the co-sponsors. We also
would like to underline the constructive atmosphere
that accompanied us throughout the entire deliberation
process of the draft resolution.

Last December, the Centre marked its fifteenth
anniversary. We would like to commemorate that
occasion by submitting our traditional draft resolution
on the role of the Centre. In its one-and-a-half decades
of operation, the Centre has provided Governments
with a platform for dialogue on the most challenging
regional issues, ranging from the management of
common resources to transnational threats such as
terrorism and violent extremism, organized crime and
drug trafficking, as well as common efforts to help
stabilize the situation in Afghanistan. In doing so,
UNRCCA has closely cooperated with all Governments
in the region and built capacities to use preventive

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Agenda item 58
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Draft resolution (A/77/L.53)
The President: Before we proceed to take action
on the draft resolution, I should like to inform members
that the Assembly will hold a debate on this item at a
later date to be announced.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Turkmenistan to introduce draft resolution A /77/L.53.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-05869 (E)

*2305869*

A/77/PV.60

24/02/2023

diplomacy methods and instruments to address existing
and emerging challenges.
The draft resolution underlines the new and
valuable experience of the Regional Centre achieved
in the past few years in order to allow other countries
of the world to make use of that knowledge in their
preventive measures, early warning and mediation
activities. The new paragraphs in the draft resolution
focus on recent developments in Central Asia, in
particular the regular consultative meetings of the
Heads of State of the Central Asian countries; the
establishment of a Central Asian zone of peace, trust
and cooperation in accordance with resolution 76/299,
of 28 July 2022; and joint steps on the counter-terrorism
track, such as the adoption in March last year of an
updated joint action plan for the implementation of the
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia,
and the initiative of the countries of the region to
establish a United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism
Programme Office in Central Asia. The draft resolution
welcomes the initiatives of the Regional Centre aimed
at empowering women and young people, such as the
Preventive Diplomacy Academy to train young people
in preventive diplomacy and the Central Asian Women
Leaders’ Caucus. Within the global agendas of the
United Nations on women and peace and security and
on youth, peace and security, the Centre continued
its activities to increase the participation and roles of
women and young people in social and political life.
In conclusion, we would once again like to express
our gratitude to the delegations that co-sponsored draft
resolution A/77/L.53 and hope that it will be adopted by
consensus. We also call on Member States that have not
yet become co-sponsors to do so.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/77/L.53, entitled “Role
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (General Assembly Affairs Branch):
I should like to announce that, since the submission
of draft resolution A/77/L.53, and in addition to those
delegations listed in the document, the following
countries have become sponsors of draft resolution
A/77/L.53: Algeria, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
2/15

Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Canada, Chile,
China, Croatia, Cyprus, the Czechia, Denmark,
Djibouti, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan, the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lithuania, the Maldives, Mali, Malta, Montenegro,
Morocco, Nepal, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Moldova,
Romania, the Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, South Africa,
Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Türkiye, Uganda,
the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States
of America, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Viet
Nam and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.53?
Draft resolution A/77/L.53 was adopted (resolution
77/273).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 58.
Agenda item 127 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(n)Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons
The President: We will now hear the remaining
statements in explanation of vote after the voting
on resolution 77/272. Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote after the voting, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): The primary focus of
resolution 77/272 is to remind ourselves about the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) at a global inflection point, as we have regularly
observed, when the cry of the times is for peace.
We cannot afford to have any further escalation of
hostilities of any kind. Nature appears to be crying out
23-05869

24/02/2023

the warnings loud and clear. But we wilfully refuse to
hear or see them. Sri Lanka is committed to achieving
the vision of a world free of chemical weapons and
the threat of their use, a world in which chemistry is
used for peace, progress and prosperity. We condemn
unequivocally the use of chemical weapons under
any circumstances by any party, and fully support
the work of the OPCW and the equal application of
the provisions of the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use
of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction. As a
State party to the Convention and therefore a member
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons, Sri Lanka welcomes the cooperation between
the United Nations and the OPCW and therefore voted
in favour of the resolution.
We value the work of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat but do not in any way condone the use
of the OPCW as a political tool or as a vehicle for
political expediency or to play out political agendas of
particular interest to some Member States. Sri Lanka
therefore abstained in the voting on the paragraphs
that ostensibly seek to lose sight of the essence and
focus of the resolution for the elimination of weapons
of mass destruction by prohibiting the development,
production, acquisition, stockpiling, retention and
transfer or use of chemical weapons by State parties.
Rather, the resolution should encourage stronger
relations among Governments, industry, professional
associations and academia to promote chemical
safety and security management. Furthermore, I want
to highlight the role of the OPCW in assisting its
member States to evaluate their strengths and gaps in
the implementation of chemical safety and security
measures. What is of paramount importance is the
implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention,
chemical safety and security management, chemical
security threat assessment, mitigation measures and
chemical inventory management. We must not lose
sight of those principal objectives.
One hundred and ninety-three States committed
to the Chemical Weapons Convention, 98 per cent of
the global population lives under the protection of the
Convention and 99 per cent of the chemical-weapon
stockpiles declared by possessor States have been
verifiably destroyed. Let us maintain the OPCW as
an organization that transcends political agendas and
efficiently ensure the effectiveness of its supervisory
oversight in its purest form.

A/77/PV.60

Mr. Parga Cintra (Brazil): Brazil regrets the
situation that has been created by the existence of two
competing draft resolutions (A/77/PV.L.48 and A/77/
PV.L.49) on the same topic, and we are concerned about
the trend of proposing alternative draft resolutions
when one penholder’s draft seems unsatisfactory. We
saw it in the Security Council last year and we are
seeing it again in the General Assembly this year. It
is a dangerous trend that threatens to undermine the
working processes of the Organization and makes
consensus even harder to reach. At the same time, we
are also concerned about the increasing willingness to
take a lack of consensus as a given and to use that lack
of consensus as an opportunity to knowingly include
text that makes it impossible for certain countries to
engage. The work of the Assembly is and must continue
to be premised on the search for consensus — even
when it eludes us, and especially on matters that should
be of interest to all, such as cooperation with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW).
After careful consideration, we decided to abstain
in the voting on operative paragraphs 6, 7, 8, 9 and
10 of resolution 77/272, owing to the understanding
that the scope of United Nations-OPCW cooperation
in the Syria chemical-weapons file is sufficiently
covered by operative paragraph 11. Security Council
resolution 2118 (2013) sets out the mandate for United
Nations-OPCW cooperation in the file and remains
the basis for constructive collaboration between the
two organizations. Other aspects of the OPCW’s
work, while important, fall outside the scope of
resolution 77/272. Similarly, we also decided to abstain
in the voting on operative paragraph 12. Once again,
we value the work of the OPCW in monitoring any use
of chemical weapons in Ukraine and elsewhere. Yet
unlike the situation with the Syrian chemical-weapons
file, where we can identify a concrete Security Council
decision that serves as a basis for cooperation, in this
case there is no identifiable element of United NationsOPCW cooperation that would justify the inclusion of
the paragraph in the resolution. There are many things
that the OPCW does that are worthy of praise, but none
of them are pertinent to this resolution.
This exercise has been disappointing and worrisome
on many levels. We were frankly dissatisfied with both
draft texts and with how the process was handled. We
have witnessed division, brinkmanship and a lack of
genuine interest in engaging on all sides. We voted
in favour of resolution 77/272 out of our awareness of

23-058693/15

A/77/PV.60

the importance of the cooperation between the United
Nations and the OPCW and of preserving the working
methods of the Organization. However, we urge all
Member States in this Hall to recommit to self-restraint
as a basic principle of multilateral diplomacy. As in any
political organization, self-restraint is what allows us
to disagree with our peers while still engaging with
them as our peers. Nowhere is that more essential than
in the General Assembly, where we all gather under
the principle of sovereign equality to try to advance
causes of interest to all of us. Cooperation between the
United Nations and the OPCW is one such cause. There
are many more. We stand to lose with regard to all of
them if we are unable to exercise restraint in our draft
resolutions and disagreements and to respect the norms
and practices of the Organization.
Mr. Romero Puentes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
The Cuban delegation would like to explain its vote on
resolution 77/272, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)”. As a State party to
the Chemical Weapons Convention, Cuba supports
continued cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons. Regrettably, we were unable to support the
resolution as it was adopted. We oppose the submission
of a divisive text on cooperation between the United
Nations and the OPCW to the General Assembly.
Controversial issues surrounding the OPCW agenda
should be discussed within that organization, not
manifested in the annual resolution on United NationsOPCW relations.
With regard to the agenda item we are discussing
today, any draft resolution on the matter should focus
on promoting cooperation and therefore highlight the
issues that unite Member States, not those that divide
us. We must prioritize working resolutely towards
returning to the practice of reaching consensus on this
issue in the General Assembly. The spirit of cooperation
and unanimous support for the work of OPCW must
be preserved.
Ms. Kristanti (Indonesia): Indonesia would like to
explain its vote on resolution 77/272, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW),
which was adopted last Monday (see A/77/PV.59).
Indonesia voted in favour of the resolution to reaffirm
its support of cooperation between the United Nations
and the OPCW. We support the resolution, which aims
4/15

24/02/2023

to emphasize the importance of strong cooperation
between the United Nations and the OPCW in
maintaining peace and security through the total
elimination of chemical weapons.
In the context, we believe that achieving consensus
on the resolution is vital, as it would send a strong
message of the importance of the full implementation of
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and reflect
our shared interest and unity in achieving the ultimate
goals of the Convention. The resolution should therefore
focus on the issue itself and avoid elements that are
discussed within the OPCW but are outside the scope
of cooperation with the United Nations. Against that
backdrop, Indonesia abstained in the voting on operative
paragraphs 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 of the resolution. While
supporting the overall thrust of promoting compliance
on the part of CWC States parties, we are of the view that
the question of compliance should be settled through the
mechanism under the Convention. We also abstained in
the voting on operative paragraph 12, as we understand
that the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s task under the
Convention is not limited to a particular situation.
Cooperation between the United Nations and other
international organizations must have solid support
from all States Members of the United Nations. What
we see in this resolution is the opposite. As a result of
egoism, we gathered in this Hall last Monday with two
draft resolutions (A/77/L.49/Rev.1 and A/77/L.48) on
our hands — a practice that only takes us further from
achieving consensus. While we appreciate the informal
meetings held by the two penholders to discuss the
draft resolutions, the efforts made to reconcile the two
texts were minimal. If we continue such practices we
will not only see the disarmament machinery falling
victim to polarities, we will also be disrespecting
the General Assembly and undermining the spirit of
multilateralism. We should therefore not continue on
this path but should reflect on the future and find ways
to move forward towards a stronger multilateralism.
Ms. Quintero Correa (Colombia) (spoke in
Spanish): Colombia has traditionally supported the
annual resolution entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization for the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW)”. Colombia is firmly committed to the
Chemical Weapons Convention, is grateful for and
highly values the work of the OPCW and attaches
importance to the relationship agreement between the
United Nations and the OPCW and the cooperation
23-05869

24/02/2023

expressed within its framework. Similarly, we are
grateful to the Netherlands for its work as penholder of
the annual resolution since 1997.
Disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction are pillars of Colombia’s foreign
policy and constitutional mandates. We advocate the
total elimination and prohibition of all weapons of
mass destruction and condemn their use by any actor,
anywhere and in any circumstances. We believe that
we should continue to follow the current and customary
procedures and working methods of the United Nations,
which are designed to facilitate the consideration of
specific topics and promote transparency, dialogue
and decision-making. Revising and updating them are
collective tasks of all Member States. We must redouble
our efforts to strengthen dialogue, communication,
understanding and negotiated and peaceful resolutions
of all disputes. That is the raison d’être of the
Organization. Our vote on resolution 77/272 under this
agenda item reflects our principled position, which has
already been articulated.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote after the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (n)
of agenda item 127?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 128
Global health and foreign policy
Draft resolutions (A/77/L.51 and A/77/L.54)
Draft amendments (A/77/L.55 and A/77/L.56)
The President: Before we proceed to take action
on these proposals, I should like to inform members
that the Assembly will hold a debate on this item at a
later date to be announced.

A/77/PV.60

Permanent Representatives of Morocco and Israel for
their co-facilitation of the modalities draft resolution
(A/77/L.54), and we look forward to their leadership
in the process as we embark on adopting a political
declaration during the spring and summer ahead of the
high-level meeting.
While we appreciate the process, we were
disappointed to have to co-sponsor amendments to the
draft resolution’s eleventh and fourteenth preambular
paragraphs (A/77/L.56 and A/77/L.55) today. Both
paragraphs ended up with problematic language
resulting from last-minute additions in discussions
by a small number of delegations. We appreciate the
efforts that the co-facilitators have made to navigate
the difficulties, and we nevertheless think that both
amendments bring us a consensus text that will set the
tone for the negotiations on the political declaration.
The draft amendment to the fourteenth preambular
paragraph strengthens the impact of the paragraph, as
its language states. In order to implement robust global,
regional, national and local responses, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the key
leadership role of the World Health Organization within
the broader United Nations response, international
human rights law should be respected. Promoting and
protecting the human rights of all persons is critical
to an effective pandemic preparedness architecture,
which I know we are all trying to achieve. We hope
that all delegations can support this important
draft amendment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft amendment
A/77/L.56.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
United States to introduce draft amendment A/77/L.55.

Ms. Berlin (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its member
States. The candidate countries Albania, North
Macedonia, Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova and
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the potential candidate
country Georgia, align themselves with this statement.

Ms. Korac (United States of America): The
United States would like to express its support for
the high-level meeting on pandemic preparedness and
response, which will be a critical step in reinforcing
the hard work that our colleagues in Geneva are doing,
including in the intergovernmental negotiating body
process. It is a shared global priority and a major focus
for the United States. We would also like to thank the

Let me first express our sincere thanks to the
co-facilitators, the Kingdom of Morocco and the State
of Israel. We acknowledge their efforts in facilitating
the adoption of draft resolution A/77/L.54. We share
their commitment to moving the overall process
forward in a timely fashion and look forward to the next
steps, including fruitful discussions on defining themes
and topics. We pledge them our full support.

23-058695/15

A/77/PV.60

The draft resolution to be adopted today is aimed
at defining the modalities for the preparation and
organization of the high-level meeting on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response, mandated by
the General Assembly in September 2022 in resolution
76/301. The EU engaged actively and constructively in
the negotiations on the draft modalities resolution, and
we fully endorse the process and modalities as outlined
in the draft resolution. Nevertheless, we have proposed
draft amendment A/77/L.56 to delete the eleventh
preambular paragraph, and I should like to explain why.
The tenth preambular paragraph, which precedes
the eleventh, fully recalls decision SSA2(5), adopted
by the World Health Assembly at its second special
session, as it was adopted in 2021. The EU fully
supports the decision, and we also support referencing it
in full in the draft resolution. The eleventh preambular
paragraph, however, further recalls one particular
paragraph of the decision, highlighting it above all
other paragraphs in that decision. The purpose of
highlighting this paragraph is to underscore a particular
term and formulation — “unhindered access” — and
to introduce it into the General Assembly context.
While “unhindered humanitarian access” is a familiar
concept, “unhindered access” in this context has not
been discussed at any length. It is neither framed nor
defined and has not been adopted by consensus in the
General Assembly. Furthermore, the lack of clarity
surrounding the term has led to its misuse. Most
pertinently, it is subject to ongoing discussion among
Member States in Geneva. The EU cannot support
the eleventh preambular paragraph, whose inclusion
could be used to prejudge or disrupt discussions and
processes in Geneva — the very ones that the highlevel meeting process should support and align with.
Furthermore, the paragraph is of no consequence for
the scope or modalities of the high-level meeting. It
would be an unhelpful precedent for the negotiation
of other draft modalities resolutions, which should be
focused on processes and modalities.
There can be no question that the EU is fully engaged
and contributes tirelessly towards improved and more
equitable access, distribution and development of
vaccines and therapeutics globally. Our aim is to close
what we know to be significant and unacceptable gaps.
We would also like to underline that the EU has been
forthcoming, transparent and consistent in its position
in the negotiations. We have repeatedly asked to delete
the reference and have explained why at length and in
detail. We have offered alternative solutions. We have
6/15

24/02/2023

suggested including a definition of the term or using
other terms that are clearer and less problematic. We
have suggested stripping down the draft resolution to
strictly process and modalities. We broke the silence
to stress that we cannot support the inclusion of that
paragraph. For those reasons, we respectfully request
the membership to adopt the draft amendment deleting
the eleventh preambular paragraph.
Let me conclude by saying that we look forward
to the adoption of the draft resolution and to working
constructively together on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response, culminating in a successful
high-level meeting in September.
The President: The Assembly will now consider
draft resolutions A/77/L.51 and A/77/L.54 and draft
amendments A/77/L.55 and A/77/L.56.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I will now announce
the additional sponsorships for both draft amendments
A/77/L.55 and A/77/L.56.
First, I should like to announce that since the
submission of draft amendment A/77/L.55, and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of the draft amendment: Albania, Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Georgia,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, New Zealand, North
Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
the Republic of Moldova, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
Secondly, I should like to announce that since
the submission of draft amendment A/77/L.56, and in
addition to the delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of the
draft amendment: Albania, Georgia, Iceland, Japan,
Monaco, North Macedonia, Norway, the Republic of
Moldova and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
The President: Delegations wishing to make a
statement in explanation of vote or position before the
voting on any of the proposals under this agenda item,
23-05869

24/02/2023

A/77/PV.60

including the proposed draft amendments, are invited
to do so now in one intervention.

will vote against draft amendment A/77/L.56, and we
encourage all delegations to do likewise.

Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, I would like to remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by representatives from their seats.

Moreover, we regret the non-transparent way in
which draft amendment A/77/L.55 was presented. It
seems that the intention, rather than demonstrating a
genuine interest in shedding light on the issue of human
rights, was to minimize the relevance of the Charter
of the United Nations. In any case, Cuba will continue
to support our Organization’s efforts to strengthen
the capacities of countries, particularly developing
nations, to deal with the challenges facing the South.
We are ready to contribute our modest experiences to
the negotiation process on the political declaration to
be adopted at the high-level meeting in September of
next year.

Mr. Romero Puentes (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Promoting and protecting the right to health and access to
quality health services for all people has been a priority
for Cuba. We are fully committed to United Nations
efforts to build collective progress in addressing the
health challenges facing the international community.
The capacities of the United Nations and our countries
must be strengthened to meet the health needs of our
people and ensure that we are better able to cope with
current and future diseases. We hope that the high-level
meeting on pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response mandated by resolution 76/301 will contribute
to that purpose. We also reiterate our full support for
the World Health Organization and its role within the
United Nations system.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has been
an eloquent demonstration of the unjustness of our
international order. As always, the developing countries
are the ones that suffer and will continue to suffer
disproportionately from the adverse socioeconomic
effects of the international situation created by
the virus. The lack of access faced by developing
countries to the resources, knowledge and technologies
needed to address those challenges is one of the
characteristics of the current international order, in
which inequality is inherent. It is vital that we work to
replace it with a new one that emphasizes solidarity and
international cooperation.
Draft amendment A/77/L.56 represents everything
that is wrong with the current international order. It
seeks to remove an express reference to the need to
address existing gaps in preventing, preparing for and
responding to health emergencies and for developing
countries such as my own to have timely, equitable
and unimpeded access to the resources, knowledge
and technologies necessary to meet those challenges.
The eleventh preambular paragraph of draft resolution
A/77/L.54, which draft amendment A/77/L.56 seeks to
delete, was the result of lengthy negotiations and reflects
the consensus language reached in Geneva. It is striking
that those who accepted that language in Geneva do not
accept it now in New York. For those reasons, Cuba

Mr. Raguttahalli (India): We thank the
co-facilitators, Morocco and Israel, for their hard work
in arriving at a final draft of draft resolution A/77/L.54.
The world is struggling with challenges to its postpandemic economic recovery. The devastation of the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and the
discriminatory practices that characterized the global
response have severely affected developing countries.
As we are all aware, the COVID-19 pandemic has
called into question the overcentralized nature of
globalization. It has also led us to seek greater resilience
and reliability for supply chains. Without equitable
access to medical countermeasures such as vaccines,
therapeutics and diagnostics, there can be no discourse
about strengthening health systems and their resilience,
and there certainly cannot be universal health coverage.
In effect, without equity we will see only a rerun of
what we saw in the COVID-19 pandemic. We cannot
afford a vaccine divide.
India will therefore vote against draft amendment
A/77/L.56, which seeks to delete the eleventh
preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/77/L.54, on
pandemic preparedness, and we call for retaining the
paragraph as proposed by the co-facilitators. We also
reject the proposal in draft amendment A/77/L.55 to
introduce new language into the fourteenth preambular
paragraph, which was done at the last minute without
following the negotiation process.
Mr. Poveda Brito (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela would like to explain its position on draft
resolution A/77/L.54, entitled “Scope, modalities,
format and organization of the High-Level Meeting on
Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness and Response”.

23-058697/15

A/77/PV.60

At the outset, we would like to thank Morocco and
Israel, the co-facilitators of the draft resolution, for
their efforts to achieve consensus on the modalities of a
draft resolution with such a far-reaching objective, one
that the Member States will have to implement with the
high urgency and priority that the issue requires, in the
aftermath of the terrible onslaught of the coronavirus
disease pandemic and its subsequent effects, which
demand further efforts to ensure global recovery.
Venezuela believes that all the preambular
paragraphs proposed in the draft resolution are
appropriate, especially the eleventh, which relates to
the need to fill the gaps in preventing, preparing for
and responding to health emergencies and to ensure
unrestricted, equitable, timely and unimpeded access to
medical countermeasures such as vaccines, treatments
and diagnostic tests, the lack of access to which is both
a major current topic of debate and a structural cause of
so much death and human suffering.
For all of those reasons, Venezuela opposes any
draft amendment aimed at removing from the debate
the key element of multilateral forums on preventing,
preparing for and responding to pandemics, as well
as — and especially — on the importance of creating
synergies and international solidarity between the
global South and States of the North on such a farreaching issue, and as a fundamental principle of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on draft amendment A/77/L.56 on behalf
of Argentina, Colombia, Costa Rica, the Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras,
Mexico, Peru, Uruguay and my own country, Brazil.
First, we want to express our deep appreciation
to the missions of Morocco and Israel for conducting
the negotiation process on draft resolution A/77/L.54
in an open and transparent way, and for employing all
available efforts to reach a balanced text and possible
compromise. We regret the proposal to delete a whole
paragraph of the text. The paragraph in question, the
eleventh preambular paragraph, was agreed to by
consensus by all Member States at the World Health
Assembly, contains verbatim language and enjoyed
broad support from developing countries from every
region during the negotiations on draft resolution
A/77/L.54. It speaks to the hardship of what almost
every single developing country faced during the
coronavirus disease pandemic — the lack of access to
8/15

24/02/2023

medical countermeasures such as vaccines to uphold
the right to health of our peoples.
Promoting unhindered, timely and equitable
access to medical countermeasures in future health
emergencies is one of the main reasons behind the
purpose of a World Health Organization instrument
currently being negotiated in Geneva. That is why this
paragraph is part of the preambular section of decision
SSA2(5), which established an intergovernmental
negotiating body to draft and negotiate a World
Health Organization convention, agreement or other
international instrument on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response. And that is why developing
countries defended it in the draft resolution on the
scope, modalities and format of the high-level meeting
on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. To
delete that paragraph, as proposed in draft amendment
A/77/L.56, is to remove one of the very reasons why
we want to convene such a meeting. We will therefore
vote against the draft amendment and invite others to
do the same.
Ms. Mendoza Elguea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico aligns itself with the explanation just delivered
by the representative of Brazil on behalf of a number of
countries. In that regard, we regret that today a group
of countries finds the textual and factual reference
to decision SSA2(5) of the World Health Assembly
contained in draft resolution A/77/L.54 unacceptable
and proposes amending it through draft document
A/77/L.56. The decision referred to in the eleventh
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution recognizes
the need to address the gaps that of course continue
to exist in preventing, preparing for and responding to
health emergencies, in particular in the development
and distribution of medical countermeasures such
as vaccines, treatments and diagnostic tests and in
ensuring unimpeded, timely and equitable access to
them, as well as in strengthening health systems and
their resilience with a view to achieving universal
health coverage.
We must not forget the obstacles, challenges and
difficulties the world has faced and continues to face
in responding not only to the coronavirus disease
pandemic but to other epidemics and pandemics, such
as HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis. That is a priority issue
for Mexico and many other countries. Moreover, this
should not be an issue that divides our countries into
those with resources and those without. Pandemics
affect all countries, and as has been said repeatedly
23-05869

24/02/2023

in recent years, no one is safe until all of us are
safe. Ensuring unimpeded access to vaccines for all,
regardless of nationality, is a priority, including for
the interests of nations themselves. Mexico urges all
delegations to vote against draft amendment A/77/L.56
and to retain the eleventh preambular paragraph in
the draft resolution as proposed for adoption by the
co-facilitators.
Mr. Rizal (Malaysia): Malaysia takes the floor
to deliver an explanation of vote before the voting on
draft resolution A/77/L.54, entitled “Scope, modalities,
format and organization of the High-Level Meeting on
Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness and Response”,
and the related draft amendments to be considered for
adoption by the General Assembly.
The coronavirus disease pandemic has shown us
that our capacities for preventing, preparing for and
responding to health emergencies are lacking and vary
widely from one country to another. There is therefore
an urgent need to boost those capacities so that we can
be well prepared for the next pandemic. International
cooperation, as well as in achieving equity in the field
of health, is paramount in that regard.
Malaysia believes that the draft resolution presented
by the co-facilitators is relatively balanced and that
its contents reflect the theme of the text. Considering
that, we are perplexed that some delegations have
presented amendments to the draft resolution that
would upset the delicate balance struck. The proposal
in draft amendment A/77/L.56 to delete the eleventh
preambular paragraph is outright baffling, especially
since the paragraph is taken verbatim from decision
SSA2(5) of the second special session of the World
Health Assembly, which was adopted by consensus and
sponsored by more than 120 countries. We are extremely
alarmed that language that was previously agreed on is
no longer considered acceptable to the proponents of the
draft amendment. We firmly believe that the elements
contained in the eleventh preambular paragraph are
essential to addressing gaps in preventing, preparing
and responding to health emergencies, especially in
developing countries.
The argument for deleting the eleventh preambular
paragraph on the basis that it touches on substance is,
to put it simply, ironic. There are other substantive
issues incorporated in the draft resolution, some of
which were introduced by the proponents of the draft
amendment. This is regrettably another example of
efforts to stonewall the priorities of the developing

A/77/PV.60

world. It is imperative that the resolutions adopted by
this body reflect realities on the ground and address
real problems that we face worldwide. It is for that
reason that Malaysia will vote against draft amendment
A/77/L.56, on deleting the eleventh preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution.
Malaysia believes that multisectoral and
multi-stakeholder cooperation is important, especially
in efforts to achieve equity in the field of health,
which must not be subjected to undue limitations
and constraints. We should remind ourselves that the
purposes of the United Nations, as outlined in Article
1, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United Nations,
include
“to achieve international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social,
cultural or humanitarian character, and in
promoting and encouraging respect for human
rights and for fundamental freedoms for all without
distinction as to race, sex, language or religion”.
We believe firmly that the formulation of the
fourteenth preambular paragraph as presented by the
co-facilitators is more than sufficient and that draft
amendment A/77/L.55’s introduction of new language is
unnecessary. It is concerning that the draft amendment
to the text was introduced in a way that subverts the
negotiation process. Recognizing the importance of that
process, Malaysia will support the draft resolution as a
whole. We sincerely hope that Member States can work
together towards the high-level meeting on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response, particularly on
the negotiations of the political declaration.
Mrs. Xu Daizhu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks Morocco and Israel, the co-facilitators
of draft resolution A/77/L.54, for their considerable
efforts to promote consensus among Member States.
The final text they submitted reflects a balanced
and constructive approach. It is the outcome of the
greatest consensus achievable and as such enjoys
the support of the vast majority of Member States.
China supports the co-facilitators’ text. Regrettably,
however, a small minority of Member States, flouting
the spirit of multilateralism, insisted on submitting
draft amendments to impose their own views on
others, thereby undermining the efforts of the general
membership and the co-facilitators to find consensus.
More surprisingly, the changes those countries
are seeking to make through their draft amendments

23-058699/15

A/77/PV.60

would minimize the importance in the context of the
Charter of the United Nations, which is a universally
recognized set of international rules. What they are
attempting to remove is a consensus text that was
agreed by a majority of Member States at the World
Health Assembly. We deeply regret the attempts by
those countries to challenge the established consensus
and weaken the Charter. We call on all Member States
to support the co-facilitators’ text.
Mr. Rai (Nepal), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Pandemic prevention, preparedness and response
require the international community to work in unity
and in concert by pulling together to prevail over the
challenges. We call on Member States to uphold true
multilateralism and to do their utmost to preserve
consensus and reject division.
Mr. Passmoor (South Africa): Last year, on
2 September (see A/76/PV.98), we introduced resolution
76/301, asking the General Assembly to call for a highlevel meeting in New York during the seventy-eighth
session of the General Assembly. The essential aim of
the meeting is to support efforts to find fair and longlasting solutions to the global inequities and inadequate
responses that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic has highlighted. To that end, our Heads of
State and Government will adopt a succinct political
declaration on pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response. Today we have before us draft resolution
A/77/L.54, on the modalities of that meeting, and we
are extremely grateful for the commitment shown by
our co-facilitators to presenting a text that is fair and
balanced and will allow for a constructive process and
engagement in September.
With the COVID-19 pandemic now in its third year,
the need to develop inclusive and durable solutions
for pandemic preparedness, prevention and response
remains more important than ever. It is our belief that
a continued demonstration of political will is vital to
ensuring that whole-of-society approaches to pandemic
preparedness, prevention and response are adopted and
operationalized. For that, we need concerted political
action at a global level, an increase in international
finance and a willingness to adopt every possible
measure to address the issue in a whole-of-society
approach. We knew that despite the fact that this task
is a procedural one, the current political realities and
contexts would be critical to consider and reflect on,
even at this early stage, and that this modalities draft
resolution and its preambular text would therefore need
10/15

24/02/2023

to reflect those realities so as to set the scene in which
the high-level meeting will take place.
The reality is that the global pandemic and possible
future pandemics have the potential to be an existential
crisis for humankind. Unfortunately, the pandemic
was also a demonstration of the worst elements for
the cohesion of the global community, as countries
resorted to protectionism instead of equitable access
and cooperation. Indeed, national self-preservation was
prioritized over our shared humanity, and it served only
to prolong and exacerbate the damage created by the
global health emergency. We recognize now that had
we cooperated then and unconditionally served each
other rather than ourselves, we would have collectively
fought the pandemic more effectively and eased the
suffering of millions.
Despite that context, the negotiations on the draft
resolution before us demonstrate that this lesson has not
been learned, and we cling to our national interests as
if a competitive advantage were critical to surviving
another pandemic. As a result, we are voting on a
preambular paragraph that is reproduced verbatim from
decision SSA2(5) of the World Health Assembly and is
consensus language from that process. We are voting
because draft amendment A/77/L.56 proposes to delete
that language from the draft resolution by deleting
its eleventh preambular paragraph, undermining our
collective responsibility and rejecting humanity in
favour of individualism. It is an unfortunate situation,
but it is with pride that South Africa will vote against
the draft amendment. We will do it because it is the right
thing to do, and because the lessons learned over the past
three years cannot be forgotten and we want to ensure
that they are translated into the political declaration.
We have also taken that decision because the eleventh
preambular paragraph reflects the Geneva process,
which is something we critically need to support. South
Africa remains steadfast in supporting the World Health
Organization in leading global efforts to mitigate
the COVID-19 pandemic and future pandemics, as
well as in supporting future preparedness to foster a
comprehensive multisectoral approach to strengthening
national, regional and global capacities and resilience
to combat future pandemics. We also want to say that
it is unfortunate and regrettable that draft amendment
A/77/L.55, the other proposed amendment, has come at
the last minute without any opportunity to negotiate its
relevance in the text.
23-05869

24/02/2023

It is our view that the high-level meeting in
September will facilitate the political direction for the
global community and support the pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response processes that are currently
being discussed in Geneva, which we have pledged
to support and want to reinforce. It is imperative that
we cooperate and coordinate with one another so that
we can prepare and prevent future epidemics from
spreading and becoming pandemics. Ensuring that will
require coordination at an international level through
political will and by placing collective interests over
those of individuals.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote or position before
the voting.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.51, entitled “Scope, modalities,
format and organization of the High-Level Meeting on
the Fight Against Tuberculosis”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.51?
Draft resolution A/77/L.51 was adopted (resolution
77/274).
The Acting President: I would like to express
my sincere appreciation to Mr. Krzysztof Szczerski,
Permanent Representative of Poland to the United
Nations, and Mr. Bakhtiyor Ibragimov, Permanent
Representative of Uzbekistan to the United Nations,
who ably and patiently conducted the discussions and
complex negotiations in the informal consultations
on resolution 77/274. I am sure the members of the
Assembly join me in expressing our sincere appreciation
to both of them.
The Assembly will now turn to draft resolution
A/77/L.54. Before proceeding to take a decision on
the draft resolution, in accordance with rule 90 of the
rules of procedure, the General Assembly will first
take a decision on draft amendments A/77/L.55 and
A/77/L.56, one by one.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
amendment A/77/L.55.
In the absence of a request for a recorded vote, may
I take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
adopt draft amendment A/77/L.55?
It was so decided.

A/77/PV.60

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft amendment A/77/L.56.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of),
Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Türkiye, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Angola, Australia, Canada, Ghana, Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, New Zealand, Republic of Korea,
Switzerland
The draft amendment was rejected by 85 to 40, with
9 abstentions.
[Subsequently, the delegation of Iraq informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote against.]

23-0586911/15

A/77/PV.60

The Acting President: Since draft amendment
A/77/L.55 was adopted, we shall proceed to take action
on draft resolution A/77/L.54 as amended.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/77/L.54, entitled “Scope, modalities,
format and organization of the high-level meeting on
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response”,
as amended.
I now give the floor to the representative of Sweden
on a point of order.
Ms. Berlin (Sweden): I understand that the draft
amendment proposed by the European Union was not
adopted, but we would like to call for a vote on the
current text of eleventh preambular paragraph of draft
resolution A/77/L.54.
The Acting President: A separate recorded
vote has been requested on the eleventh preambular
paragraph of draft resolution A/77/L.54, as amended.
Do I hear any objection?
I call on the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Saleem (Pakistan): We would like to
request that the representative of Sweden and you,
Mr. President, clarify what is meant by a vote on the
eleventh preambular paragraph. Clarification would be
helpful for all delegations so that they know how they
wish to proceed in the voting.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Secretariat to clarify the process.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): Through you, Mr. President,
I should like to advise the delegation of Pakistan that, in
the recorded vote conducted on the eleventh preambular
paragraph, a vote in favour means that a delegation
is in favour of retaining — keeping — the eleventh
preambular paragraph of draft resolution A/77/L.54.
A vote against the eleventh preambular paragraph
means that a delegation is against retaining that
paragraph, meaning that the delegation wants to see
that paragraph deleted.
The Acting President: I hope this satisfies the
query of the delegation of Pakistan.
I call on the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would request
clarification as to exactly how the voting is going to
proceed. Are we going to vote first on A/77/L.54 as
12/15

24/02/2023

a whole and subsequently on its eleventh preambular
paragraph? Following the guidance of the Secretariat,
I understand that a vote in favour means retaining
the eleventh preambular paragraph and a vote against
means removing it from the text, which, as a side
note, seems to me a bit absurd as we just had that very
same vote, but I would request a clarification of the
entire procedure.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
Secretariat for further clarification.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): Through you,
Mr. President, I would like to advise the delegation of
Brazil that when a paragraph vote is requested, the first
vote is on that paragraph, and then, after the vote on the
paragraph is conducted, the Assembly will proceed to
take action on the draft resolution as a whole.
The Acting President: I hope that further clarified
the process for the representative of Brazil.
Is there any objection to this procedure?
There being none, I shall therefore put the paragraph
to the vote first.
I now put to the vote the eleventh preambular
paragraph of draft resolution A/77/L.54, as amended.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Djibouti,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Ethiopia, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Israel, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Mozambique,
Myanmar,
Namibia,
Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Uganda, United Arab
23-05869

24/02/2023

A/77/PV.60

Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe

appreciation for the leadership and dedicated efforts of
the co-facilitators, Morocco and Israel.

Against:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America

Allow me to take this opportunity to express the
following points that Japan wishes to underline. First,
while appreciating the adoption of resolution 77/275
on the high-level meeting on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response, we would like to reiterate
the importance of placing all health-related issues
within the context of universal health coverage and
the health sector as a whole, and of strengthening the
overall health agenda within the United Nations system.

Abstaining:
Angola,
Australia,
Canada,
Liechtenstein,
Madagascar, New Zealand, Republic of Korea,
Switzerland
The eleventh preambular paragraph of draft
resolution A/77/L.54, as amended, was retained by
a vote of 86 to 41, with 8 abstentions.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution, A/77/L.54,
as amended?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
77/275).
The Acting President: I would like to express
my sincere appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Gilad
Erdan, Permanent Representative of Israel to the
United Nations, and His Excellency Mr. Omar Hilale,
Permanent Representative of Morocco to the United
Nations, who avidly and patiently conducted the
discussions and complex negotiations in the informal
consultations on resolution 77/275. I am sure the
members of the Assembly will join me in extending our
sincere appreciation to them.
Before giving the floor for explanations of
position after adoption, may I remind delegations that
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kita (Japan): On behalf of Japan, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 77/275, entitled “Scope,
modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting on pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response” under agenda item 128, “Global health and
foreign policy”. We would also like to express our

The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has
reminded us of the importance of strong health systems
as the foundation for achieving universal health care
and health security. We believe that the time has come
to address health issues in a comprehensive manner,
integrating various efforts in the health sectors that
have historically been siloed by disease and by system.
In this regard, we strongly recognize the importance
of this year’s three health-related high-level meetings
and of ensuring coordination and harmonization
among them.
Secondly, there is no question about the importance
of ensuring access to such existing health products as
medicines, diagnostics, vaccines and therapeutics. On
the other hand, there is no doubt that in the event of
another pandemic caused by emerging or re-emerging
pathogens, such as COVID-19, the ability to rapidly
develop new high-quality health products to deal with
it will be essential. For example, without the rapid
development and subsequent delivery of new vaccines
for COVID-19, it is quite unlikely that we would have
been able to resume in-person meetings here in New
York, such as today’s.
From this point of view, we believe that ensuring
access to existing health products should be mentioned
in proper balance with the development of new health
products. In that regard, we believe that the wording of
the eleventh preambular paragraph was inappropriate,
and we agreed with the proposal to delete it.
Thirdly, the World Health Organization is
currently leading several health-related discussions
in Geneva, including on an international system for
pandemic preparedness and response, and we need to
respect the process. In this regard, we appreciate the
reference in the fourteenth preambular paragraph to
the United Nations Charter, which spells out promoting
and encouraging respect for human rights among the

23-0586913/15

A/77/PV.60

purposes of the United Nations. In the same vein,
we are very pleased to see the proposed additional
reference to the obligation of States under international
human rights law embraced by all States Members of
the United Nations.
Finally, we are committed to contributing
constructively to the high-level meetings and the
debates on the outcome documents on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response. We look
forward to intensive discussions with Member States
on ways to harmonize various health challenges while
achieving maximum impact.
Ms. Mendoza Elguea (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico joins the consensus on resolutions 77/274
and 77/275 and appreciates the efforts made by the
Permanent Representatives of Israel, Morocco, Poland
and Uzbekistan as co-facilitators during the two
processes. However, we cannot overlook the most
important limitation that my country identifies in both
resolutions: the mention that the political declarations of
the high-level meetings must be adopted by consensus.
Historically, Mexico has maintained a consistent
position with regard to the consensus. For my country,
consensus is a desirable aspiration rather than an end
in itself or an ultimate goal. As the rules of procedure
and the Charter of the United Nations establish,
decisions of the Assembly must be taken by a majority
of the members present and voting. Consensus does
not mean unanimity. It means the will expressed by a
large majority of the members present, while unanimity
can mean in practice the granting of 193 vetoes,
diminishing the democratic character of the General
Assembly and affecting progress on such important
issues as prevention, preparedness and response to
future and existing pandemics, to the detriment of our
future as humanity on this planet. Accordingly, Mexico
regrets this unnecessary limitation in the resolutions
we adopted today. Nevertheless, my country is working
proactively to reach an ambitious outcome with a view
to achieving a positive and action-oriented impact.
Mexico reaffirms its commitment to the successful
deliberations of the high-level meetings on combating
tuberculosis and on prevention, preparedness and
response to future pandemics in order to achieve results
that go beyond the texts, and which respond to global
health challenges. It is our obligation in the present to
bet on a healthier and more prosperous future.
14/15

24/02/2023

Ms. Hinton (Canada): I have the pleasure to deliver
this statement on behalf of Australia, New Zealand and
my own country, Canada.
We would like to thank the co-facilitators as well as
all delegations that took part in the negotiations on the
scope, modalities, format and organization of the highlevel meeting on pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response for their active and constructive engagement.
Our countries have abstained from voting on the draft
amendment to the eleventh preambular paragraph. We
share similar concerns with those States that voted
in favour of the draft amendment over the reference
to “unhindered access”, a term that potentially has
different meanings for different delegations, and which
is still being discussed in more technically focused
forums, including at the World Health Organization
(WHO). While we do not believe this is the appropriate
venue for its negotiation, we also recognize that the text
in resolution 77/275 is making a factual reference to the
preambular paragraph in decision SSA2(5).
While we did not vote to amend the reference in a
preambular paragraph of this modalities resolution, we
will not support stronger or action-oriented language
in the political declaration on this topic. Additionally,
we reiterate our long-standing position that modalities
resolutions should be focused on organizational
arrangements and not address issues of substance.
As we and many delegations stated at the outset of
this process, we must ensure that this meeting lends
political support to important processes under way in
Geneva under the auspices of WHO, the negotiation of
a new pandemic instrument, and amendments to the
international health regulations. The meeting should
build political momentum and support for critical
reforms to the global health architecture to better
prevent, prepare and respond to the next pandemic,
and ensure that pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response are embedded across the United Nations
pillars. It is imperative that we refrain from undermining
these processes in any way.
We must also ensure that the negotiation of the
political declaration remains focused on the mandate
and is conducted in a transparent and Member
State-driven manner.
The high-level meeting on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response will be an important
meeting and a first of its kind in New York. We look
forward to working together with all delegations, as we
prepare for this milestone event.
23-05869

24/02/2023

Mrs. Birrer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the delegations of Israel and
Morocco for facilitating the negotiations on resolution
77/275 on the modalities of the high-level meeting on
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response.
As the resolution emphasizes, continued
multilateral cooperation and engagement is needed to
prevent future global health emergencies such as the
coronavirus pandemic. Our shared commitment to
strengthening pandemic preparedness and response
must ensure coherent global health governance, with a
strong and effective World Health Organization (WHO)
at its centre.
Accordingly, it is crucial to ensure the
complementarity of discussions and work between
Geneva and New York. In the spirit of multilateralism,
we did not wish to oppose references stemming from
agreed language at the special session of WHO in
November 2021 and therefore to delete the eleventh
preambular paragraph on unhindered access. However,
we were not in a position to vote in favour of this
paragraph either, as we do not consider it appropriate to
make such a reference in a resolution on the modalities
of a high-level meeting, especially since decision
SSA2(5) is already referenced in its entirety.
Furthermore, we wish to avoid creating a precedent
for the substantial discussions to come. For these
reasons, Switzerland decided to abstain from the voting
on the draft amendment on the eleventh preambular
paragraph of resolution 77/275.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the facilitators of the negotiations
on the modalities resolution on the high-level meeting
on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response
(resolution 77/275), the Permanent Representatives of
Israel and Morocco, for their efforts to find mutually
acceptable compromises and solutions in a spirit
of neutrality, impartiality and consideration for
the interests of all parties. The Russian delegation
supported the draft text and joined the consensus on
its adoption.
Our support for the resolution reflects agreement
with the plans to hold such an important event in

A/77/PV.60

the area of global health, a priority for the Russian
Federation. At the same time, that cannot be interpreted
as support for the inclusion of substantive paragraphs
in modalities decisions and resolutions of the General
Assembly. In that regard, we are also referring to the
amendment introduced by a group of countries on the
issue of human rights. Such issues will be discussed
in depth during the negotiations on the political
declaration of the upcoming high-level meeting.
In addition, we are forced to express disappointment
at the inclusion, in paragraph 10 of the resolution, of
language on the decisive role of the General Assembly
in approving the list of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) participating in the high-level meeting. We are
convinced that it is important to include organizations
with the appropriate professional competence to
participate in such an event. It should take place in an
orderly manner, in line with an agreed agenda, as well
as the past practice of selecting participating NGOs,
with consensus among States Members of the United
Nations being key.
Unfortunately for us all, despite the constructive
spirit of many States, the facilitators of the consultations
did not opt for balanced solutions in that regard. The
same situation can be seen in resolution 77/274, on the
modalities of the high-level meeting on tuberculosis,
which is under consideration today.
We would also like to draw attention to the eighth
preambular paragraph, which mentions the report
of the Group of 20 High-Level Independent Panel on
Financing the so-called Global Commons for Pandemic
Preparedness and Response. We note that the report
presents the private opinion of experts. It should also
be emphasized that the term “global commons” used
by the expert community was not agreed on within
the United Nations. The Russian Federation will also
proceed on that basis in the future.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 128.
The meeting rose at 4.35 p.m.

23-0586915/15
