UNITED NA TIc)NS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-FOURTH

COUNCIL
RECORDS

YEAR
UN
MEETING:

22 MARCH

1979

LIBIV

h’f

MAY 7 1982

id

CONTENTS
Page

1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Complaint
by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13176)

1

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2133/Rev.
of the agenda

WPV.2133

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W...) are normally published in quarterly Supplements of the Oflcial Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964; are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2133rd MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday, 22 March 1979, at 11 a.m.
President:

Mr. Leslie 0. HARRIMAN

(Nigeria).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,
France,
Gabon, Jamaica, Kuwait, Nigeria, Norway, Portugal,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Zambia.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda!2133/Rev.l)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 March 1979 from the Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the, President of the Security
Council (S/13176)
The meeting was called to order at 11.55 a.m.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 16 Mach 1979 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/13176)
1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at previous meetings f223Oth and
2132nd meetings], I invite the representative of Angola to
take a place at the Council table and the representatives of
Algeria, Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria, the Congo, Cuba, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, Ghana, Guinea,
Madagascar, Mozambique, Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Viet Nam
and Yugoslavia to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of thepresident, Mr. deFigueiredo(Angola)
took a piace at the Council table and Mr. Bouayad-Agha
(Algeria), Mr. Houngavou (Benin), Mr. TIou (Botswana), Mr.
Kankov (Bulgaria), Mr. Mondjo (Congo), Mr. Roa Kouri
(Cuba), Mr. Worku (Ethiopia), Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic). Mr. Sekyi (Ghana), Mr. Yansank(Gubtea),
Mr. Ra6etajka (Madagascaql, Mr. Lobe (Mozambique), Mr.
Rodrigo (Sri Lanku), Mr. Sahloul (Sudan), Mr. Ha Van L.au
(Viet Nam) and Mr. Komatina (Yugoslavia) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the Council that I have received letters from the representatives of Egypt, Guyana, Liberia, Romania, Sierra Leone,
Somalia, Togo and the United Republic of Tanzania in
which they request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the question on the agenda. In accordance with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion,
without the right to tiote, in confotiity with the provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdel Meguid
(Egypt), Mr. Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Tubman (Liberia), Mr.
Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Conteh (Sierra Leone), Mr.
Hussen (Somalia), Mr. Ko4ovi (Togo) andMr. Chale (United
Republic of Tanzania) took the places reservedfor them at the
side ‘of the Council chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
taken at the 2132nd meeting, I invite Mr. Mishake Muyongo,
Vice-President of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. MuyongO (South
West Africa Peopte’s Orgaiization) took a place at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform members of
the-Council that I have received a letter dated 20 March
from the representatives of Gabon, Nigeria and Zambia
/S/13183] which reads as follows:

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council, have the honour to request that, during its meetings
devoted to the consideration of the item ‘Complaint by
Angola against South Africa’, the Council should extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Johnstone Makatini, representative of
the African National Congress of South Africa.*’
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council agrees
to that request.
It was so decided.
5. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to draw the attention of
members of the Council to document S/13182, which contains a letter dated 6 March from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the President of the Council.
6. The first speaker is the representative of Bulgaria,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council and to make his
statement.

on the “intransigence” of the national liberation movement. Exacerbating the tensions in the area through acts of
armed aggression could be considered as part and parcel of
the policy of protraction and preservation of the oppressive
colonial and racist system in southern Africa.

7. Mr. YANKOV (Bulgaria): Mr. President, I should like,
first of all, to expressto you and the members of the Council
the gratitude of my country for having given me the opportunity to take part in the deliberations on the question of the
recent and continuing acts of armed aggression and the
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
People’s Republic of Angola perpetrated by South Africa.

12. The arrogance and cynicism of the South African
racist r&ime are such that it has,gone so far as to suggest
formally a draft resolution, contained in a letter from its
Foreign Minister /S/23180], whereby the Council is called
upon, in defiance of numerous United Nations resolutions,
to condemn SWAP0 for its struggle f6;r the selfdetermination and independence of the oppressed people of Namibia.
This is a cynicism which goes beyond normal imagination
and common sense.

8. I should like also to extend my congratulations to you
on your accession to the Council’s presidency. We are
particularly pleased to see a son of Africa and the representative of a country with which Bulgaria maintains very
friendly relations presiding over the meetings of this body
on such a highly important issue, on which your deep
knowledge and your competence have been widely recognized. The Bulgarian delegation is confident that under
your skilful guidance the Council will succeed in adopting
decisions which will respond to the legitimate aspirations of
the African peoples and be in conformity with the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the requirements
of the numerous relevant resolutions of the Council.

13. The recent acts of armed aggression and the violations
of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola reaffirm in a most convincing way some apprehensions which
were voiced on earlier occasions. Less that four months ago,
the General Assembly conducted a broad discussion on all
aspects of the situation in southern Africa, a situation resulting directly from the policy and actions of the Pretoria
r&ime. The discussions and the resolutions adopted at the
thirty-third session brought to the fore, beyond any shadow
of doubt and with particular emphasis, the extremely alarming development of the situation in’ southern Africa.

9. The Security Council is called up& to deal with the
most recent acts of aggression by South Africa against the
People’s Republic of Angola. The statement of the representative of Angola, supported by several off%al communiquQ issued by the Ministry of Defence of that country,
justifies the grave concern over the extremely serious situation created by South Africa. These armed attacks and
flagrant infringements of the s&ereignty and territorial
integrity of the neighbouring States committed by the South
African racist r&me have become the underlying features
of its foreign policy in Africa. They have been condemned
on numerous occasions by the United Nations and the
international community as overt violations of international law and the Charter.

14. The fundamental conclusion ,to be drawn from these
extensive debates and from the resolutions is one that it is
difficult to contradict. Since then, the situation has considerably deteriorated, a development &at could be substantiated by the following main features: first, the aggravation
and exceptional brutality of reIjieS$ons on the part df the
racist r6gime inside the country; secqndly, the growing arrogance and aggressiveness of South Africa vis-&vis neighbouring States-Angola, Mozanibihtie and Zambia; thirdly,
the aggravation of the colonial war against the people of
Namibia and the measures taken by the r&ime, including
fraudulent manceuvres aimed at @petuating the colonial
yoke over this Territory illegally oscupied by South Africa;
fourthly, the active support rendered by the South African
racist Government to ‘the illegal’ i6gime of Ian Smith, a
support that turns into farce the loudly proclaimed diplomatic moves for a “peaceful solution** of the problem of the
liberation of the people of Zimbabwe; fifthly, the diplomatic support rendered by severa’l ,Westem Powers to the
manccuvres of the South African Government which contributed to that country’s arrogant attitude in regard to the
proposals on Namibia made by the United Nations.

10. In the present critical and explosive situation in southem Africa, however, the timing of these acts of aggression
against Angola has acquired special significance within the’
political scenario of arrogance and hypocrisy so characteristic of the South African racists and their protectors. It seems
that the recent aggression had several targets subordinated
to one common objective, that is, the maintenance of the
oppressive colonial and racist r&imes. They have been
designed to intimidate the front-line States, which, faithful
to the principles of the self-determination and independence
of the peoples of Namibia and acting in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council, are supporting the legitimate struggle of the
people of Namibia for the attainment of freedom and
independence.

15. As is generally recognized, this startling development
of events in South Africa might erupt at any moment into
an even more dangerous conflict. The last acts of aggression
committed against the People’s Republic of Angola have
confirmed it. So, it is not only fully justifiable but also
imperative that the Security Council should take urgent and
effective measures. The provocative and aggressive actions
of the South African rulers represent a real challenge to the
United Nations. For decades, the Pretoria regime has been
practising the shameful policy of upurrheid inside the country. For decades, this regime, through the constant econorr.ic assistance of the Western countries and influential

11. The armed attacks and provocations against Angola,
Mozambique and Zambia have also been aimed at inflicting
a heavy blow to the national liberation movement of
Namibia and its sole legitimate representative, SWAPO. At
the same time, the South African Government, while rejecting the proposals contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral [S/13120], is trying, with the active collaboration
of some Western Powers, to exert pressure on SWAP0 to
obtain further concessions from it. If this manCeUvre of
colonialist hypocrisy and demagogy is unsuccessful, it
should come as no surprise to anyone that the blame is laid
2

foreign economic interests, has been the mainstay of cdonialism and oppression in southern Africa, animpediment to
the process of the liberation of a number of African peoples
from the centuries-long colonial yoke and, in this way, it
brought additional untold suffering to those heroic nations.

r@ime. and take measures to end all military attacks and
prevent the further deterioration of security in that region.
The Government of South Africa should be compelled to
respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola and other neighbouring States.

16. There is nothing more logical or natural than the fact
that a regime that has-elevated racism and its most cruel
manifestation, apartheid, to the level of an official State
policy, a regime whose actions are governed by Fascist
ideology, should endanger the security, territorial integrity
and free development of close or distant neighbours on their
road to social progress.

20. My Government condemns with indignation the acts
of aggression perpetrated by South Africa and urges the
Council to take effective measures in accordance with
Chapter VII of the Charter.
21, In conclusion, on behalf of my Government and the
Bulgarian people, I should like to expressour admiration to
the people and Government of Angola for their determination in defending the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of their country and for their continued
support of the people of Namibia in theirjust and legitimate
struggle. I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate our
solidarity with the People’s Republic of Angola, which
derives also from the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation between our two countries signed at Luanda on
21 October 1978. That Treaty is an expression of the common aspirations and objectives of our two nations. To
illustrate my point, I should like to close my statement with
a short passage from a speech delivered by the Chairman of
the State Council of Bulgaria and First Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Bulgarian Communist Party,
Todor Zhivkov, during his visit to Luanda:

17. In essence, the international community has already
passed a most categorical judgement on the South African
regime and its policy of apartheid, which has been declared a
crime against humanity. Numerous are the resolutions of
the United Nations which contain such a condemnation
and which proclaim the legitimacy of the struggle of the
people of South Africa for self-determination and liberty.
No less numerous are the resolutions which demand that
the racist Pretoria regime should be isolated politically and
diplomatically and that all economic and military cooperation whatsoever with it should be halted.
18. But for years the South African racists, with an arrogance that has been most prejudicial to the authority of the
World Organization, have declined to reckon with the United Nations. There are abundant facts of late as to the
alarming growth of the South African military potential.
Suffice it for me to mention that the regime’s military
expenditures increased fourfold in the 1972-1978 period
alone. Ca-n there by,any doubt that this would not have
happened but for the active collaboration between Pretoria
and the NATO States m, the economic and military fields?
Therefore, of what value are the verbal condemnation,
indignation and reprobation if, at the same time, the South
African racists are being granted the material means to
intensify their repression of the fighters for freedom and
human dignity in the country, to extend their aggression
against neighbouring African countries and to perpetuate
colonialism against the people of Namibia who are fighting
for independence and liberty7 It is high time to put an end to
this double-faced policy. An unbearable situation is being
created that requires the translation of words and resolutions into practical deeds and the taking of effective mandatory actions against the racist regime of South Africa.
Above all, however-and I should like strongly to emphasize this-it is high time that all States strictly complied with
the United Nations resolutions. Verbal condemnations and
declarative statements of indignation conceming,the theory
and practices of apartheid in South Africa are no longer
suflicient. The only effective way to prove that such condemnation and reprobation are meaningful is to take firm
steps to apply comprehensive sanctions against South
Africa in accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter, to
discontinue relations with it without further delay and to
terminate economic and military collaboration in any form
with Pretoria.

“The People’s Republic of Bulgaria and the People’s
Republic of Angola stand close together in every respect,
and there is nothing to divide us. We are bound close
together, not only by the present, but also by the past, in
which we have had much in common, as well as by our
common future.”
22. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
23. Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (interpretation from
French): Mr. President, first of all I should like to thank you
and the other members of the Security Council for having
allowed me to speak in this important debate. I welcome the
prompt decision of the Council to convene this urgent
meeting in order to take an exemplary stand in the face of
the successive armed attacks of the racist South African
n5gime against the People’s Republic of Angola and in the
face of its attitude of unparalleled arrogance towards the
United Nations.
24. It is not the first time that the Council has been called
to examine acts of aggression by the South African and
Rhodesian racist regimes against the People’s Republic of
Angola and against the other front-line States in southern
Africa. These acts have been committed repeatedly for
several years now. As was pointed out by the communiques
of the Ministry of Defence of the People’s Republic of
Angola published in documents S/13168 and S/13177, the
Pretoria regime, from 8 to 14 March, carried out air raids
and armed incursions into several areas of the Cunene and
Benguela provinces, some penetrating as far as 17 kilome-

19. The Security Council should therefore condemn the
acts of aggression committed by the South African racist
3

tres from the frontier, causing immeasurable material damage and loss of human life to the people of Angoia.

historic period when the balance of forces has undergone
changes more favourable to the struggle for national independence of countries and national liberation movements
in southern Africa, as was noted by the special session of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the Co-ordinating Bureau
of Non-Aligned Countries recently held at Maputo. The
Bureau considered that the decisive factor ,m this change
was the resounding military defeat ihff icted on Portuguese
colonialism by the peoples of Angola, Mozambique and
Guinea-Bissau after a very long armed national liberation
struggle. The final communique of Maputo furthermore
pointed out:

25. These flagrant acts of aggression by the Pretoria
regime, just like those committed by the illegal regime of
Salisbury against the People’s Republic of Angola in February last, constitute grave violations of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Angola, gross violations of the-principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the most
elementary norms of international law, and also intolerable
defiance of international public opinion and the world
community.
26. Against those barbarous acts of aggression, the people
of Angola, under the leadership of President Agostinho
Neto and the Central Committee of the MPLA, the party of
the workers, struck back heroically, thus demonstrating
their determination to defend, at any price, their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, as well as their
achievements in the work of national reconstruction after
liberation. The whole world knows that the struggle of the
people of Angola is being waged-in total solidarity with the
struggle for liberation of their brothers, the peoples of
Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa.

“The Bureau noted that another major contribution
to this change was the victory.of the people of Angola
over the army of the racist regime.of South Africa, when
it undertook open aggression against them. The victory
of the Angolan people wasa heavy blow for the imperialist forces in southern Africa, and it encourages the peoples of the region to intensify the onslaught on the
remaining outposts of colonialism and racism.
“The victory of Angola and Moiambique,
their
achievement of national independence and the establiihment in those countries of governments and political
systems freely chosen by their peoples has led to greater
consolidation of the independence of the States in southern Africa and thus enlarged the secure rearguard for the
national liberation movements.‘* /S/13185, annex, paras.
..
24 and 2S.j

27. It is public knowledge that after the failure of aggression against Angola in 1975 the racist upurrheid regime of
South Africa, supported by certain Western Powers and
making use of illegally occupied bases in the Territory of
Namibia, committed acts of provocation and aggression
one after another, and ever more deliberate, against the
Angoian revolution. International imperialist and reactionary circles provided all the necessaryresources for the Pretoria and Salisbury racists to help them step up their military
attacks against the front-line States and against the national
liberation movements in southern Africa in the hope of
checking their liberation struggle. Thus, the Liberation
Committee of the Organization of African Unityin January
last denounced the presence of 13,000 mercenaries in
Rhodesia to tight the liberation forces. Mozambique announced that from March 1977 to June 1978 the illegal Ian
Smith regime had committed at least 143 acts of aggression
against that country, causing serious loss in human iife and
material damage. Botswana also declared that from 1965,
and particularly after 1977, the date on which the front-line
States organized themselves, the racists carried out more
than 100 armed attacks against the territory of Botswana.
The armed forces and air force of the Pretoria and Salisbury
regimes have carried out repeated-attacks against Zambia;
last November, for instance, they killed more than 400
people and wounded more than 700 in a single attack
against a Zimbabwe refugee camp. It is obvious that all
these acts are dictated by imperiafist policy in this region,
which aims at destabilizing progressive Governments of
independent African countries, impeding the liberation of
the territories stih remaining under the colonial yoke and
maintaining minority racist regimes. The sole objective of
that policy is to protect for the present the economic, political and strategic interests of imperialism and tapromotethe
“recoionizing” of Africa as and when conditions permit.

29. In spite of their military defeat in the field and their
political and diplomatic isolation within the international
community, and although they. ‘are condemned by the
whole of mankind which loves peace and justice, the racist
regime of South Africa and ‘the ihegal minority regime of
Rhodesia have not given up their- plans for perpetuating
their domination. Armed to the teeth, aided and enouraged
by imperialist forces and the forces of international reaction, they continue to practise repression and to terrorize
the peopIe inside these countries and to have recourse to
economic measures and acts of armed aggression aimed at
weakening the front-line States in the hope of forcing them
to give up their support for the national liberation movements in Namibia, Zimbabwe and South Africa. In this
way, these racist and minority “regimes, which persist in
opposing the emancipation of the peoples of southern
Africa, amount to an operational terrorist army of imperialism and international reaction against free Africa, and constitute a real and very serious threat to peace andsecurity in
Africa and in the world.
. .I
30. However, contrary to the aims of theracists and their
protectors, all. these pertidious manceuvres and barbarous
armed attacks by the regimes of Pretoria and Salisbury do
nothing whatsoever to reduce the economic and military
potential or, indeed, the will to unity of the front-line States;
they in fact serve to strengthen even further the militant
solidarity and active support of these countries for the
struggle of the peoples of Namibia, Zimbabwe and South
Africa for genuine independence and freedom. Thepeoples
of southern Africa, waging a decisive struggle against the
last bastions of colonialism, racism and apartheid, will
honourably discharge their duty, but they also call upon the

28. The struggle of the peoples of southern Africais entering its most critical phase and is one of the flash points of the
current situation in the world. We are living through an
4

international community for the most@iergetic and firm
action against their tormentors.

@your colleague, therepresentative of the People’s Republic of Angoia, and associates itself with so many other
delegations in urging. the Council to take effective and
energetic measures against the South African racists. This is
one of the essential conditions for-finding a just and equitable solution to the difficult problemofNamibia.
The Pretoria regime must be firmly condemned not only for having
deliberately impaired the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the People’s Republic of Angola but:also for having
shown obstinate arrogance towards the international community and all the relevant decisions and resolutions of the
United Nations.

31. In his inaugural address to the Maputo meeting, President Samora Machel of Mozambique declared:
“Imperialism will be overcome. It will meet the same
doom as the .Portuguese colonialists. Shortening or
lenghtening the death throes of racism, reducing the
price to be paid-this all depends on ourjoint action and
our support for,the liberation struggle. Conditions are
favourable for victory.”
32. At the meeting of 19 March, the representative of
Angola [213Oth meek@ quoted the words of Agostinho
Neto, the President of the People’s Republic of Angola,
which expressed forcefully the will of the people of Angola
to defend their country’s freedom and socialism as we11as its
determination to discharge its internationalist duty.

38. The PRESIDENT: The next sneaker is the reuresentative of Sri Lanka. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
39. Mr. RODRIGO (Sri Lanka): Mr. President, I should
like at the outset to thank you and, through you, the other
members of the Security Council for having given me the
opportunity to express the views of the delegation of Sri
Lanka, which is currently serving in the capacity of Chairman of the Group of Non-Aligned Countries.

33. At this time of terrible ordeal. from which the people
of Angola will surely emerge victorious, the delegation of
the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam reaffirms the fraternal
friendship and unswerving militant solidarity of the Vietnamese people with the heroic people’of Angola in its holy
struggle for the protection of its independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity and also in the discharge of its noble
internationalist duty. ‘The metnamese people warmly welcomes the victories of the Angolan revolution, which we
view as victories of our own.

40. It was barely a fortnight ago that the Permanent
Representative of Sri Lanka-who regrets his absence at
this time from New York-spoke
before the Council to
condemn the acts of aggression of the racist regime of
Southern Rhodesia against the front-line States of southern
Africa, inluding Angola. Once more the Council has been
convened to defend the independence, sovereignty and tenitorial integrity of a front-line State-Angola-which
is the
latest victim in what appears to be an unremitting chain of
acts of aggression perpetrated by the racist regimes of southem Africa.

34. Our people warmly welcome and highly esteem the
fact that the front-line States-Mozambique, Zambia,Tanzania, Botswana and Angola-have joined together in a
common fighting .front actively supporting SWAP0 in
Ntiibia, the Patriotic Front of Zimbabwe in Rhodesia and
the African National Congress in South Africa, which are
leading the strugglein ,all,its forms, including armedstruggle, in these three countries for self-determination and true
independence for their peoples,
.
35. This militant solidarity of the peoples of southern
Africa is one.of the decisive factors in their victory and aIso
,another living reality which has the force of objective law in
our time-the unity of oppressed peoples with the revolutionary and progressive forces in their victorious struggle
for national emancipation and against old and new colonialism, imperialism, expansionism, racism and apartheid.

41. Last year the Security Council adopted resolution 428
(1978), which condemned South Africa’s aggression against
Angola and demanded that South Africa should scrupulously respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Angola. These meetings of the Council, convened to consider acts of aggression against the front-line
States by one or the other of the minority regimes in southem Africa, are now acquiring an almost ritualistic regularity that’ is alarming. Rather than inducing feelings of
resigned cynicism leading to a sort of political lethargy, .
these acts must, by their very regularity, serve to convince
the international community in general and the Security
Council in particular of the continuously grave threat posed
by the ‘racist regimes to the peace and security not only of
the peoples and States of southern Africa but also the world
in general.

36. Faithful as always to its policy of principle, that is,
independence, national freedom and international solidarity, the Vietnamese people are firmly convinced that the just
revolutionary struggle of the fraternal people of the People’s Republic of Angola to defend its sovereignty and
territorial integrity and for the independence of the peopIes
of southern Africa, as well as the just and heroicstruggle of
SWAP0 in Namibia, the Patriotic Front in Rhodesia and
the African National Congress in South Africa, will continue to enjoy support and assistance of all kinds from all
revolutionary and progressive forces in free Africa and the
whole world and will irresistably march to final victory.

42. These acts of aggression are not merely a series of
isolate-d raids and forays; rather, in sum, they constitute a
deliberate and carefully timed and executed strategy to
undermine the independence and sovereignty of front-line
African States with the broader goal of setting back the
liberation struggle in Zimbabwe, Namibia and South
Africa. The liberation struggle may certainly be subject to
temporary set-backs, but the course which has been set by
humanity for the total emancipation of southern Africa is
inexqrable. The longer this process is delayed the greater the
upheaval that is being courted and the more disastrous the

37. The delegation of Viet Nam whole-heartedly supports
the just demand made on 19 March in the Security Council
5

consequences forany who seek to stifle it. At Colombo, the
heads of State of non-aligxied countries who met at their
summit conference noted that the degree of resistance by
the oppressed black people against the inhuman and criminal system of apartheid and racial discrimination had escalated to the level of a national uprising and that the struggles
in Zimbabwe and Namibia, together with the uprising in
South Africa, constituted “the final and decisive phase in
the liquidation of the tyrannical racist minority r&imes”.’

a fair chance. it is the other side that has gone back on
assurances made to the United Nations. If plans carefully
negotiated by all parties and supported by the international
community eventually come to naught, the responsibility
shall not lie with the front-line States or with SWAPO.
46. The implementation by the front-line States of the
sanctions imposed by the Security Council against the racist
regimes had constituted a heavy burden on their nascent
economies, including the sheltering of the thousands of
refugees, victims of racist r&imes, now living on their territories. The Ministerial Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau
of Non-Aligned Countries held at Mozambique called on
all States to intensify all forms of assistanceto the front-line
States of Angola, Botswana, Mozambique, Tanzania and
Zambia-a
call which should not go unheeded by the
Council.

43. The commitment of the non-aligned countries to sup
port the struggle in southern Africa for its liberation from
imperialism, colonialism, racism and aputtheidgoes back to
the first non-aligned summit held 18 years ago at Belgrade
and has been consistently renewed thereafter at every summit and ministerial meeting, The most recent Ministerial
Meeting of the Co-ordinating Bureau of Non-Aligned
Countries was held, significantly, in a front-line State:
Mozambique. At that meeting, Foreign Ministers strongly
condemned all acts of armed aggression, expansion and
destabilisation against Tanzania, Angola, Zambia, Botswana and Mozambique. The final communiqut of that
meeting stated:

47. It is reassuring, Mr. President that you, the representative of non-aligned Nigeria, with you! personal commitment to the, anti-apartheid struggle and your country’s
dedication to the total emancipation of southern Africa, are
at this time guiding the deliberations of the Council on the
issue under consideration. The non-aligned countries sincerely wish you and the members of the Council successin
your endeavours to deal effectively with the issue, and
assure Angola and other front-line States and the liberation
struggle in southern Africa of continuing support and
solidarity.

“. . . These actions constitute an attempt by the enemy
to divert the support given by the front-line States to the
!iberation struggle.
6‘. . .
“. . . me Bureau] called for further and substantially
increased support and assistance to the front-line States
to preserve and strengfhen their independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity, and alleviate the suffering
of their people and the vast damage caused to their
economies as a result of the wanton aggressions and
destruction perpetrated against them by the racist minority r@imes.” [S/13185, annex paras. 71 and 78.J

48. The PRESIDENT: The next s&ker is the representative of Ghana. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement. I .,
49. Mr. SEKYI (Ghana): Mr. President, about a fortnight
ago I had the pleasure of congratulating you on your
assumption of the Chair and of conveying to you the confidence of my delegation in your chairmanship. We believe
that the performance has already fulfilled the promise and
so we are particularly happy again, and of course thankful,
that we have been granted the opportunity to address the
Council on Pretoria’s aggression against Angola while the
Council is still under your presidency.

44. Earlier this week, the representative of Angola spoke
of the heavy toll his country had had to-bear in human and
material terms. Therepresentative of Zambia also described
the recent acts of death and destruction visited upon his
country by the racist r&imes. I do not intend to catalogue
the crimes committed against these and other front-line
States. That is being done more authoritatively by the States
concerned. I only wish to say that if those independent
States do not obtain the support and protection of the
international community through the Security Council,
which bears primary responsibility for the-maintenance of
international peace and security, then the veryprinciples on
which the United Nations is founded would be negated.

50. In documents S/l3168 and S/13177, the Angolan
delegation has adequately stated the reasons why it has
asked for the convening of this meeting. Angola, inshort, is
complaining that between 8 and 13 of this month, its territory, its people and its property were subjected to a seriesof
wanton and unprovoked attack and its air space violated
by the air force of the Pretoria racists. Considering the
frequency of the attacks, the scale of the operations, the
reported penetration by land forces as much as 17 kilometres into Angolan territory and the uninhibited use of
napalm, there can be no doubt at all that Pretoria has taken
a deliberate decision to embark on yet another spree ofits
familiar adventurism, this time at the expense of Angola, in
defiance of the specific warning delivered by the Security
Council last May.

45. The frequent exhortations to the front-line States for
moderation and peaceful solutions are absolutely meaningless and empty unless the Security Council takes the necessary steps to prevent the recurrence of acts of aggression
against these States. In fact, the front-line States and
SWAP0 have shown great patience and forebearance and
have co-operated fully with the United Natiotls,.particularly
with regard to independence for Namibia. Theyhave made
sacrif&s. They have given peaceful negotiations more than

51. Later we shall look at the motives. Now I wish to
express the unflinching solidarity of my Government with
that of Angola in its courageous stand against this new

I A/31/197. afinexi, para. 41.
6

outburst of racist aggression, which calls indeed for the
most unreserved condemnation by the Council-and we
hope the Council will pronounce it in clear, unmistakable
terms.

57. The objection issure to be raised that talks are again in
progress and that pressure by any of the Western five-the
mediators-would
prejudice their chances of success.We
have always found the argument somewhat peculiar that
negotiators are more likely to succeed ifthey bargain from a
position of weakness and we are frankly out of patience
with the repeated suggestion that we must wait for South
Africa to make it clear that it will not cooperate with the
United Nations plan and with resolutions 385 (1976) and
435 (1978) before we can expect the Security Council to act.
South Africa is by now notorious for its time-buying feints.
It has decided again to make a feint at negotiation rather
than thumb its nose too openly. It may well have decided
that the categorical “no” which has now been made the
prerequisite for Council action will never be forthcoming. It
has obviously decided to prolong and protract the process
of negotiation by a strategy of simple obstructionism-until
the posture of affairs looks more propitious to its real
scheme, until more favourable Governments appear in the
West, until its own feeble Tumhalle marionettes appear
politically stronger and until the political support of
SWAP0 is that much further eroded.

52. We can hardly believe our eyes when we read of the
cool, cynical effrontery of Botha in demanding that the
Security Council should condemn SWAPO. What the
Council should do, in our view, is to commend the People’s
Republic of Angola, as it did last May, for its contin
support of the people of Namibia in their just and legitimate
struggle.
53. But the complaint before the Council is not merely
Angola’s or Africa’s It should be the eomplaint of the
whole civilized world concerning the contempt for intemational law and, for the purposes and the principles of the
Charter, repeatedly demonstrated by a State whose membership in the Organization is still tolerated for reasons
which have long ceased to be tenable. South Africa is an
inveterate and notorious offender. It has often enough been
arraigned before the Council for the same conduct and has
always got away with the same warning repeated ad
nauseam-and nothing more than that. The absence of
more effective measures against its peculiarly obnoxious
adventurism is, perhaps, the reason why the racist regime
has shown so little compunction whenever it felt like flexing
its muscles at the expense of neighbouring African States.

58. Talks have always been allowed to avert sanctions.
The question arises whether talks should now be allowed to
avert them again and so enable what is obviously the second
phase of the old Tumhalle scheme to be accomplished. If
that happens the Security Council will have played into
racist hands yet again-but this time with consequences
probably fatal to any effective action by the United Nations
in the discharge of its responsibilities towards the people of
Namibia.

54. Indeed, it is largely due to failure or reluctance to
apply more effective measures that the United Nations has
been forced to live with the continuing presence of the
Pretoria regime in ;Namibia, that Territory theoretically
under United Nations authority from which the armed
intruder dares to launch its continual attacks against
Angola and other neighbouring countries and to make its
continual affronts to the Organization. It is due to the same
failure and the same reluctance that the world community is
now reduced to negotiating with the Pretoria rigims-as if
it had any right to be in Namibia-to
accepting its continued military presence, its illegal administration and its
armed police during- -what should be an act of selfdetermination within the boundaries of a United Nations
trust.

59. We have already said, and we still maintain, that the
second Tumhalle scheme is infinitely more dangerous than
the first. It poses a far more serious threat to international
peace and security. Our fear as early as last December was
that once its marionettes were placed in position nothing
would prevent them, if Pretoria were to make the right
manipulation, the right flick of its little finger, from provoking hostilities across the border, from sabotaging thus every
possibility of the cease-fire prerequisite to the United
Nations plan, and thus sabotaging the plan itself. Already
Pretoria’s plans for an attack across the Angolan border
were being reported widely enough.

55. Today, the marionettes of Tumhalle II, the products
of an action by an illegal regime which the Council itself has
declared null and void, stalk through the corridors of the
United Nations as if there were a proper basis for their
involvement in talks on the United Nations settlement proposal. The situation is hard to tolerate.

60. We believe today that Pretoria meant to create the
pretext it wanted for not withdrawing its troops from
Namibia. A sham election and/or a unilateral declaration
of independence, both under the protection of apartheid
guns, would be but one step beyond that. And the United
Nations would be faced in Namibia with a situation which
would be even more than the exact replica of the Rhodesian
one. The events of to&y merely confirm our fears.

56. But it is the view of the Ghana delegation that the
Council is now bound by its own decision under resolution
428 (1978) to meet again in the event of further violations of
Angolan sovereignty and territorial integrity in order to
consider the adoption of more effective measures under the
Charter, including measures under Chapter VII. And when
I say “more effective measures” I am quoting the language
of the resolution. Well, those further violations have now
taken place, not once but repeatedly, and the Council cannot, in our view, escapethe obligation to give serious consideration to measures under Chapter VII.

61. As we have already pointed out, Namibia already
exhibits and has long exhibited on a larger scale, on a more
alarming scale, all those features which made Rhodesia an
acknowledged threat to the peace as far back as 1966: there
are internal oppression, external aggression, an armed
rebellion against legal authority and an illegal military occupation tantamount to an act of alien aggression against the
people of Namibia. Following the December “elections** it
7

.-

’

1

already has what amounts to an internal settlement. The
attacks across the Angolan border have now started on the
initiative of the Pretoria regime itself. A unilateral declaration of independence is already threatened if the United
Nations plan falls through. Inability to establish a cease-fire
will mean the end of that plan, and a cease-tire will not
occur if the South African attacks persist across the Angolan border, provoking, as they are naturally: bound to do,
reprisals from SWAPO.
62. What will occur instead is a unilateral declaration of
independence, and a unilateral declaration of indepencence
behind the barrier of Pretoria’s weaponry. It is for the
Council to decide whether effective measures will be taken
before or after that catastrophe. While the United Nations
hesitates, that central scheme is being accomplished, along
with its byproducts, since it almost certainly has a multiple
rather than a simple aim. For if the attacks continued and
succeeded in their objective, SWAP0 would thenhave been
either militarily damaged prior to a unilateral declaration of
independence or politically damaged prior to an election
under the United Nations plan through the decimation of
political exiles in refugee camps.
63, We prefer action now to forestalt clearly foreseeable
dangers. The time is long overdue when the Security Council should recognize and determine, first of all, that the
situation in Namibia constitutes a threat to international
peace and security. It follows therefrom that it is now time
to arrest the stockpiling by South. Africa of crude oil
reserves to the point where they would last until oil-fromcoal takes over, by the grace of the West. It is time to
intercept the supply from the West, and the West only, of
refined aviation fuel to the lethal arm of the regime-for
aviation fuel is not refined in South Africa. It is time to

revoke all licences for the manufacture of any more napalmcarrying Mirages, a measure specifically enjoined by the
Security Council non-mandatory embargo of 1963 but not,
strangely enough, by the mandatory one of 1977. And it is
time, above all, to halt the flow of Western investmentsfor they are the only ones-into the industrial-military complex of the apartheid regime.
64. Measures of this kind are bound to undermine the
position of strength from which alone the apartheid r&me
has been able for so long to outrage its neighbours and to
defy, out-manoeuvre and outwit the United Nations itself at
every turn. These are the measures needed to defeat the
temporizing manceuvres by which the aparzhefdr&iine aims
at placing itself pretty soon beyond the need to temporize
any more. And if we are to overtake and forestall the
apartheid regime in its race to that point of immunity, we
must ourselves race forward and, above all, definitely stop
sehing that r&ime the time it wants to buy. My Government
urges that the Security Council now should not merely
consider but proceed in a meaningful manner with at Last
some effective measures under Chapter,VII of the Charter,
as envisaged last year in its ownresolution 428 (1978). This
should in our view-and we call for it-go along with the
clear condemnation of the apartheid regime’s latest outrages
against the territorial integrity of Angola and with a commendation of the gallant people and Government of
Angola for their undeterred support of the people of
Namibia, spearheaded by SWAPO, in their just and legitimate struggle for freedom.

The meeting rose at LOS p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

United
Nations
publications
throughout
tbe world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

may be obtained
your bookstore

or

LES PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
d@ositaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aup&
de votre libraire ou adresses-vous
B : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Genkve.
KAK

HOlIYPHTb

R3HAHRIL

OPrAHH

3AYEiH

OE’bEANHEHHIaIX

HAIUUf

Rs~aRsuI
OpraHAJaqHH
06%eJ@UieHEbrx
HaqaR
16oauio aynn~b
a KEEKcIIbIx
Marasmrax
II areRTc’raax
BO acex paftoriax
uxpa.
Raaor(HTe
cnpaaxa
06 suAaHmZX
B
BarneM ~mumio~
Marasmfe
mm nNmATe no wpec.y : OpraRH3aIWK
06’beAmieHHbrX
HaqnR, Ceaqnx no npoxaxe
asAamiR. Hbxo-Ffoprt
am% Xenesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas estin
buidoras
en todas partea de1 mundo.
Cons&e
Unidas, Sea&in de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

Price: $U.S. 1.50

NACIONRS

UNIDAS

en venta en librerfas
y casas distria su librero o dirfjase
a: Naciones

79-7OLl02-December

1981-2.250
