116

General Assembly-Thirty-seeond Session

favour of developing island countries 161 and welcomes
the initiation of the measures specified therein;
2. W elcomes, in particular, the activities undertaken by the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, including the establishment of a unit in
its secretariat devoted to the problems of the least developed, land-locked and island developing countries;
3. Also welcomes the progress achieved by the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization in
its implementation of the special technical assistance
programme for developing island countries;
4. Urges ali organizations in the United Nations
system to continue to identify and implement, within
their respective spheres of competence, appropriate
specific action in favour of developing island countries,
in accordance with the recommendations in resolution
98 (IV) of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development, in particular those concerning the
fields of transport and communications, trade and commercial policies, industrialization, tourism, the transfer
of technology, marine and submarine resources development, the flow of externa! resources, environment
protection and response to natural disasters;
5. Further urges the United Nations organizations
concemed, in particular the United Nations Development Programme and the regional commissions, to give
attention to programmes of regional and subregional
co-operation in respect of developing island countries;
6. Calls upon Governments, in particular those of
the developed countries, to take fully into account, in
their bilateral and regional development efforts and in
relevant negotiations towards the attainment of the objectives of the new intemational economic order, the
special problems of developing island countries;
7. Decides to keep under review all progress in the
implementation of the present resolution and requests
the Secretary-General to submit for the consideration
of the General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session a
sectoral analysis of action undertaken in favour of developing island countries and proposals for further consideration, taking into account the consideration of this
question by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its fifth session.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/186.

Assistance to Antigua, Dominica, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St.
Vincent

The General Assembly,
Recalling its decision 32/ 413 of 28 November 1977
by which it deferred until its thirty-third session con~
sideration of the question of Antigua, Dominica, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent,102
Aware of the special problems faced by Antigua,
Dominica, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St.
Vincent with regard to territorial size, geographical
location and limited economic resources as well as
the serious adverse effects on their econ01~ies of recent
world-wide economic and financia! problcms,
Mindful that these Territories require the continued
attention and assistance of the United Nations in the
achievement by their peoples of their dcvelopment
objectives,
161 A/32/126 and Add.l.
162 See sect. X.B.6.

Recalling also its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
and ali other resolutions and decisions of the United
Nations relating to these Territories and peoples,
N oting the action taken by the specialized agencies
and the organizations within the United Nations system, as well as the regional bodies, particularly the
Caribbean Community and Common Market, to provide
eeonomic, financia} and technical assistance to these
countries, as set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral on progress in the implementation of specific
action in favour of developing island countries, 163
Recalling that the question of Antigua, Dominica,
St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent is
currently under consideration in the relevant and competent organs of the United Nations,
l. Stresses the urgency of rendering all necessary
assistance to the peoples of Antigua, Dominica, St.
Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, St. Lucia and St. Vincent in their
efforts to strengthen their national economies and calls
upan the Government of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, in consultation with the
freely elected representatives of the peoples of those
Territories, to take adequate steps to establish and
finance an appropriate programme of development of
the Territories;
2. Requests the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system, including in particular the United Nations Development Programme, international financia! institutions and aid
donors to intensify their assistanee within their respective spheres of competence to the peoples of those
Territories.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977

32/187.

Deht prohlems of developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975,
Recalling its resolution 31/158 of 21 December
1976 on debt problems of developing countries,
Recalling also resolution 94 (IV) of 31 May 1976
of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, 164
Noting that no substantive action has been taken in
pursuance of the resolutions noted above and that the
?rowing externa! debt of developing countries amountmg to nearly $200 billion, resulting from a decline in
their export earnings, increased import costs and inadequate concessional assistance, places a heavy burden
on their limitcd forcign cxchangc resourccs,
C:onc:erned that ~any developing countries are expenencmg extreme d1fficulties in scrvicing their externa]
dcbts ancl are unable to pursue or initiate important
16 :J

164

A/32/ l 26 and Add.1.

See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and D~velopm~nt, Fourth Session, vol. J, Report and
Annexes _(Umted Nations publication, Sales No. E.76.TI.D.10

and corngendum), part one, sect. A.

V.

Resolution.o adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

development projccts, that thc growth performance of
the most seriously affected, least dcveloped, land-locked
and island developing countries during thc first half
of this decadc has been extremely unsatisfactory and
that their per capita incomes have hardly increased,
Considering that substantial dcbt-relief measures in
favour of developing countries are essential and would
result in a significant infusion of untied resources urgently required by many developing countries,
Acknowledging that balance-of-payment support
facilities have been inadequate and that official development assistance flows havc been stagnating,
Convinced that net capital inflows, especially relating
to official development assistance, to developing countries, in particular to the most seriously affectcd, least
developed, land-locked and island developing countries,
must be increased substantially and rapidly,
A ware that the majority of developing countries do
not enjoy proper access to international capital markets
and that, in any event, loans in such markets are available at high interest rates and on short maturities,
Regretting that so far most developed countries have
not been prepared to assist in resolving the immediate
difficulties of those developing countries suffering from
the effects of heavy debt burdeos or to consider the
debt question in the perspective of development rather
than commerce,
Noting that the Special Action Programme of $1
billion offered by the developed donor countries at the
Conference on International Economic Co-operation165
will cover less than one third of the annual debt-service
payments of the most seriously affected and the least
developed countries, and that substantive action has yet
to be taken by them to implement the Programme,
1. W elcomes the adoption of the provisional agenda
for the part of the ninth special session of the Trade
and Development Board to be held at the ministerial
leve!, 166 which includes proposals for the immediate
solution of the debt problems of developing countries;
2. Calls upon the Trade and Development Board
at its ministerial session to reach satisfactory decisions
on:
(a) Generalized debt relief by the developed countries on the official debt of developing countries, in
particular of the most seriously affected, least developed, land-locked and island developing countries, in
the context of the call for a substantial increase in net
official development assistance flows to developing
countries;
( b) Reorganization of the en tire system of debt
renegotiation to give it a developmental orientation so
as to result in adequate, equitablc and consistent debt
reorganizations;
(e)
The problems created by the inadequate access
of the majority of developing countries to intcrnational
capital markets, in particular the danger of the bunching
of repayments caused by the short maturities of such
loans;
3. W elcomes the steps taken by sorne developed
countries to cancel official debts owed to them by
165 See A/31/478/Add.l
and Add.1/Corr.1, chap. III,
sect. F.
166 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtv-second
Sessíon, Süpplement No. 15 (A/32115), vol. II, part two,
annex IT.

ll7

certain dcveloping countries and the decision to extend
futurc official devclopment assistancc in favour of the
most seriously affected and the Ieast developed of the
devcloping countries in the form of grants, and urges
that this be followed by similar decisions by other developed countrics;
4. Rccommends that additional financia! resources
should be committed by multilateral development financc institutions to the developing countries experiencing debt-scrvicing difficulties.
107th plenary meeting
19 December 1977
32/188.

United Nations Conference on an lnternational Code of Condut't on the Transf er of Technolo~y

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-opcration, as well as its resolution 2626
(XXV) of 24 October 1970 containing the International Development Strategy for the Second United
N ations Devclopmcnt Decade,
Recafling further paragraph 13 of its resolution 31/
159 of 21 December 1976,
1. Decides to convene a United Nations conference
to negotiate and to take ali decisions necessary for the
adoption of an international code of conduct on thc
transfcr of technology under the auspices of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development, to be
held from 16 October to 10 November 1978;
2. Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development to convene, if necessary, additional meetings of the Intergovernmental Group of Experts, in arder to adhere to
the time-table for the United Nations Conferencc on
an International Code of Conduct on the Transfer of
Technology as specified in paragraph 1 above;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) Ali Sta tes to participate in the Conference;
( b) Representativcs of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assemhly to participate in the sessions and the work of all
intcrnational confcrenccs convened under its auspiccs
in the capacity of observers, to participate in the Confcrence in that capacity in accordance with Assembly
resolution 3237 (XXIX) of 22 Novembcr 1974 and
31 / 152 of 20 Deccmber 1976;

(e) Represcntatives of thc national libcration movemcnts recognized in its region by the Organization of
African Unity to participate in the Conference in the
capacity of observers in accordance with General Asscmbly resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974;
(d)
The United Nations Council for Namibia to
participate in the Conference in accordance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly rcsolution 32/9 E of
4 Novembcr 1977;
