Re1olntion1 adopted on the reporta of the Fifth Committee

before he reached the age of sixty-five, the widow's
pension shall amount to one-half of the amount of
such pension, but shall not be less than one-twelfth
of the annual salary ;
" ( c) If the former member had reached the age of
sixty-five when he began to receive his retirement
pension, the widow's pension shall amount to one-half
of his retirement pension, but shall not be less than
one-sixth of the annual salary.
"4. A widow's pension shall cease on her remarriage."

7S

(US dollars)
(a) The President of the International

Narcotics Control Board . . .

2,500

(b) The Vice-Presidents . . . .
1,500
(c) Other members . . . .
1,000
( d) These payments shall, in accordance with the

decision of the General Assembly at its twelfth
session, be payable in the form of an annual
lump sum for any year during which the recipients attend the meetings of the Board.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

ARTICLE VIII

(Application and effective date)

Replace the present· text by the following :
"1. The present Regulations shall be applicable
as from 1 January 1968 to all who are members of
the Court on or after that date and to their eligible
beneficiaries.
"2. Former members of the Court who left office
prior to 1 January 1968, or their eligible beneficiaries,
shall continue to have their entitlements governed
by the Regulations approved in General Assembly
resolution 1562 (XV) or 1925 (XVIII), as the case
may be, except that the revised provisions of article
III and the consequential changes under article IV
shall be applicable as from 1 January 1968 to all
relevant entitlements regardless of the date on which
the said entitlements first became payable."

II
Desirous of protecting former members of the International Court of Justice and their eligible beneficiaries
from the rise in the cost of living that has occurred
since their pensions were first awarded,
Decides that, as from 1 January 1968, and notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in
the Pension Scheme Regulations for members of the
International Court of Justice, pensions awarded prior
to 1 January 1964 and pensions awarded between 1
January 1964 and 31 December 1967, adjusted in
accordance with the revised provisions cited in article
VIII, paragraph 2, shall be raised by 33 per cent and
16 per cent respectively.
1642nd plenary meeting,
19 December 1967.

2368 (XXII). Payment of honoraria to members
of the International Narcoties Control
Board

The General Assembly
1. Takes note of the reports of the Fifth Committee'0 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions0 on the question of the
payment of honoraria to officers and other members of
the International Narcotics Control Board ;
2. Decides to pay honoraria to the members of the
International Narcotics Control Board on the following
basis:

'° JIM., document A/C.5/1123.
,1 Ibid., document A/6878.

2369 (XXIl). Reorganization of the top echelon
in the United Nations Secretariatz amend•
ments to the Staff Regulations of the
United Nations
The_ General Assembly
1. Takes note of the proposals of the SecretaryGeneral for the reorganization of the top echelon in the
United Nations Secretariat;
2. Decides that the Staff Regulations of the United
Nations shall be amended with effect from 1 January
1968 as follows :
(a) Replace the present text of regulation 1. 10 in
article I ( Duties, obligations and privileges) by the
following text :
"Regulation 1.10: The oath or declaration shall
be made orally by the Secretary-General, by UnderSecretaries-General and by Assistant SecretariesGeneral at a public meeting of the General Assembly
and by all other members of the Secretariat before
the Secretary-General or his authorized deputy" ;
( b) Replace the present text of paragraph (a) of
regulation 3.4 in article III ( Salaries and related allowances) by the following text :
"Regulation 3.4: (a) Staff members whose salary
rates are set forth in paragraphs 1 and 4 of annex I
to these Regulations shall be entitled to receive dependency allowances as follows :
" ( i) At $400 per year for a dependent wife or
dependent husband and $300 per year for
each dependent child ; or
" (ii) Where there is no dependent spouse, a single
annual allowance of $200 for either a dependent parent, a dependent brother or a
dependent sister" ;
( c) Replace the present text of the first sentence of
paragraph (a) of regulation 4.5 in article IV (Appointment and promotion) by the following text :
"Regulation 4.5: (a) Appointments of UnderSecretaries-General and of Assistant SecretariesGeneral shall normally be for a period of five years,
subject to prolongation or renewal";
(d) Replace the present text of paragraphs 1 and 2
of annex I by the following text :
"SALARY AND ALLOWANCES--UNDER-SECRETARIESGENERAL AND ASSISTANT SECRETARIES--GENERAL

"Annex I, paragraph 1
"An Under-Secretary-General shall receive a salary
of $US 33,500 per year and an Assistant SecretaryGeneral shall receive a salary of $US 30,000 per year
