S/PV.4264 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-sixth year

4264

th meeting
Thursday, 25 January 2001, 3.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mahbubani . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Singapore)

Members:

Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ireland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mauritius . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ahmed
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Valdivieso
Mr. Levitte
Mr. Ryan
Mr. Ward
Mr. Ouane
Mr. Neewoor
Mr. Strømmen
Mr. Granovsky
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Kuchynski
Mr. Eldon
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation in Sierra Leone
Note by the President of the Security Council (S/2000/1195).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

01-22726 (E)

S/PV.4264 (Resumption 1)

The meeting was resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Sweden. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the
European Union — Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania,
Slovakia and Slovenia — and the associated countries
Cyprus, Malta, and Turkey, as well as the European
Free Trade Association country Iceland, align
themselves with this statement.
The European Union welcomes the report of the
United Nations Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone, and
we thank Ambassador Chowdhury and all five
members of the Panel for the valuable work they have
done. This is a comprehensive report by independent
experts, which sheds light on the covert network of
support to the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). We
take particular note of the conclusion that systematic
and deliberate violations of Security Council
resolutions, especially by the leadership of Liberia,
continue to fuel this long and bitter conflict which has
brought misery to the people of Sierra Leone. Now is
the time for the international community to show
clearly by its actions that such activities will no longer
be tolerated.
The links between conflict diamonds and the
arms trade are at the core of the tragedy in Sierra
Leone. The RUF continues to rely on illegal trade in
diamonds to finance its campaign of violence, and the
population continues to suffer.
The European Union is particularly concerned
about the role played by the Liberian leadership, under
President Charles Taylor, in fuelling the violence in
Sierra Leone. The report provides conclusive evidence
that President Taylor is a key provider of arms and
related material to the RUF. Investigations also show
that RUF activities are financed through diamonds
mined in Sierra Leone and that the Liberian air registry
is being used for illicit trafficking in arms. The EU
demands that Liberia and all other parties involved in
the violation of sanctions cease such activities
immediately.
The Panel of Experts recommends a number of
robust and wide-ranging measures to address the

2

problems they have identified. Some of these measures
fall beyond the scope of the Security Council itself and
require implementation in other forums. For instance,
the report once again demonstrates the importance of
action on the proliferation of small arms, on both the
supply and the demand sides. The EU welcomes, and
has expressed its readiness to support, current efforts,
such as the Moratorium of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), to prevent the
illicit trade in small arms in West Africa. The EU also
supports efforts by individual countries, both in the
region and elsewhere, to tighten their air traffic
regulations and strengthen their customs controls.
The EU supports the recommendations of the
Panel of Experts for early action to curb the flow of
conflict diamonds from the region. We would support
coordinated action in order to establish national
certification schemes in the region, as well as measures
to strengthen control in countries identified as transit
States for conflict diamonds. We also underline the
importance of the recommendations of the Panel of
Experts that a global certification scheme be developed
as soon as possible. In this context, the EU emphasizes
its strong support for last year’s General Assembly
resolution 55/56, on conflict diamonds.
The Panel of Experts was mandated to look
primarily at the situation in Sierra Leone. Over time it
has become apparent that President Taylor’s
destabilizing agenda is spreading also to Guinea and
having dramatic effects on the security and
humanitarian situation of refugees and internally
displaced persons in that country. We applaud
ECOWAS efforts to try to deal with the situation in
Guinea, and we believe that a regional dimension of
this crisis further underlines the need for action by the
Security Council.
The European Union shares the strong concern of
the Panel of Experts that sanctions on diamonds and
weapons are being broken with impunity. We therefore
believe that effective pressure to persuade President
Taylor and his associates to comply with the sanctions
and to put an end to their support for the rebel
movement in neighbouring countries should be a key
element in the Security Council’s and the international
community’s response to the West African crisis. Such
measures should be targeted at the Liberian
leadership — yes — while limiting the impact on the
Liberian people themselves.

S/PV.4264 (Resumption 1)

We express our strong support for the intention of
the Security Council to take action in order to put
pressure on President Taylor and follow up on the
recommendations of the Panel of Experts. In this
context, the EU also supports an extension of the
mandate of the Panel of Experts.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Canada. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset, Mr. President, to echo the sentiments of
those who congratulated you this morning on having
organized this open meeting of the Security Council,
which shows your concern for transparency. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Chowdhury and the
Panel of Experts, who have done a tremendous job on
this question.
Canada welcomes the report of the Panel of
Experts on Sierra Leone and expresses its gratitude to
the members of the Panel for their detailed analysis of
the role of diamond- and arms-smuggling in this brutal
war.
The economic sources of conflict must first be
exposed if they are to be addressed properly. This
report is part of an important trend of examining in
depth the economic causes of certain conflicts,
including in Angola and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, of “naming and shaming” those who profit
from and sustain these wars and of taking meaningful
action where necessary, including, in the most
egregious situations, the imposition of sanctions and
embargo measures. Why should this not be done
upstream, at the source of the problem, as well as
further down the line?
During our time on the Security Council, Canada
argued that the Council should consider a range of
measures, both coercive and collaborative, to ensure
compliance with United Nations resolutions aimed at
ending the wars in Sierra Leone and Angola. We
believe that this report provides sufficient basis for the
adoption of sanctions targeting those identified by the
Panel, bearing in mind the need for such sanctions to
be both effective and sustainable, while safeguarding
civilian populations and the legitimate diamond
industry.
In light of the unambiguous conclusions drawn in
this report, Canada supports the immediate imposition

of an embargo on diamond exports from Liberia, as
well as other measures recommended in the report,
given that country’s clear role as a transit point for
gems mined illegally in Sierra Leone. We also support
the development, with the Council’s support, of
stringent control measures in neighbouring countries.
Should these collaborative efforts prove inadequate, the
Council ought not to hesitate to extend the embargo to
other States if and as needed.
We also encourage members to examine carefully
the numerous other recommendations in this report
with a view to reaching agreement on a comprehensive
package of measures that are both effective and
pragmatic. We encourage the Security Council to
engage relevant bodies in the development of those
measures and of criteria for measuring compliance by
the States targeted in the report. Any such measure
should be tied to explicit criteria, as the Council, we
believe, must avoid measures that are ambiguous or
open-ended.
(spoke in English)
Sanctions are becoming an increasingly effective
tool for the maintenance of international peace and
security. The various panels of experts established by
the Council have helped to bring this situation about. It
is essential that this trend continue. The Council’s
credibility is at issue. More to the point, the Council
must have at its disposal viable options between
deploying force on the one hand and merely uttering
words on the other.
However substantial the contribution made by the
ad hoc investigative panels established for Sierra
Leone and Angola, we believe that sanctions
monitoring would be still more effective if the United
Nations were to approach monitoring and enforcement
on a less provisional and more systematic basis. Quite
simply, targeted sanctions will not work if the Council
does not put in place the necessary arrangements to
detect violations and to determine the sources and
methods of violations. Monitoring arrangements should
remain in place for the duration of each targeted
sanctions regime, not for finite periods of three, six or
nine months’ duration.
We urge the Council to consider putting in place a
standing, integrated monitoring arrangement, not least
to improve efficiency and reduce overlap in the
Security Council’s efforts to detect violations of
Council measures. Instead of having three separate

3

S/PV.4264 (Resumption 1)

panels looking at similar issues in Angola, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Sierra Leone —
and often visiting the same capitals in close succession
speak to or about the same individuals — why not have
a single monitoring office operating with reference to
these and other sanctions regimes, as well to related
issues such as illegal trafficking in high-value
commodities? Such an office would function on an
ongoing basis, submitting reports through the various
sanctions Committees at their requests.
We encourage Council members to reflect on how
much more effective sanctions would be if such an
arrangement were in place and how much greater a
deterrent value such sanctions would have. The cost
would not be significantly greater than it is at present.
The effect would be greater, with the result that the
objectives for which the various sanctions regimes
were established would stand a far greater chance of
being achieved. We are delighted to note that a
significant number of members of the Council support
this idea.
Finally, we note that there has been an increase in
the level of the legitimate, Government-controlled
diamond trade in Sierra Leone as a consequence of
both the diamond certification scheme supported by the
Security Council and of the extensive attention paid to
the issue of conflict diamonds recently by industry,
Governments and the public. We reiterate our support
for international efforts to devise effective and
pragmatic measures to eliminate conflict diamonds,
with a particular focus on proposals for an international
certification scheme for rough diamonds. We call for a
concerted approach among diamond-producing and
diamond-trading States and believe that today’s
discussion will underscore the merits of and the need
for effective action by both.
The President: In accordance with the decision
taken earlier in the meeting, I invite the Permanent
Observer of Switzerland to the United Nations to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland rarely addresses the Security Council, but
today we believe that a statement is necessary because
Switzerland is mentioned in the report of the Panel of
Experts established by resolution 1306 (2000)
concerning Sierra Leone.
At the outset, I would stress that my Government,
too, is concerned by the situation in Sierra Leone and

4

by the resulting instability throughout the region. We
support the efforts of the United Nations and the
Economic Community of West African States to
provide a speedy and lasting solution to these
problems.
Switzerland particularly welcomes the various
measures adopted by the Security Council to put an end
to the conflict and to promote peace and stability in the
region. We believe that United Nations sanctions
aimed, inter alia, at eliminating the economic bases that
allow the conflict situation to persist are an important
instrument for attaining these goals.
In order to make these sanctions truly effective,
we need to be mindful of the risk of their being
circumvented. This problem is particularly relevant
with regard to the illicit importation of rough diamonds
from Sierra Leone. In this respect, I wish to recall that
my Government has not only fully implemented all the
recommendations of the Security Council, but has gone
even further in many spheres. It has, inter alia, taken
additional steps to enforce more effectively the
sanctions regime in the free ports and has drawn up a
list of countries that are potentially vulnerable to the
diamond traffic that sustains conflict. These countries
require increased vigilance.
The Swiss Government therefore regrets the fact
that the report of the Panel of Experts — contrary to
the recent, similar report on sanctions against
UNITA — refers in a partial and incomplete way to the
measures taken by Switzerland in this area, which are
detailed in the annex to the letter that I have addressed
to the President of the Security Council in document
S/2000/1232.
Allow me to add that my country supports
international efforts to design a global certification
system to prevent trade in conflict diamonds. We
welcome the General Assembly’s adoption last
December of the resolution on the role of diamonds, as
well as the efforts that have been made by participants
in the “Kimberley Process”. That Process has clearly
received a mandate from the General Assembly to
continue its work in this direction. Switzerland intends
to be actively involved in these efforts.
In conclusion, I would stress that my Government
attaches great importance to the promotion of peace
and stability in Sierra Leone and neighbouring
countries. At stake are not only the security of the

S/PV.4264 (Resumption 1)

people, but sustainable development throughout the
entire region.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Guinea. I invite him to take
a seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Camara (Guinea) (spoke in French): Allow
me at the outset to convey to you, Sir, my delegation’s
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council. Given our knowledge and
appreciation of your outstanding personal and
professional qualities, my delegation is confident that
under your guidance, the Security Council, in this first
month of the new millennium, will be able to write a
fresh chapter in its history.
Sir, I wish to welcome your recent initiative to
facilitate greater cooperation between countries that
contribute troops to peacekeeping operations and the
Security Council, so as to enhance the work of the
Council. I wish also to express our appreciation to the
Council for having enabled our delegation to take part
in today’s meeting, which is devoted to the
consideration of a situation that affects the equilibrium
of the whole of the West African region in general, and
my country in particular.
Indeed, for more than 10 years now, our
subregion has been gripped by a crisis that has
seriously jeopardized peace and security in our
countries. Everyone is aware of the great sufferings
that have afflicted the peoples of Liberia and Sierra
Leone for a decade now. My delegation would wish to
stress in particular the atrocities committed during that
period in the two afflicted countries, the hundreds of
thousands of people forced into exile and the
considerable material damage that has resulted.
Thanks to their determination, the States of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and its interposition force, the ECOWAS
Monitoring Group, were able to end the genocide in
Liberia. The return of peace and the holding of free
elections in that country, which allowed those very
parties who were responsible for the genocide to come
into power, have not diminished their belligerence.
They have continued their activities of destabilization
and destruction against other neighbouring States, in
particular Sierra Leone and Guinea.
The involvement and outright support of the
Liberian Government for various rebel movements of

the subregion have been proved beyond a doubt. The
Monrovia authorities are pursuing a policy of
terrorism, thereby violating all of the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, the Organization of
African Unity, ECOWAS and the Mano River Union.
The allegations made by the delegation of Liberia
are unfounded and cannot in any way disguise the
belligerent nature of the Liberian authorities. Everyone
is aware of the support given by Liberia and its
President to the Revolutionary United Front (RUF)
rebels. Liberia and other States of the region are the
main suppliers of weapons to the various rebel groups
operating in Western Africa, in a flagrant and
widespread violation of the arms sanctions imposed by
the Security Council.
The excellent report of the Panel of Experts on
the links between blood diamonds and weapons in
Sierra Leone is very instructive in this regard. We
would like to commend the outstanding work done by
the Panel under its Chairman, Mr. Chowdhury.
My country, the Republic of Guinea, is subject to
rebel attacks led from Monrovia and supported by RUF
rebels. These attacks have resulted in a great number of
deaths, including that of an official of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; significant
material damage; and a genuine humanitarian disaster
involving the displacement of border populations and
the scattering of hundreds of thousands of refugees.
Despite the recent statement of the President of
the Security Council condemning these attacks and
pointing the finger explicitly at Liberia, the incursions
continue. It is absolutely vital to put an end to the
terrorist activities of the Monrovia authorities and to
break the link between Sierra Leone diamonds and the
supply of weapons to rebel movements. This is the
challenge that the Security Council is tackling today.
It is understandable, therefore, why my
delegation welcomes this initiative and hails the
measures contained in the draft resolution before the
Council. We hope that the targeted sanctions that have
been envisaged will send a strong signal to the Liberian
President to end his support for rebel and terrorist
movements.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to encourage
the Council to monitor compliance with, and respect
for, the provisions contained in the draft resolution, as
soon as it is adopted.

5

S/PV.4264 (Resumption 1)

The President: I thank the representative of
Guinea for the kind words he addressed to me and to
my delegation.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Burkina Faso. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to congratulate you,
Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for the first
month of this year. We congratulate you also on the
skill and wisdom that you are demonstrating and on the
outstanding manner in which you are conducting our
deliberations.
I should like also to congratulate the new
members of the Council — Colombia, Ireland,
Mauritius, Norway and Singapore. We wish them every
success in carrying out their new and heavy
responsibilities.
The Panel of Experts set up by Security Council
resolution 1306 (2000) has submitted its final report,
on which the Council will subsequently be delivering
its conclusions. As everyone knows, this report
concerns us, and I should therefore like, on behalf of
my Government, to make a brief statement in this
respect.
Since the very beginning, Burkina Faso’s position
has been well-known, having been set forth in detail —
first, during the initial hearings on Sierra Leone
diamonds last July at the United Nations; then during
the various discussions with members of the Panel
during their investigative missions in our country; and
again in London last December, where, during the
intergovernmental meeting on conflict diamonds, we
had an opportunity once again to make our position
clear.
Finally, in the broader context of the General
Assembly, we recently participated in a debate on the
role of conflict diamonds, which resulted in the
adoption of resolution 55/56, which we co-sponsored.
Accordingly, we deem it, to put it mildly, inappropriate
to try to argue the case once again and to put us on the
defensive. Wisdom and the determination to try to find
a solution to the question incline us merely to take note
of the final report of the Panel of Experts.
One of the objectives of the Security Council,
when it assigned the investigation mission to the Panel

6

of Experts, was to encourage incriminated countries to
attest to their good faith and their total willingness to
cooperate with the United Nations. That is how we
understood the message, and that is how we translated
it in the various steps taken by my Government to show
our full willingness and firm resolve to work with the
United Nations transparently and honestly.
The first step was to set up an inter-ministerial
committee on 22 March 2000 to follow up sanctions
against UNITA. Article 1 of the enabling legislation
stipulates “the general authority for the follow-up and
implementation of Security Council resolutions”. The
immediate consequence of this regulation was that
nationals of Angola and Sierra Leone, with the
exception of those on official mission from the legal
Governments of these countries, would be prohibited
from entering, transiting or residing in Burkina Faso.
Subsequently, the Government prohibited,
according to a decree issued on 27 October 2000, any
transactions involving precious stones and metals
coming from conflict areas throughout the whole of the
national territory of Burkina Faso. Shortly after, we
welcomed three successive investigative missions to
Ouagadougou from the United Nations, the first two
concerning Angola and the latter Sierra Leone, to
which our Government gave total freedom and full
facilities for conducting their work. They were allowed
to visit and even to photograph military warehouses.
They were allowed to question whomever they wanted,
and, of course, they were allowed to have working
meetings with the inter-ministerial committee. In a
word, Burkina Faso, a nation which respects freedom
and is now open to democratic values and
requirements, gave every leeway to your missi dominici
freely to accomplish their duty.
But the most important and decisive step by far
was the one that followed from the decision taken by
Burkina Faso to establish a mechanism to monitor the
importing and utilization of weapons, a mechanism
which will be established for a period of three years
under United Nations supervision. Furthermore, I can
announce to this Council that the decree that
established this mechanism and which defined its
juridical nature and regime, as well as the modalities
for its functioning, has just been adopted by the
governmental council at its meeting of 24 January
2001. A letter addressed to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations proposes that both sides, Burkina
Faso and the United Nations, get together to determine

S/PV.4264 (Resumption 1)

the political and technical structure under which this
mechanism could be formalized.
Under the terms of the decree, the mechanism is
governed by a high authority consisting of members of
the Government and the Parliament — that is, the
National
Assembly
and
the
Chamber
of
Representatives — which is authorized, under United
Nations supervision, to
“monitor any import of weapons by the
Government of Burkina Faso, in strict conformity
with the relevant provisions of the ECOWAS
Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and
Manufacture of Small Arms and Light Weapons,
also in strict conformity with the rules governing
public contracts, as well as procedures for the
issuance of final destination certificates and the
drafting of the import manifest. The High
Authority is also authorized to prevent any illicit
trafficking in weapons in the territory of Burkina
Faso”.
It is understood, furthermore, that the United
Nations would be informed of how weapons acquired
by Burkina Faso would be used under our national
budget and that any movement of weapons would be
the subject of prior communication to the United
Nations Secretariat.
So, in brief, this is the substance of this measure
that we hope will remove, once and for all, any
ambiguity and will allay any suspicion about us. Very
few States would be prepared to subject themselves to
this action, which is tantamount to infringement of
sovereignty. Burkina Faso did so to prove its staunch
resolve to contribute to the implementation of Security
Council resolutions and any other measures that seek to
guarantee peace and security in Africa and in the
world.
It is precisely in the light of all of these efforts by
my country that it is really difficult for us to
understand the recommendations contained in
paragraph 35 of the report. According to these
recommendations, the Panel of Experts recommends
new investigations into the import of weapons by
Burkina Faso over the last five years — that is to say,
well before the Council’s seizure of the question of
Sierra Leone, because the first resolution on Sierra
Leone dates back to 1997. Frankly, we do not
understand the reasons behind this recommendation,
which does not offer any encouragement to the steps

taken by my country, but what is more, it does not
contribute at all to trying to find a solution to the Sierra
Leonean crisis. To put it mildly, my Government thinks
that the best reward for our total commitment to
cooperate with the United Nations would be to close
the past chapter in order to give the present and the
future a chance.
In conclusion, Mr. President, and without
prejudice to decisions that your Council will be taking
in due course following its deliberations on the report
of the Panel of Experts, we wish to convey thanks to
those who have understood us and even supported us
and to those who have not spared us when it came to
criticizing us. You are all entitled to our respect,
because all of you, in your own way and according to
your view of the objective facts and of fairness, have
done your duty.
Mr. Jagne (Gambia): At the outset, let me
congratulate you on your becoming President of the
Security Council. We are delighted to see you in the
chair. With your legendary dynamism and vast
experience, we are confident that your presidency will
be eventful and successful. We wish you the very best.
Similarly, my delegation would like to pay tribute to
your predecessor, Ambassador Lavrov, for a job well
done.
Having said that, we also thank you for
organizing this open meeting devoted to the report of
the Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone, diamonds and
arms. We welcome the idea of bringing this thorny
issue out in the open. It affords us the opportunity of
not only clearing our name but also stopping the bad
blood in our West African subregion that the Sierra
Leonean blood diamonds have recently created, further
exacerbated by the broad and thorough report of the
Panel of Experts.
We in the Gambia were flabbergasted by its
baseless and malicious allegations. As a peace-loving
nation that has always enjoyed excellent relations with
Sierra Leone, a sister country, it has made our blood
boil and has left us wondering whether, for some
obscure reason or reasons unknown to us, the Panel is
out for our country’s blood. Despite all the odds, our
blood is not up. All we want to do is to set the record
straight.
First and foremost, we would have thought that
the Panel of Experts, out of courtesy, should have
visited the Gambia and discussed any issue of concern

7

S/PV.4264 (Resumption 1)

with the competent Gambian authorities, as the Experts
have done with other countries mentioned in their
report. Why have they not done so? Is there a hidden
agenda to mount a smear campaign against the
Gambia? What is the motive behind these baseless
allegations? The representative of Ukraine is perfectly
right in stating that all relevant evidence should be
brought to the attention of the Governments concerned.
That was not the case with my Government. Yet we all
want a healthy and fruitful working relationship with
the Panel.
Let me hasten to point out that we have never
denied that some individuals have been involved in this
trade since time immemorial — long before the
Gambia gained independence from Britain in 1965.
This is common knowledge. My Sierra Leonean
colleague and friends and I have laughed over it many
times. He is here to bear me witness. But there should
be a distinction between the actions of individuals and
those of a Government. Individuals should be
accountable for their actions. A Government should not
be taken to task for, or have to account for, the actions
of an individual or group of individuals, especially in a
case like this.
This is why we are insisting on our invitation to
the Panel of Experts to visit the Gambia and present to
the authorities in Banjul the evidence they have — if
any — linking the Government to this illegal trade.
That is all that we require from this body: treat the
Gambia fairly. We are therefore requesting the Security
Council, in all fairness, guided by the principle of
equal treatment of all States, to send the Panel of
Experts to the Gambia and show us any proof that our
Government exports diamonds.

passing through the Gambia to other destinations, but it
is preposterous to even insinuate that the Government
either condones or participates in such transactions, or
derives any revenue from this illegal trade, either
through taxes or otherwise.
Considering the Gambia’s stance regarding
maintaining peace and stability within our subregion in
particular and in Africa generally, the country cannot
be involved in any activity that could have negative
effects in Sierra Leone or contribute to the procurement
of arms and the encouragement of war. The Gambia,
despite its meagre resources, will continue to do all it
can to contribute to the search for an honourable
solution to the Sierra Leonean crisis. The bonds uniting
Sierra Leone and the Gambia — and they are many and
date back many centuries — are too strong for such
baseless allegations to undo. The number of Sierra
Leonean refugees in the Gambia is a testimony to our
long-standing ties of friendship and cooperation with
that country.
In conclusion, the Government of the Gambia is
again calling on the Panel to withdraw its statement on
the Gambia and indicate as soon as possible the dates
on which a delegation of the Panel of Experts could
visit Banjul, so that we could together inform the
whole world that the Government of the Gambia is too
much aware of its international obligations to be
involved in such a shameful trade. These allegations
are unfounded, and therefore we want our country’s
name removed from the list of countries dealing in
blood diamonds.

It is sad to say, but this is ridiculous, to say the
least, for a country that has no mineral resources. It is
simply ludicrous! The Government of the Gambia will
defend its integrity at all costs, but we want to give the
Council the chance to send the Panel of Experts to
Banjul first, before we take any appropriate action to
restore our country’s good name.

There is still time to set the record straight. This
is why we support the extension of the mandate of the
Panel, as proposed by the United Kingdom. In this way,
the Panel will be able to carry on with its unfinished
business, including an early visit to the Gambia —
preferably before the scheduled meeting early next
month between the Security Council and a ministerial
delegation from the Economic Community of West
African States — so as to clear the air as far as my
Government is concerned.

Thank God, in the case of the Gambia, there is no
evidence whatsoever establishing any links between the
sale of diamonds and gun-running activities in Sierra
Leone. Besides, the Gambia has no borders with Sierra
Leone.

To echo the words of the President, we should act
swiftly on the Panel’s report, but justly. All that we ask
is that the Gambia be treated fairly, by separating the
chaff from the grain. That is all we want, nothing more,
nothing less.

Through the unscrupulous behaviour of some
individuals, it is possible that diamonds might be

The President: I thank the representative of the
Gambia for the kind words he addressed to me.

8

S/PV.4264 (Resumption 1)

The next speaker is the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Bouah-Kamon (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): I thank you, Mr. President, for giving Côte
d’Ivoire the opportunity to take part in this important
meeting of the Security Council, which is once again
addressing the situation in Sierra Leone in the light of
the report of the Panel of Experts created pursuant to
resolution 1306 (2000). This report is presented by
Ambassador Chowdhury in document S/2000/1195,
dated 20 December 2000. I commend the Ambassador
for the quality of the work that has been done.
Before continuing my remarks on this subject,
allow me to convey to you, Mr. President, my
delegation’s warmest greetings and congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January — this being the first
presidency of the year 2001 and of the new
millennium. If it they are not too late, please accept as
well my best wishes for the new year. The decisive role
that your dynamic country, the Republic of Singapore,
plays to promote development and peace around the
world leads me to believe most assuredly that you will
carry out your task with success, to the benefit of our
Organization and of all its Members.
The report that is the subject of our meeting today
provides the Council information about possible
violations of measures taken by the Council to end the
existing links between the diamond trade and the
supply and circulation of arms and related matériel, by
various ways and means, in the West African subregion
and elsewhere.
In this regional context, my country is named at
various points in the report as being among those
having special relationships with the countries or the
parties in conflict in Sierra Leone. More to the point,
my country is named as a venue for commercial
transactions in diamonds and for aerial navigation, to
the benefit of the actors in the war in Sierra Leone.
Before attempting to respond to the parts of the
report that implicitly suggest that Côte d’Ivoire plays
an important role in the various types of trade fuelling
the war efforts of the conflicting parties in Sierra
Leone, I would like to tell the Council that my country
approves of its initiative to entrust a panel of experts
with the mission of shedding light on the issue of
involvement by States of the subregion.

I would also like to highlight one fact, namely,
that Côte d’Ivoire was unable to provide the Panel of
Experts with statistics about Côte d’Ivoire’s import and
export of diamonds in good time, that is, before the
preparation of the Panel’s report. It has since done so,
in a letter dated 4 January 2001 addressed to the
secretariat of the Security Council Committee on Sierra
Leone established by resolution 1132 (1997). That
delay was justified by the unstable political situation
that has prevailed in Côte d’Ivoire since 24 December
1999. Since that time, there have been four
Governments. The delay in providing information has
been due to administrative changes, and not because of
any indifference or lack of consideration by my country
for the United Nations. I would once again like to
reaffirm to the Council the commitment of the
Government of Côte d’Ivoire to resolutely undertake
measures to ensure compliance with Security Council
sanctions within the context of its overall policies.
The second part of the report deals with weapons.
Its chapter III, which is entitled “The role of other
countries”, deals in particular with the weapons of the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF). Paragraph 194
states that private brokers and arms merchants are the
main suppliers of the RUF and that most large arms
and ammunition supplies reach the RUF only indirectly
and through countries with Governments sympathetic
to it. Paragraph 195 names Côte d’Ivoire and says that
“Côte d’Ivoire, under previous administrations,
was sympathetic to the Liberian government and,
indirectly, to the RUF in Sierra Leone. The
Ivorian relationship dates back to the training of
RUF and Liberian rebels in Côte d’Ivoire in the
early 1990s.”
In that connection, I wish to make the point that the
word “training” is imprecise, as training involves
various aspects. What aspect are we talking about here?
Let us avoid any blurring of distinctions.
Having said that, I would like to point out that
Côte d’Ivoire has constantly striven to maintain
excellent relations with all its immediate neighbours.
With regard to Liberia in particular, it should be noted
that Liberia is like other countries bordering on Côte
d’Ivoire in that they are made up of the same peoples,
who were artificially separated by the borders inherited
from colonialization. It must be kept in mind that the
Krahns and the Gios of Liberia are the Gueres and
Yacuba of Côte d’Ivoire. Moreover, it is precisely

9

S/PV.4264 (Resumption 1)

because of this ethnic affinity that there has been a
harmonious integration of Liberian refugees into Côte
d’Ivoire.
It should also be noted that late President
Houphouët-Boigny — the country’s first President —
and the Government and people of Côte d’Ivoire have
spared no sacrifice to help to restore peace to Liberia.
The thousands of Liberian refugees fraternally
welcomed by the people of Côte d’Ivoire at the height
of the civil war in Liberia attest to that fact.
In addition, the role played by Côte d’Ivoire to
try to restore peace to Liberia and Sierra Leone should
also be recalled. Sierra Leone’s recent history includes
the Abidjan agreements signed by the Freetown
Government and the RUF, which at the time was
headed by Mr. Foday Sankoh. I would also like to
remind the Council that it was due to the efforts of
diplomats from Côte d’Ivoire that Mr. Sankoh was
induced to quit his retreat in the forests of Sierra Leone
to come to the negotiating table. It does not seem fair
to us that the relations we had, and which we continue
to have, with the two fraternal countries of Liberia and
Sierra Leone — and even with the RUF — should be
interpreted as a sign of being sympathetic to the
appalling activities being condemned by the
international community. It would have been desirable
for the report to be precise at this point, especially as
the events mentioned go back to the early 1990s.
Similar precision should have been applied to
paragraph 209, which refers to the flight of an
Ukrainian BAC-111 aircraft that allegedly flew to
Abidjan without declaring the date and time of its
arrival, information necessary for a national
investigation.
With regard to paragraph 216, which refers to the
private activities of an Israeli businessman resident in
Abidjan who is allegedly very close to President
Charles Taylor, I believe the Council will agree with
me that the activities and movements of that individual
cannot be imputed to the Government of Côte d’Ivoire,
in particular as that person holds a Liberian diplomatic
passport.
With regard to the report’s technical points
relating to air traffic monitoring systems in West Africa
and to a certification regime for diamonds originating
in Sierra Leone, my country would be happy to support
any initiative to make United Nations sanctions more
effective that would not jeopardize its national interests

10

or, above all, involve additional expenses to the
countries of the subregion.
Similarly, Côte d’Ivoire is prepared to sign — if
it has not already done so — the 1989 International
Convention against the Recruitment, Use, Financing
and Training of Mercenaries. I take this opportunity to
assure countries neighbouring Côte d’Ivoire, and the
international community at large, that the Government
of my country has never permitted, and will never
permit, anyone to use its territory to undermine the
territorial or political integrity of any country in Africa
or anywhere else in the world.
Animated by that commitment, the Côte d’Ivoire
of the Second Republic, under the leadership of
President Laurent Gbagbo, reaffirms its full readiness
to continue to work in close cooperation with the
United Nations, the Security Council and the sanctions
Committees.
The new authorities of my country, who came to
power only three months ago, call on the international
community to give them the time to settle in and to
become acquainted with these issues, and to extend
understanding to them so that they may restore to full
vigour the position and image of Côte d’Ivoire on the
international scene, in accordance with the principles
and ideals of the United Nations.
The President: I thank the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire for his kind words addressed to me.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Belgium. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Adam (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
fully supports the statement made on behalf of the
European Union by the Permanent Representative of
Sweden as President of the European Union.
As the Ambassador of Sweden did, I too would
like to congratulate Ambassador Chowdhury and the
Panel of Experts for the excellent job done.
My country would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate its resolve to find a solution to the problem of
conflict diamonds, as well as to say that we fully agree
with the Panel’s conclusions. I would like to make
three particular points.
With regard to the need to establish a global
certification scheme for rough diamonds based on the
system adopted in Sierra Leone, I should like to recall

S/PV.4264 (Resumption 1)

the prominent role played by Belgium, together with
other countries involved in the diamond trade, in the
Kimberly process. One of the goals of this process is
precisely to establish such a system.
Belgium has great experience in the area of
diamonds, and this enabled us to make a decisive
contribution to the establishment of the certification
system adopted by Sierra Leone. We are prepared to
share this experience with the international community
so that the system can be expanded.
Paragraph 162 of the report (S/2000/1195,
enclosure) states that “It is essential, and a matter of
urgency” to set up a harmonized system of public
documentation and statistics on diamond imports and
exports. We support this concept, as well as the idea of
transparency in that area. We are convinced that,
whatever kind of global certification scheme is
established, one of the key elements for its success will
be transparency. My country publishes, on a monthly
and annual basis, detailed and complete statistics on all
imports and exports of diamonds.
In conclusion, in paragraph 165, the report
proposes the creation of an “ongoing focal point ... to
monitor adherence to sanctions”. Belgium supports this
idea, because we are aware of the risk of overlap and
duplication caused by the simultaneous existence of
three panels of experts.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of the Niger. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Moutari (Niger) (spoke in French): I should
like first of all to express the gratitude of the Niger for
being able to speak on this agenda item concerning the
report of the Panel of Experts on the traffic in
diamonds and the conflict situation prevailing in Sierra
Leone, which was introduced this morning by
Ambassador Chowdhury of Bangladesh.
For us, the fact that this Council — which bears
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security — is being presided
over by Mr. Kishore Mahbubani of Singapore is a
guarantee of a dispassionate and fair debate whose
outcome will be beneficial to Sierra Leone, Africa and
the world.

With the aim of bringing peace to our West
African subregion, and peace, stability and well-being
to our continent as a whole, as our people so
profoundly desire, my country has been working
closely with the other members of the Economic
Community of West African States for such a long
time.
That is why, when my delegation was presented
with the information in the report, my Government
began to carry out the necessary preliminary
investigations and communicated to the Secretariat the
following information.
The BAC-111 aircraft, with the registration VPCLM, belonging to the company Aeroleasing Inc., did,
indeed, land in Niamey on 22 December 1998 at 21.11
local time, having come from Monrovia, and departed
on 23 December 1998 at 19.02 local time. However, at
present it is not possible to say what kind of goods that
aircraft may have been carrying because the records are
kept for only three months. Nevertheless, the
competent authorities of the Niger have ordered an
investigation to be carried out in order to obtain the
information that has been requested.
The Niger will, of course, provide its full and
wholehearted cooperation for any initiative that this
Council undertakes to bring peace and security to
Sierra Leone and the subregion.
I should like to convey our great admiration to
you, Sir, and wish you every success as you carry out
your functions as President of the Council. I should
also like to express to your predecessor, Ambassador
Lavrov, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation — that great country of which we still have
vivid memories of a pleasant visit — our deep
appreciation for the outstanding way in which he
presided over the Council last month.
The President: I thank the representative of the
Niger for his kind words addressed to me.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.
The meeting rose at 4.20 p.m.

11
