United Nations

A/ES-10/PV.12

General Assembly

Official Records

Tenth Emergency Special Session

12th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 9 February 1999, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Opertti . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Uruguay)

The meeting was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Agenda item 5 (continued)
Illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and
the rest of the Occupied Palestinian Territory

unspeakable loss in terms of human life and material
destruction due to the recent earthquake in the western
part of the country. Japan responded quickly to calls for
assistance by dispatching rescue teams and medical
personnel, as well as disaster relief assistance, in the hope
of easing the suffering of the Colombian people and
hastening their recovery.

Draft resolution (A/ES-10/L.5/Rev.1)
Mr. Satoh (Japan): I would first like to express my
profound sorrow at the passing of His Majesty King
Hussein of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. A man of
great wisdom and personal integrity, King Hussein was a
beloved leader of the Jordanian people and a universally
revered world statesman. Throughout his long reign he
worked tirelessly and with admirable success to improve
the well-being of his people and to foster regional stability.
His commitment to the Middle East peace process was
unshakable. The progress that has been made towards the
realization of peace would not have been possible without
his courageous and far-sighted leadership. We are all
diminished by this loss.
On behalf of the Government and the people of Japan,
I extend my sincere condolences to Ambassador AbuNimah and through him to King Abdullah and the other
members of the royal family and to all the people of
Jordan.
At this time, I wish also to express on behalf of the
Government and the people of Japan my sincere sympathy
to the Government and the people of Colombia on their

99-85088 (E)

The Government of Japan has always attached great
importance to the realization of a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. Accordingly,
Japan has actively contributed to the peace process by
making various multilateral and bilateral efforts to
promote dialogue and foster mutual confidence among the
parties concerned, and also by extending economic
assistance to the Palestinians.
In January this year, Mr. Masahiko Komura,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan, visited Israel and
the Palestinian self-governing area, as well as Lebanon,
Egypt, Syria and Jordan. In his meetings with leaders in
the region, Mr. Komura called for the full implementation
of the provisions contained in the Wye River
Memorandum. He also advocated four guiding principles
with regard to southern Lebanon: first, the withdrawal of
Israeli forces from southern Lebanon should be
implemented as stipulated in Security Council resolution
425 (1978); secondly, that withdrawal should lead to a
comprehensive Middle East peace; thirdly, the process of
withdrawal should not be hindered, and parties should
discuss its concrete steps without any precondition; and
fourthly, the international community should render its

This record contains the original text of speeches delivered in English and interpretations of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to original speeches only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and be sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned, within one month of the date of the meeting, to the Chief of the Verbatim
Reporting Service, Room C-178. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a
consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999

support to the stabilization of southern Lebanon after Israeli
withdrawal.

indirectly, the parties concerned with a view to
stimulating political dialogue among them.

Japan is also committed to its role as a major
contributor to the peace process. My Government has
already disbursed $400 million in aid to the Palestinians.
Furthermore, on the occasion of the Conference to Support
Middle East Peace and Development, in November last
year, Japan pledged up to $200 million for assistance to the
Palestinians over the next two years.

Let me now turn to the draft resolution before us.
Having considered it with the utmost care in terms of the
effect it could have on the peace process, and bearing in
mind the work of the Government of Switzerland in its
capacity as depositary of the Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, the
Government of Japan is ready to support this draft
resolution.

Japan also wishes to play a more active role in
ensuring that assistance by the donors is extended and used
effectively, and in nurturing an environment in which the
assistance will contribute to confidence-building among the
parties concerned. Japan has already expressed its readiness
to host the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee meeting in Tokyo
in the course of this year.
The signing of the Wye River Memorandum in
October last year was indeed a major step forward in
breaking the impasse that had prevailed in the peace
process since March 1997. The international community,
including Japan, heartily welcomed it. We also saw some
progress soon after the signing. Recently, however, the
implementation of the Memorandum has regrettably been
stalled subsequent to various domestic political
developments in Israel. Japan shares the concern of the
international community over the current situation. During
his recent visit to the region, Foreign Minister Komura
appealed to the Israeli leaders to implement the existing
agreements, and at the same time called on the parties
concerned to refrain from taking any unilateral actions that
could further destabilize the situation.
It is essential that the parties concerned should be
unrelenting in their efforts to resolve the problems through
dialogue. From this point of view, Mr. Komura stated in his
speech to the Palestinian Council in January that
“oppression and violence create further oppression and
violence, and reinforce the vicious circle of distrust and
hatred,” and that “the road to mutual understanding and
peace in a true sense, though it may seem the long way
around, should be through thorough and continuous
dialogue, fully recognizing the position of the other side
and avoiding unilateral actions which might amplify the
misunderstanding and distrust”.
Japan sincerely hopes that the parties concerned will
persevere in their efforts to engage in dialogue in order to
advance the peace process. Japan, for its part, is determined
to play a political role by approaching, directly and

2

Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The General Assembly today convenes for the fourth time
its tenth emergency special session under the provisions
of General Assembly resolution 377 (V), entitled “Uniting
for Peace”, with the aim of fulfilling its responsibilities
vis-à-vis Israel's continuing total disregard of the demands
of the international community, as represented by this
Assembly, with regard to the cessation of Israel's illegal
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem. Foremost among these activities is the building
of settlements.
It is disheartening to recognize that, since this
session adopted its first resolution, on 25 April 1997 —
that is, nearly two years ago — Israel has continued to
implement and intensify its settlement plans in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including in particular East
Jerusalem. By doing so, Israel is completely and
intentionally ignoring not only the requests embodied in
the resolutions adopted by the Assembly on the matter,
but also the consensus opinion expressed by the
international community for 30 years now regarding the
applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to all the
Arab and Palestinian territories occupied by Israel in June
1967. Israel is further violating international legal and
political instruments.
The Government of Israel announces day after day
its unwillingness to cease construction of new settlements
or to halt the expansion of the existing ones. It has
continued to challenge the will of the international
community by confiscating more territory even after
signing the Wye River Memorandum last October. It
would seem to be reassuring its supporters by showing
that it will relinquish territory to the Palestinians only
when it is also confiscating other territories, twice as
large.
This situation poses a serious question: how long
will the international community allow Israel to continue

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
this recklessness? How long will the international
community overlook the challenge to its will and the
disregard of its positions?
We believe that the international community must
continue to assert its position until Israel complies and
retreats, until Israel relinquishes the territory it occupies and
returns to the fold of nations that abide by international
law.
All the measures taken by Israel, the occupying Power
in the occupied Palestinian territory — such as the
confiscation of civilians' lands, the construction of houses
and infrastructure for Israeli habitants and the transfer of
Israeli settlers to these territories — are outlawed by the
1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War. The provisions of this
Convention are not without reason. They aim at preserving
the rights of civilian populations in territories occupied by
an occupying Power, so that with the passage of time facts
on the ground will not be altered so as to allow the
occupier to become the owner of the territory or to obtain
any rights regarding it.
Further reaffirming this concept, the General Assembly
has for 30 years, year after year, adopted resolutions that
reaffirm its well-established position regarding the
applicability of this Geneva Convention to the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, as well as
the other occupied Arab territories.
The Assembly recommended in its resumed
emergency special session, on 15 July 1997, inter alia, the
convening of a conference of the High Contracting Parties
to the Geneva Convention on measures to enforce the
implementation of the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territory. The Assembly adopted this
recommendation by an overwhelming majority of the
Member States. This shows that these States have clear and
resolute positions regarding the applicability of the
Convention to those territories, and it proves that these
States recognize that what is occurring in the occupied
Palestinian territories constitutes the complete violation of
all the provisions of international humanitarian law
enshrined in the Geneva Conventions.
It is important here to mention that the Government of
Switzerland, in its capacity as the depositary of the Geneva
Conventions, responded favourably to the request of the
Assembly by playing an important and pivotal role in the
preparations for the convening of that conference.

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
Egypt fully appreciates the efforts made by
Switzerland in this regard. We invite it to continue its
efforts, with a view to upholding the principles of
international humanitarian law. Switzerland convened two
meetings: one for the Palestinians and Israelis with the
participation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross in June 1998, and the other for the States parties to
the Fourth Geneva Convention at the level of experts at
the end of October last. The Arab side cooperated fully in
the conduct of those meetings in the hope and expectation
that they would lead to the implementation of the
recommendation of the General Assembly to convene the
conference, in spite of the fact that those meetings were
not, in our view, alternative steps to the holding of the
conference.
Today, now that almost a year and a half has
elapsed since preparations for the conference began, we
believe that it is high time to set a date for its convening
through the collective will of the States parties to the
Convention.
Egypt believes that this conference — which we are
well aware has no precedent in the history of the four
Conventions — must be an embodiment of the collective
responsibility of the States parties to the Fourth
Convention, in line with common article 1, which places
on the High Contracting Parties the responsibility to
respect and to ensure respect for the Conventions in all
circumstances.
By requesting the resumption of this session and
presenting the draft resolution that has already been
circulated, we are seeking to convene a conference which
aims only at reaffirming the principles of international
humanitarian law, respecting the implementation of its
provisions and preserving its credibility from erosion.
The universal membership of the Fourth
Convention — 188 States — and the collective belief of
the High Contracting Parties in the humanitarian
principles enshrined in the field of the protection of
civilian rights in time of war and conflict give a binding
dimension to the meaning of the phrase “respect and to
ensure respect” of the Conventions, as mentioned in
common article 1.
I should like here to note in particular that in
addition to common article 1, article 89 of the first
Additional Protocol to the Fourth Convention, the legal
basis for the draft resolution before the Assembly, states
that

3

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
“in situations of serious violations of the Conventions
or of this Protocol, the High Contracting Parties
undertake to act, jointly or individually, in cooperation
with the United Nations and in conformity with the
United Nations Charter”.
Egypt believes that the actions taken by the current
Government of Israel in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem, constitute serious violations of the
Fourth Geneva Convention. These include continuing and
intensifying settlement activities, confiscating the land of
Palestinian people, constructing bypass roads, implementing
policies of closure of the areas under the control of the
Palestinian Authority, and many other measures that are
well known to the Assembly through the reports submitted
to it. All of these justify the General Assembly's
recommendation to specify a date in April to convene this
important and historic conference.
I should like to seize this opportunity to invite
Member States to further show their solidarity with the
Palestinian people at this crucial stage in their history. I call
upon the Assembly to live up to its responsibilities under
the Charter and adopt the draft resolution before us by an
overwhelming majority.
Mr. Mungra (Suriname), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): My delegation wishes to
express our profound sadness and deep sorrow at the
untimely passing of His Majesty King Hussein of Jordan.
His death is not only a loss to the people of the Kingdom
of Jordan but also to the peace process in Palestine and the
Middle East in general. It is indeed a loss for humanity.
I would like to use this opportunity to convey the
heartfelt condolences of the President, the Government and
people of the Republic of Namibia to the bereaved family
of the late King Hussein and to the people of the Kingdom
of Jordan.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
made by the delegation of South Africa on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
The question of Palestine is the responsibility of the
United Nations, and, as such, we cannot and must not fail
the people of Palestine. Therefore, with the resumption
today of this tenth emergency special session on illegal
Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of
the occupied Palestinian territory, States Members of the

4

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
United Nations should reaffirm their commitment to
ensuring the advent of a lasting and comprehensive peace
to Palestine and to the Middle East in general. Israel's
continuing violations and breaches of General Assembly
and Security Council resolutions as well as international
humanitarian and human rights law can only delay that
peace.
In December of last year, my delegation, together
with others, voiced our optimism at the resumption of the
peace process after the signing of the Wye River
Memorandum on 23 October 1998. However, to our
dismay and disappointment, we had to witness once again
obstructions by the Israeli side, which resulted in the
eventual suspension, on 30 December 1998, of the Wye
River Memorandum, including the negotiations on the
final settlement, which should be concluded by 4 May
1999. These negative actions have again stalled the peace
process. We urge the international community to continue
to exert pressure on the Israeli Government to induce it to
resume complying with its obligations under international
agreements.
The situation of the Palestinian people in the
occupied territories warrants concern and action by the
international community. My delegation appreciates the
parallel efforts by the Government of Switzerland, which,
as the depositary of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
convened in October 1998 a meeting of experts of the
High Contracting Parties, at which general problems
concerning the Convention and in particular in occupied
territories were discussed.
We thus remain convinced of the urgent need for a
conference of the High Contracting Parties to the Geneva
Convention on measures to enforce the provisions thereof
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem.
My delegation has always expressed and continues
to express its unequivocal solidarity and support for the
Palestinian people, their just cause, their achievement of
self-determination and the establishment of an
independent State of Palestine. We also reaffirm our
conviction that the long-deserved peace in the region can
be attained only through the full implementation of all
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), the principle of land for peace, as well as
resolution 425 (1978). In this context, the draft resolution
before us is an important element in the resolution of the
question of Palestine and my delegation fully endorses it.

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
As a member of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, Namibia
supports and endorses the Bethlehem 2000 international
Conference to be held in Rome on 18 and 19 February
1999. We also call upon Member States to support the
African meeting in support of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian People, which will take place from 20 to 22
April 1999 in Windhoek, Namibia.
Mr. Aamiry (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic): It
is a great honour for me to begin by extending our heartfelt
thanks and appreciation to all the heads and members of
delegations who have expressed their noble feelings towards
Jordan and conveyed their condolences at our great loss in
the untimely demise of His Majesty King Hussein. We are
grateful to those who stand at our side in our tragedy. Their
noble sentiments will encourage us to move steadily into
the future with confidence and determination.
I wish to thank you, Sir, for the resumption of the
tenth emergency special session to address the current
difficult circumstances in our region and the Palestinian
territories as a result of the continued Israeli illegitimate
practices against the population of the territories. These
practices damage the prospects for peace in our region. It
is perfectly normal for us to appeal to the arbitration of this
Assembly whenever obstacles rise to impede the progress
of the peace process, despite the fact that many question the
usefulness of such a pursuit. Is not the peaceful settlement
of disputes, free of violence and armed conflict, at the heart
of the United Nations? Is the Organization not duty-bound
to implement the principles of international law and
legitimacy and the resolutions of its various organs as the
bases of valid and healthy international relations governed
by peace, stability, cooperation, mutual respect and
commitment to the resolutions of these international
organizations?
We would not have asked for this session to be
convened had the peace process, begun seven years ago in
Madrid, remained on track or if the scheduled steps and
stages had been completed in accordance with the
timetables and agreements signed by the parties concerned.
The current trend is counterproductive and can neither serve
the objectives of peace nor contribute to its realization.
We are gravely concerned at the paralysis that has
stricken the peace process. We have expressed these
feelings on every occasion in which we have addressed this
Assembly. We truly fear that the peace process may
become mere sloganeering, devoid of all meaning. This
could pose a most serious threat to the Middle East and the

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
peace process. We have confirmed our belief that peace
is an act and a practice. Peace is a commitment to signed
agreements. We believe that peace is respect for justice,
right, legitimacy and the rights of others. We have also
assumed that it is a sincere desire to cooperate, participate
and build a prosperous future for all peoples of the
region.
Unfortunately, however, the current Israeli
Government does not share this understanding. It has
failed to heed sincere assurances that security, on which
Israel keeps harping, necessitates peace and a
commitment to its requirements. The way to security
includes enhancing mutual confidence and rejecting the
hegemonic mindset and any attempt to consolidate
illegitimate gains through the wielding of strength and
power. What does security have to do with demolishing
Palestinian homes with bulldozers and leaving their
residents exposed to the elements? What does it have to
do with displacing residents in the pretext that these
homes were built without licenses? Are these homes not
built on Palestinian territory? Isn't this territory supposed
to be returned to their legitimate owners as part of the
final status agreement?
Hardly a day passes without our television screens'
broadcasting scenes of the homes of Arab Palestinians
being demolished and of arbitrary Israeli practices against
the Arab Palestinian population, which reflect policies
followed by Israel since 1967 to depopulate the land and
prepare territories for settlement. Today's newspaper
carried reports of the Israeli army's demolition of two
houses, one of them home to 10 people, near Hebron after
Israeli soldiers evicted their inhabitants by force. The
houses were destroyed with all their furnishings.
The policy of land confiscation and of settler
colonialism pursued by Israel poses the gravest threat to
the peace process. The fact is that settler colonialism
threatens the future of relations in the region and to
plunge it back into an atmosphere of war and conflict.
This policy is a denial of justice, right and of valid
principles on which any normal relations might be built.
It is also a breach of the sanctity of international law,
human rights and the successive resolutions adopted by
this international Organization over the years.
For all these reasons, and now that Israel has
rejected its responsibilities and commitments under the
Wye River Memorandum, which we had hoped would put
the peace process back on track after an absolute
deadlock of more than a year and a half, we called for a

5

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
convening of this special session. We did so in the hope
that it would allow us to assess the deteriorating situation
in the Middle East and to adopt a resolution calling for the
convening of a conference of the High Contracting Parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention and to enforce its
provisions on the Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem. Our aim is to put an end to practices that
perpetuate the conflict, threaten peace and security and
violate human rights. This is all explained in the draft
resolution, and we call on the Assembly to adopt it.
We in Jordan are committed to peace. This
commitment is firm and cannot be undermined by obstacles
and doubts. We witnessed His Royal Highness the late
King Hussein interrupt his treatment in order to join his
efforts with those who were already making their
contributions to arrive at an agreement at the Wye River
Plantation. After those efforts were successful, the Israeli
Government undermined and failed to implement the
ensuing agreements. We still believe that the efforts of
those who sincerely want peace should be redoubled and
coordinated with the efforts made by our Organization to
realize the noble objective of peace.
We also believe that for peace to be permanent and
capable of withstanding any challenge, it should be
comprehensive and based on justice and legitimacy. We
therefore call upon Israel to respect and implement its
commitments and to address seriously and objectively our
endeavours, not only on the Palestinian track but on the
Lebanese and Syrian tracks as well.
In conclusion, I would like to express our sincere
sympathy to the people and the Government of Colombia
over the earthquake that recently struck that country and to
affirm that the people and the Government of Jordan stand
in solidarity with the people of Colombia. We hope that
they will soon be able to overcome their tragedy.
Mr. Al-Hajri (Qatar) (interpretation from Arabic):
Allow me at the outset to express, on behalf of the State of
Qatar, its Emir, its Government and its people, our sincere
condolences to His Majesty King Abdullah of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and to the entire royal
family and the people and the Government of Jordan, our
sister country, on the passing of His Majesty King Hussein.
We hope that he will rest in peace and that peace and
security will be assured for Jordan.
Allow me also to express to our sister country
Colombia our heartfelt condolences over the victims of the
earthquake that occurred last month in that country.

6

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
I have the honour and pleasure of speaking before
the General Assembly on behalf of the Islamic Group. I
would like to express our appreciation and thanks to the
President for having secured the resumption of this
emergency special session, one of whose goals is to
combat one of the main problems that the Organization
has been dealing with. I would like to thank all of those
who have contributed to the holding of this session and
who have supported it.
We are gathered together today to reaffirm what we
decided upon at earlier meetings of this session. At the
last meeting, held in March last year, we affirmed the
need to hold a meeting of the High Contracting Parties to
the Fourth Geneva Convention to consider ways and
means to ensure Israel’s respect for all the provisions of
that Convention. All of the Members except Israel
acknowledge the de jure and de facto applicability of the
1949 Fourth Geneva Convention in the occupied Arab
territories. We would like to reaffirm here that article 49
of the Convention compels Israel, as the occupying
Power, to refrain from expropriating the territories it
occupied and erecting buildings on it or expelling its
civilian populations. Unfortunately, we can all see that
Israel is applying all these measures without any concern
for the norms of international humanitarian law or for the
agreements that it entered into with the Palestinian
Authority.
Today the time has come for all States parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention to begin preparations for the
holding of the conference recommended at previous
meetings, in accordance with the text of the Convention
itself. I would like to express my deep thanks to the
Government of Switzerland for its efforts. We are fully
ready to cooperate with that Government, as the
depositary State of the Convention, to ensure the
implementation of the resolutions adopted by the General
Assembly at the ninth emergency special sessions, as well
as any resolutions that may be adopted at this session.
The Islamic Group is greatly dissatisfied over
Israel’s activities at the holy places of Al-Quds al-Sharif,
as well as other holy places. The establishment of
settlements and the expansion of existing settlements, the
destruction of Palestinians’ homes, the confiscation of
their identity cards and the expropriation of their lands are
all flagrant violations of international norms and
instruments and a clear defiance of the will of the
international community. While strongly condemning such
reprehensible practices and activities on behalf of the
Islamic Group, we would also like to say that such

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999

activities do not create any legal precedent. We will
demand that the international community shoulder its full
responsibility to force Israel to yield to the international
will, revert to international legality and abide by all relevant
resolutions of the United Nations in this regard. We would
like to reaffirm that Israel’s measures and activities
adversely affect all peace-loving States and injure the
sensitivities of the Islamic world. We look forward to all
States' adhering to the Fourth Geneva Convention and call
upon all peace-loving countries to adopt the draft resolution
before us and support it so that we may take the proper
course to help the Palestinian people achieve its aspirations.
That people has suffered for too long from the abominable
lack of freedom.

However, Israel continues to defy the resolutions of
the international community and the United Nations. It
continues to build new settlements in the Palestinian
territories with the objective of altering the ante-bellum
status quo and creating a new reality. It continues to
attempt to Judaize Holy Jerusalem by building Israeli
settlements inside and around it so as to create a Jewish
majority in that city. It continues to drive the Arab
population from its homes, and it has also decided, prior
to negotiations on the final status of Jerusalem, to enlarge
Jerusalem's municipal boundaries to include the
neighbouring Israeli settlements. All these actions are
proof of the Israeli Government's intention to jeopardize
the peace process and to bring it to a halt.

Mr. Al-Ahmed (Saudi Arabia) (interpretation from
Arabic): On behalf of the Government and the people of
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia I would like to express our
sincere condolences and sympathy to the royal Hashemite
family and to the fraternal Government and people of
Jordan on the passing of King Hussein Ibn Talal. We pray
that God will show him mercy and forgiveness and give his
family patience. We express our solidarity with and support
for fraternal Jordan and our hopes for its continued progress
and prosperity.

These Israeli practices have aborted the efforts of the
international community to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace settlement on the basis of Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the
principle of land for peace. They have brought the peace
process to a dead end. The behaviour of the present
Israeli Government does not make us hopeful that it will
be possible to achieve the peaceful resolution to which
the peoples of the region aspire. All our efforts to date
will be to no avail if these Israeli practices are not faced
in a resolute and firm manner that forces Israel to fully
implement the agreements signed with the Palestinian
side, respect the principles on which the peace process is
based, enter into serious negotiations with the Palestinians
and resume negotiations with Syria and Lebanon from the
point where those negotiations stopped.

We would also like to express to the Government and
the people of Colombia our deepest sympathy regarding the
victims of the earthquake that recently struck that country.
I am pleased to express my appreciation and thanks
for the resumption of the tenth emergency special session
of the General Assembly to discuss the illegal Israeli
actions in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the
occupied Palestinian territory. The positive response given
by the Assembly in resuming this session today is proof of
the dilemma that the international community is facing, and
it is proof that the international community as a whole is
keenly interested in assuming its responsibilities regarding
the question of Palestine.
During many previous meetings of General Assembly
emergency special sessions and of the Security Council the
international community has demanded by an overwhelming
majority that Israel, the occupying Power, desist from
engaging in any illegal settlement activities or making any
changes that might affect the existing conditions in Holy
Jerusalem and the other occupied Palestinian territories,
because such actions and policies negatively affect the
peace process in the Middle East and result in further
complications in that region.

We appeal to the international community, and to the
United States of America in particular, to take the
necessary steps to salvage the peace process and to put an
end to the Israeli transgressions regarding one of the most
delicate and sensitive aspects of the peace process: the
question of Holy Jerusalem, Al-Quds al-Sharif, the first
Qiblah and the third Holy Sanctuary. This must be dealt
with as the most important aspect of the Arab-Israeli
conflict.
The best way to achieve security and stability is by
making a commitment to the rules of international
legitimacy and honouring the agreements signed. If the
present Israeli Administration is serious about achieving
peace with the Palestinian party, all it has to do is
recommit itself to the agreements signed and to resume
negotiations to resolve the outstanding issues.
With the objective of achieving peace, stability and
security in the Middle East, the Government of The

7

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques has endeavoured to
support the peace process from the outset. My Government
participated as an observer in the Madrid Peace Conference
and actively participated in the multilateral negotiations. We
have supported and will continue to support this process in
all our international activities and contacts.
In addition, the Arab States, at their summit meeting
in Cairo in June 1996, unanimously adopted a firm position
that stipulates that peace is an Arab strategic choice,
confirming that there will be no retreat from this clearly
defined position. However, we are increasingly concerned
about the continued Israeli violations of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War, of 12 August 1949. In particular, we are
concerned about the building of Israeli settlements in Jebel
Abu Ghneim, south of occupied East Jerusalem, and about
its refusal to apply the Geneva Convention to the occupied
Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem and the other
Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967.
Thus, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia calls upon the
High Contracting Parties to the Geneva Convention to
convene a conference to enforce the Convention in the
occupied Palestinian territories, and in particular in
Jerusalem. The parties must ensure the adherence of the
Israeli authorities to the Convention in accordance with its
common article 1. The High Contracting Parties should
demand that Israel, the occupying Power, rescind all
policies and regulations that were illegally enacted, fully
desist from any actions or transgressions in Arab Jerusalem
and other occupied Palestinian territories and begin
immediately to fully comply with the articles of the
Convention.
We thank the Government of Switzerland, in its
capacity as the depository of the Geneva Convention, for
the efforts it has made. We invite that Government to take
all necessary measures, in cooperation with the United
Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross,
to convene a conference of the High Contracting Parties to
the Geneva Convention.
We would like to reaffirm our belief that the
Assembly and the Security Council are obligated to take the
necessary steps to prevent Israeli transgressions in Holy
Jerusalem and other occupied Palestinian territories. They
have the obligation to prevent other Israeli violations of
international law and of the resolutions adopted by the
Assembly and the Security Council. We hope that the
international community will prove to the world that it
supports justice and peace by seriously assuming its

8

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
responsibilities in the face of these Israeli practices and
transgressions.
Mr. Jemat (Brunei Darussalam): Allow me at the
outset to express my delegation's deepest sympathy and
our heartfelt condolences to the Government of Jordan,
through the Permanent Mission of Jordan, on the passing
of their beloved King, His Majesty King Hussein. The
people of Brunei Darussalam grieve with the people of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
Our condolences and sympathy go also to the
Government and people of Colombia on the recent
tragedy which brought death and suffering to that country.
As on previous occasions, Brunei Darussalam once
again joins the international community at this resumed
emergency special session to reiterate its strong support
for the Palestinians' right to self-determination and to
establish a Palestinian state. My delegation is concerned
at developments in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Israel's policies in occupied East Jerusalem and other
occupied Palestinian territories continue to be the main
obstacle to real progress in the peace process. We are
particularly disappointed at the fact that construction
continues on housing units in the new settlement of Jebel
Abu Ghneim in the West Bank, to the south of occupied
East Jerusalem, and on bypass roads in the West Bank,
and that all settlement activities in the occupied territories
are still ongoing. Those activities, my delegation believes,
serve to undermine the spirit of trust and cooperation vital
to the success of the peace process. The recent suspension
by the Israelis of the Wye River Agreement signed on 23
October 1998 is a further setback to this process.
Brunei Darussalam firmly holds the view that
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and
425 (1978) and the land-for-peace formula continue to be
the basis for negotiations in order to arrive at a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the region. We also
believe that Israel's compliance with resolutions ES-10/2,
ES-10/3, ES-10/4 and ES-10/5, adopted at the tenth
emergency special session, would help defuse tension in
the region. In this regard, Brunei Darussalam calls on all
parties concerned to continue efforts to urge the Israelis
to comply with all previous resolutions and to
immediately bring the peace process back on track and to
ensure its continuity for a durable peace and stability in
the region.

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
In conclusion, Brunei Darussalam would like to
reiterate its support for the convening of the meeting of the
High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
of 1949 relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
Time of War and the implementation of that Convention in
the occupied Palestinian territories. Brunei Darussalam
reaffirms its strong commitment and unwavering support
for, and its continued solidarity with, the Palestinian people
in their struggle for a just and lasting peace and an
independent state of Palestine.
Mr. Boang (Botswana): At the outset, my delegation
fully associates itself with the statement delivered by the
Permanent Representative of South Africa on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Let me join those who have expressed deep sorrow
and conveyed condolences to the Government and people
of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan on the sad occasion
of the untimely demise of His Majesty King Hussein Ibn
Talal. While he lived, His Majesty King Hussein worked
tirelessly for peace in his region. His pursuit of this noble
cause never ceased despite ill health. This was epitomized
by his timely intervention during the Wye River peace
talks, which contributed immensely to the conclusion of the
Wye River accord. It is the fervent hope of my delegation
that the people of the Middle East, Jews and Arabs, will
honour the memory of King Hussein by transforming the
Middle East into a zone of peace and tranquillity.
The case of Palestine may at times bring about
exasperation and despair because of its seemingly
intractable nature. But because of the high stakes involved,
exasperation and despair are a luxury we cannot afford. The
high stakes my delegation is referring to are the inalienable
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and the
elusive but necessary peace which we all cherish and pray
for in the Middle East.
We have stated before and will do so again here that
peace is a two-way street. The parties concerned — that is,
the leadership of both Israel and Palestine — should
continue to pursue peace in the spirit of give and take. This
is an achievable objective, as was shown by the agreement
on the Oslo accords and their subsequent implementation,
although their future was in the process bleakened by the
murderous hand of an anti-peace fanatic and the consequent
change of administration in Israel.
Even though the consequence of the tragic death of
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was a debilitating lacuna or
hiatus in the evolution of the peace process, a ray of hope

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
began to shine again on further prospects for peace with
the adoption of the Wye River Memorandum late last
year. The Israelis and Palestinians committed themselves
to the resumption of the concrete implementation of the
peace accords.
We cannot fail to recognize that, in spite of the
brave efforts of the Palestinians to implement the Wye
River Memorandum, those efforts have once again fallen
victim to their partners' failure to live up to their side of
the bargain. The implementation of the Wye River
Memorandum remains in limbo. It may be argued that
due to pending national elections in Israel, implementation
of the Memorandum may prove difficult.
However, it worries my delegation that the timing of
such elections should take precedence over the search for
peace through the implementation of the Oslo accords. To
compound matters further, activities which are contrary
and inimical to the peace process manage to find space on
the calendar of events in Israel. Expropriation of
Palestinian lands and illegal settlement construction
continue even as the Memorandum remains frozen.
Obviously, such a situation pours cold water on the
argument that the Memorandum cannot be implemented
at this stage.
My delegation wishes to join those who have called
upon the Israeli Government to live up to its side of the
bargain. Peace in the Middle East cannot be postponed
nor frozen forever. Israel's search for a secure
environment for its citizens is inseparable from the
inalienable right of the Palestinians to a place of their
own under the sun.
While we recognize the right of the State of Israel to
exist within secure and internationally recognized borders,
we also ardently believe that the Palestinians too are
entitled to their own. We strongly appeal to the authorities
in Israel to implement the Wye River Memorandum.
Israelis from all walks of life, particularly those who
really yearn for peace and recognize the right of other
people to similar entitlements to theirs, should not cease
to work tirelessly for the day when all the children of
Abraham can live together as brethren. The bravery and
visionary leadership which the late Yitzhak Rabin so
amply showed can only be honoured and rewarded by the
efforts of peace-loving Israelis working harder for the
realization of his dream.
Let me conclude by associating my delegation with
those that have expressed the desire for the holding of a

9

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
conference of the High Contracting Parties. We believe that
the time has come for the dates and venue for the
conference to be determined.
Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): Yesterday,
we gathered in this Hall to hear powerful tributes to King
Hussein. Different regional groups spoke; representatives of
different countries made statements in a number of
languages. But all drew one conclusion about what made
King Hussein great: his tireless work for peace and his
unrelenting efforts to bring the benefits of peace to his
people. This is something to which we all aspire — the
very aim that brings us here today.
The United States is working hard to achieve a just,
lasting and comprehensive settlement of the conflict in the
Middle East. I think we all share this goal. The United
Nations can play a positive and important role in that quest.
But the question we must ask ourselves is this: Does this
emergency special session or this draft resolution contribute
to that goal? The answer, clearly, is no.

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
it as a vehicle to drive the political agendas of parties to
a negotiating process.
This draft resolution is redundant and hortatory and
will not accomplish the goal it ostensibly seeks to
achieve. It will, in fact, not advance that process even
incrementally. If it succeeds at anything, it will succeed,
perhaps, in politicizing the Fourth Geneva Convention. Is
that really something any of us would characterize as a
success?
Let us not lose sight of our goal. My Government
has not, and we are working every day to bring about a
just and lasting settlement between Palestinians and
Israelis. We want to see the Wye River Memorandum
implemented in its entirety by both sides as soon as
possible. We want to see progress in the permanent status
negotiations.
That is why the United States will vote against this
draft resolution. We ask all to do the same.

My Government does not believe that this draft
resolution, either in content or in tone, advances the cause
of Middle East peace or even promises to improve the lot
of the Palestinians, which is the avowed purpose of this
initiative. In fact, this draft resolution is likely to have just
the opposite effect, damaging further the environment
between the parties precisely at a time when actions are
needed on both sides to improve that environment.

Mr. Hosseinian (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me at the outset to express, on behalf of the Government
and people of the Islamic Republic of Iran, our deepest
condolences to the Government and people of Jordan on
the sad occasion of the demise of King Hussein and to
pray to almighty God for his divine forgiveness of the
deceased King and for the well-being and prosperity of
the people of Jordan.

The Palestinians and the Israelis agreed to handle the
issues raised today in their negotiations. We do not believe
that the United Nations or any other body should interfere
in that discussion. But more importantly, we believe that
this initiative will be counterproductive.

I would also like to express my sympathy and
condolences to the people and the Government of
Colombia for the tragic earthquake that claimed the lives
of hundreds and caused extensive damage in that country.

The draft resolution's call for a meeting of all the High
Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention to
“enforce” the Convention in the occupied territories will
only serve to damage the climate necessary for productive
and ultimately successful negotiations. The language of this
draft resolution and its proposed steps prejudge negotiations
on permanent status issues and hamper the chances for
eventually achieving the goal of peace shared by us all.

The tenth emergency special session of the General
Assembly has been resumed once more to discuss the
continued illegal Israeli actions in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem. The
resumption of this session is a clear indication of Israel's
intransigent policy of totally disregarding the rule of
international law and the demands of the international
community that it cease its illegal actions and practices in
occupied Palestine, in particular its settlement activities.

We remain deeply concerned that this draft resolution,
like similar ones in the past, constitutes an unacceptable
assault on the basic uses and meaning of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. This draft resolution is another step towards
politicizing that noble Convention, which is fundamentally
humanitarian in nature. It demeans the Convention to use

The four resolutions adopted during this special
session in the course of the past two years have explicitly
condemned Israel for failing to comply with the decisions
of this Assembly and have rejected the validity of the
Israeli illegal actions, as well as their practical outcomes
and implications, in occupied East Jerusalem and the rest

10

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
of the occupied Palestinian territory. The resolutions have
also demanded that Israel cease immediately and fully the
construction at Jebel Abu Ghneim and all other actions in
Jerusalem, the building of new settlements and the
expansion of existing settlements in the occupied territories,
the construction of bypass roads and the confiscation of
lands. Equally important are the provisions of these
resolutions referring to the applicability of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 to the occupied Palestinian
territories and emphasizing the responsibilities of the Israeli
regime and officials arising from their persistent violations
and grave breaches of the requirements of this Convention.
Israel's rejection and defiance of these and other
relevant resolutions of the United Nations illustrate the base
intention of the Israeli regime to continue its notorious
policy of expansionism and forcible occupation of others'
lands through aggression, the use of brute force and
intimidation. Such unlawful policies and inhumane practices
have not only been directed against the inhabitants of the
occupied territories, but have also been conducted to
perpetuate the refugee status of 4 million Palestinians who
live in the diaspora in refugee camps under precarious
conditions. The continuation of this unjust situation would
certainly prolong the suffering of Palestinians, both in the
occupied territories and in the refugee camps.
The Israeli actions and policies are undoubtedly the
main source of instability and insecurity in the region, thus
creating an atmosphere of fear and anxiety among regional
nations as well as in the entire international community.
The agony is deepened when the world sees that Israel is
even aloof to its obligations and commitments arising from
the agreements which it has deliberately entered into,
despite the acknowledged fact that they have been designed
mostly in its favour.
Therefore, the United Nations, as the universal and the
most representative body of the international community,
has a permanent responsibility to tackle the Palestinian
issue with a view to bringing peace and justice to a region
that for more than half a century has been marked by
enduring crises and engulfed in a whirlpool of constant
tension and destructive confrontation. To our great regret,
the Security Council, for plain reasons of common
knowledge, has long been rendered ineffective in fulfilling
its responsibility — which is well defined by the Charter —
to deal with the issue of Palestine decisively. This has
prompted the general membership to call for the convening
of the special session under the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 377 (V) of 1950.

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
In such circumstances it is imperative for the
General Assembly to take the lead in condemning and
rejecting the illegal Israeli policies and practices designed
to perpetuate the forcible occupation, with a view to
bringing such unlawful actions to an immediate end. By
doing so, the Assembly should declare null and void all
legislative and administrative measures and actions taken
by Israel to alter the character, legal status and
demographic composition of Jerusalem and the rest of the
occupied territories, including laws adopted on 26 and 27
January 1999 by the Israeli parliament.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, as a party to the
Fourth Geneva Convention, appreciates the initiative of
the Government of Switzerland, which in its capacity as
the depositary of the Convention convened the experts
meeting of the Convention in Geneva last October. This
meeting, as indicated in its chairman's report, was held to
analyze the general problems regarding the application of
the Fourth Convention, particularly in the occupied
territories. In our view, such a meeting is a step forward
and in the right direction to address issues of a
humanitarian nature at time of armed conflict or in the
occupied territories.
By the approach of the fiftieth anniversary of the
four Geneva Conventions, a momentum will be created
for the international community to reaffirm its
determination to safeguard and promote the principles of
humanitarian law through removing any obstacles —
technical, political or otherwise — to the full
implementation of these Conventions in all cases and
circumstances. Accordingly, the Islamic Republic of Iran
reaffirms its support for convening a conference of High
Contracting Parties to the Convention on measures to
enforce its provisions in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem. It is our earnest hope that such a
conference can contribute to the restoration of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
Finally, the Islamic Republic of Iran supports the
continuation and resumption of discussion on the issue
under consideration by the General Assembly at the
emergency special session, because of continued illegal
Israeli actions in the occupied Palestinian territories.
Indeed, the time is long overdue for the realization of the
legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people, both in
the occupied territories and in the refugee camps. To this
end the role of the United Nations, particularly that of the
General Assembly, remains as paramount as ever.

11

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from
Chinese): First of all, allow me to express on behalf of the
Government and people of China our profound grief over
the unfortunate passing away of King Hussein of Jordan.
Chinese President Jiang Zemin sent a telegram to Jordan's
new King, Abdullah, expressing such a profound grief and
heart-felt sympathy for the members of the royal family.
King Hussein was a great leader of the Jordanian
people and an outstanding statesman of the Arab world. He
devoted all his life to the prosperity of Jordan and the
development of the Middle East peace process. King
Hussein enjoyed not only the dear love of the Jordanian
people, but also extensive respect in the international
community. At this sad moment, the best way to remember
King Hussein is undoubtedly to do all that we can to push
forward the Middle East peace process that he worked for
throughout his life.
The Israeli Government decided recently to
temporarily suspend the implementation of Wye peace
accord, continue the building of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories, including East Jerusalem, and
postpone the second-phase troop withdrawal from the West
Bank. The Chinese delegation is gravely concerned over
this development of the events there. We believe that such
moves by the Israeli Government, having seriously
sabotaged the Middle East peace process and caused tension
in the region, should be halted immediately.
China has always believed that the Palestine issue is
the core of the Middle East question. Only after the
Palestine issue is solved in a just and reasonable manner
and all the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people are
restored can genuine and lasting peace be brought about
between Israel and Palestine and peace, stability and
development in the Middle East be realized. We maintain
that a political settlement of the Middle East question
should be found on the basis of the relevant United Nations
resolutions and according to the principle of land for peace.
The Middle East peace process is right now at a
sensitive and crucial juncture. We call upon all parties
concerned to cherish the hard-won peace, carry out their
respective obligations in all earnestness, strictly abide by
the agreements already reached between Palestine and Israel
and work to push forward the peace process with a flexible
and pragmatic attitude and unaffected by disturbances.
Mr. Snoussi (Morocco) (interpretation from French):
First of all, I would like to offer the fraternal Jordanian
people our most sincere condolences on the passing of His

12

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
Majesty King Hussein Ibn Talal. I would also like to say
to my Jordanian brothers that their sorrow and grief are
shared by the entire Moroccan people, the Arab nation,
the Islamic Ummah and all the peace-loving peoples of
the world.
The world will remember His Majesty King Hussein
of Jordan, the builder of modern Jordan, as a hero who
united his tireless efforts with those of other Arab leaders
in order to make peace an achievable objective.
His Majesty King Hussein has bequeathed to the
Arab nation and to Jordan a great heritage of wisdom,
vision and courage. To His Majesty King Abdullah, his
worthy successor, he has bequeathed inestimable potential
for promoting peace and development in the Middle East.
May God help him to assume his noble task, and we call
on the Almighty to have mercy on the soul of the
deceased.
In less than two years, the General Assembly has
four times resumed its tenth emergency special session in
order to consider the question of illegal Israeli actions in
occupied East Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory. During these various meetings, the
Assembly has adopted resolutions condemning the Israeli
policies, in particular the policy of settlement building.
Unfortunately, the will of the international community,
which has been clearly expressed by the Assembly, has
not been enough to get the Israeli Government to heed
reason.
As the occupying Power, Israel continues to violate
the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention of 12
August 1949 by carrying out its policy of deporting
Palestinians, confiscating identity papers and diverting
flows of water, to cite only a few examples. It is thus
beyond the shadow of a doubt that Israel is continuing to
shirk its obligations under this Convention. This is what
has made the resumption of this session inevitable.
This special meeting is intended to call on Israel one
last time to return to reason and to respect the agreements
that have been reached. As a sponsor of the draft
resolution before the Assembly, Morocco supports the
renewed recommendation by the General Assembly that
the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention hold, on 15 July 1999, a conference on
measures to enforce and ensure respect for the
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem.

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
I would thus like to take this opportunity to call anew
on the Israeli Government to review its decision to suspend
implementation of the Wye River Memorandum. Certainly
Israel, which has so often reiterated that it wants peace, is
aware that it cannot have peace without justice and equity.
Israel continues to approach the Middle East peace process
exclusively from the perspective of security. However,
Israel’s security cannot be assured if that of its neighbours
is not. Certainly Israel is aware that security is only a single
step in a grand civilizing project on which the hopes of the
entire region rest and which includes — apart from the
security component — tolerance, equality, coexistence,
cooperation, development and, finally, peace for all the
peoples of the Middle East.
A few months from the twenty-first century, it is
appropriate to hope that this end of the century will finally
see the closing of this dark chapter in the history of the
Middle East. Let us dare hope, in any case, that future
generations will be able to recall the Middle East conflict
as a thing of the past.
Mr. Dlamini (Swaziland): May I preface my remarks
by, first of all, expressing — on behalf of His Majesty the
King, the people of Swaziland and, indeed, the Government
of the Kingdom of Swaziland — our sympathy on the
demise of His Majesty King Hussein of the Kingdom of
Jordan. We say to the people of Jordan that Almighty God
will continue to soothe the excruciating pain to which they
have been subjected due to the unforeseen departure of His
Majesty the King. Through the departure of His Majesty,
they have not only lost a father but have been deprived of
a leader full of patience in the face of circumstances
beyond human control.
The Kingdom of Swaziland is taking the floor to make
its views known on the item before us today. We have been
listening to all the calls upon the parties to the dispute to
come to a common understanding. Our expectations were
subsequently reinforced by a series of conferences that
brought the two parties together, conferences at which they
both agreed to pursue the goals of lasting peace in the
Middle East.
Not forgetting, of course, that the obstacles to
achieving peace are always there, and not forgetting, of
course, that there are difficulties facing all of mankind, the
international community continued to urge the two parties
to come to the conference table — notably, at the Oslo
conference, the Madrid conference, the Washington
conference in 1995, the Cairo conference in 1993 and,

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
recently, at the meeting held at the Wye River Planation
in the United States of America.
This body therefore has a responsibility to come up
with resolutions that would call upon all parties not to
renege on the commitments they made at all those
conferences. There is no time for political posturing in
our debate. Time is no longer on our side. That being the
case, therefore, the Kingdom of Swaziland wishes to
persuade the international statesmen who are here today
to put forward resolutions that call upon both parties to
urgently implement and honour the agreements set forth
in the Wye River Memorandum.
Let us not allow ourselves to be bound by the
history that stands in the way of our realizing lasting
peace in the Middle East.
My delegation has yet to see a resolution specifically
setting a time-frame for both Israel and Palestine to be
prepared to adhere to and respect their own commitments.
My delegation is taken aback, therefore, and wonders
what the purpose is of this agenda before us. The Fourth
Geneva Convention is not political, it is humanitarian. and
we are faced here with a political situation. We would be
cheated of our noble responsibility if we did not adopt
resolutions calling on both parties earnestly to adhere to
the provisions of the Conventions to which they both
agreed.
For these reasons, my delegation will abstain in the
voting, in keeping with the policy of His Majesty’s
Government that when one’s brothers are fighting, the
best thing to do is not to take sides but to stand in the
middle and remind them of their noble responsibility in
society: to live and coexist peacefully. Today I say to the
parties concerned: come to the Kingdom of Swaziland.
We have the solution; the solution lies around the
conference table where commitments are honoured. Only
then will the international community have a good reason
to celebrate.
The Acting President: In accordance with the
decision taken at the 10th plenary meeting, I now call on
the Observer of Switzerland.
Mr. Staehelin (Switzerland) (interpretation from
French): The Swiss authorities and the people of
Switzerland would like to express their condolences to the
royal family and to the Government and people of Jordan
on the occasion of the death of His Majesty King
Hussein, defender of peace in the Middle East. As

13

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
indicated by the Swiss authorities, the King’s best legacy is
his work for peace. We hope that all in the region now will
come together on the road to peace.
The Swiss authorities and people would like also to
express their sympathy to the Government and people of
Colombia in the wake of the tragic human losses they have
incurred.
Switzerland, as a State party to the Fourth Geneva
Convention, considers that that Convention is fully
applicable to the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem, and that it should be fully applied in those
territories. It has stated this on numerous occasions,
including before this Assembly. Unfortunately, major
violations of the Convention have been noted that affect the
development and rights of the civilian population. Those
violations include the settlements policy in the occupied
Palestinian territories, expulsions, the treatment of
detainees, the plight of certain injured persons, the
demolition of houses and infringements on the right to
property. Switzerland is concerned at the deterioration of
the situation in the territories and, in this regard, makes an
appeal for the respect of the Convention.
Regarding the Geneva Conventions, Switzerland,
above and beyond its responsibilities as a State party, also
plays another role: that of depositary. Therefore my
statement will deal in particular with the exercise of this
duty by my country in the context of the issues we are
addressing today.
In operative paragraph 10 of its resolution ES-10/3 of
15 July 1997, the General Assembly recommended for the
first time to the High Contracting Parties to the Fourth
Geneva Convention that they
“convene a conference on measures to enforce the
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem, and to ensure its respect, in
accordance with common article 1”.
Why is it that, more than 18 months after the adoption of
this resolution, this conference has not yet taken place?
Following the adoption of resolution ES-10/3,
Switzerland, in its capacity as the depositary of the
Convention, began in the summer of 1997 a process of
consultation with the States parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention. It particularly requested States parties to
communicate to it their views with respect to the holding of
a conference and its possible outcome. It then transpired

14

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
that there was no consensus among the States parties
regarding a time-table for the conference. The Fourth
Convention has no provisions related to the holding of
conferences devoted to specific situations, and
consequently specifies no modalities for them. A
consensus would have made possible the early convening
of the conference by the depositary, as recommended by
the General Assembly.
Indeed, Switzerland must construe its role as
depositary in a restrictive sense when legal bases and
norms are not clearly defined or when action may be
controversial. On the other hand, it may exercise this role
more broadly when the framework is clear and when
States parties are in favour of its action.
Given, inter alia, the repeated recommendations of
the General Assembly of November 1997 and March
1998, Switzerland continued its consultations. In close
contact with States and the organizations more directly
concerned, it sought to identify measures that would lend
themselves to a consensus and that would be conducive
to promoting the respect of the Fourth Convention in the
occupied Palestinian territories. In the context of this
consultation process with the States and organizations
more directly concerned, a consensus was reached with
respect to a set of two measures, which were
subsequently communicated by the depositary to all the
States parties in July 1998.
The first track of this set of measures provided for
Switzerland to invite the representatives of Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization to a closed meeting in
the presence of representatives of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) with a view to
examining measures and machinery that could contribute
to the effective implementation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem. A first meeting was held in Geneva
from 9 to 11 June 1998. The participants engaged in an
exchange of view on the possibility of enacting specific
measures to implement the Fourth Geneva Convention.
They agreed to meet again to consider ideas and
suggestions that could promote respect for the Fourth
Geneva Convention. The hope of contributing to a rapid
improvement in the situation on the ground has yet to be
realized. Switzerland considers, however, that this type of
meeting can produce positive results in terms of tangible
improvements on the ground, provided that the principle
of respect for the provisions of the Convention is not
thrown into question. In the summer of 1998, Switzerland
began approaching participants with a view to calling

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
another meeting. That meeting has had to be postponed
several times. Switzerland hopes that a date will be
scheduled as soon as possible.
The second track, the contents of which were
discussed by all the States parties, consisted in organizing
a meeting of experts to consider general problems in
implementing the Fourth Geneva Convention. That meeting
was held in Geneva from 27 to 29 October 1998. It allowed
the participants to consider ways and means of ensuring
respect for the Convention in the spirit of common article
1 of the Geneva Conventions. That provision requires States
to respect and to ensure respect for these instruments in all
circumstances. It lays down a true legal obligation, but the
substance of that obligation is not spelled out. The
Convention itself establishes no mechanism for ensuring its
respect. The 1949 Conference adopted no provision
specifically addressing the settlement of disputes on the
interpretation of the Convention. It did, however, invite
States, in its first resolution, to make every effort to agree
to submit their potential disputes to the International Court
of Justice. Hence, article 1 necessarily and basically defers
to the political judgment of States the determination of
measures to be taken in a specific case to ensure respect for
the Convention.
At the meeting of experts, the participants identified
violations of the Convention and measures to put an end to
such violations and to prevent future breaches. They
underscored that it is essentially political and legal disputes
relating to the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention that hamper its implementation. Among the
measures mentioned at the meeting of experts was the
organization of meetings in which the States or entities
particularly concerned — as well as certain States parties,
when necessary — would participate to consider specific
situations. One meeting of this kind was held last June with
the representatives of Israel and Palestine in the presence of
representatives of the ICRC.
Included among the 17 measures mentioned in the
report of the Chairman of the meeting was a consideration
of the timing and modalities of conferences on specific
situations, such as those recommended by the General
Assembly in the case of the occupied Palestinian territories.
Convening such a conference, however, raises many
questions that the Geneva Conventions and their additional
protocols do not resolve and which only the States
parties — and not the depositary — can address.
Such questions include, inter alia, the determination of
the circumstances in which such a meeting should be

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
convened and to what extent such meetings can tangibly
alleviate the plight of victims. Who can take the initiative
for convening such a meeting? The depositary? A
particular number of States parties? An international
organization? How should the decision to convene such
a meeting be taken? Should it be taken by all or by a
simple or qualified majority of States parties or of the
States taking a position? How would the States parties
deal with a situation in which one of the principal parties
concerned does not participate in the conference? When
the principle of a meeting is agreed, how are decisions
taken concerning its preparation and conduct? What
should its agenda and goals be? What rules of procedure
are to be applied? Who would cover the costs?
Despite the consultations undertaken since summer
1997, and in spite of the precise questions raised by the
Swiss delegation at the meeting of experts last October,
the depositary has yet to receive any conclusive reply.
That, in substance, is the main reason why the conference
recommended by the General Assembly has not yet been
convened.
Shortly, the General Assembly will be called upon
to vote on a draft resolution recommending the convening
of the conference on 15 July 1999. This draft resolution
was the subject of difficult negotiations, inter alia, on the
question of whether some earlier date should have been
proposed for the conference. It expresses welcome
gratitude to Switzerland and invites my country, in its
capacity as depositary, to undertake preparations to that
end. In the light of these recommendations, what position
will Switzerland adopt in its capacity as depositary of the
Fourth Geneva Convention?
In transmitting to the States parties, the SecretaryGeneral and the observers the report of the Chairman of
the meeting of experts held in October, the Swiss
authorities announced their intention to undertake a new
round of consultations with the States parties to the
Geneva Conventions, the International Committee of the
Red Cross and the organizations more directly concerned.
Those consultations have already begun, albeit informally
so far, and have been mostly devoted to matters related to
the possible convening of conferences devoted to specific
situations. Switzerland, in its capacity as depositary, could
consider taking an active role in the convening and
holding of a conference of that type only if States parties
first defined a solid basis for the implementation of such
a measure, so that, inter alia, it could be applied in the
case of serious violations of the Fourth Geneva
Convention in any location. Switzerland takes note of the

15

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
willingness expressed before this Assembly by many States
to seek a basis for common action by the High Contracting
Parties. We hope that this action can be the subject of
general agreement.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/ES-10/L.5/Rev.1.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Jin Yongjian (Under-Secretary-General for
General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services): I
should like to inform members that, should the General
Assembly adopt draft resolution A/ES-10/L.5/Rev.1, the
Secretary-General does not anticipate any programme
budget implications.
The Acting President: I now call on the
representative of Israel, who wishes to speak in explanation
of vote before the voting.
May I remind delegations that explanations of vote are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Gold (Israel): Since the signing of the Oslo
accords, the PLO has systematically violated the 9
September 1993 commitment given by Chairman Yasser
Arafat to Israel’s late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, “that
all outstanding issues related to permanent status will be
resolved through negotiations”. This violation is continuing
here today. Today’s proposed draft resolution does not
support the peace process. On the contrary, this action
undermines its bilateral foundations.
Israel views the attempt to convene a conference of
the signatories to the Fourth Geneva Convention with
respect to the West Bank and Gaza as a vulgar distortion of
international humanitarian law for the purpose of narrow
political interests. No such conference has been held since
1949 with respect to any single conflict in the world,
despite the many cases of wars of aggression, genocide and
ethnic cleansing that have transpired. Moreover, no
conference intended to address the status of civilians in
time of war can have any relevance whatsoever to the
Israeli situation, in which 97 per cent of the Palestinians in
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip are today under
Palestinian rule.

16

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
Finally, to selectively apply a Convention that grew
out of the experience of Nazi-occupied Europe to the case
of Israel is nothing less than a travesty. International
political reality is undergoing Orwellian contortions here
today, by which sincere efforts at implementation are
described as obstruction and compliance is portrayed as
illegality.
It is important to set the record straight in the light
of the assertions that have been made here today. In the
aftermath of previous meetings of the emergency special
session, the Swiss depositary suggested translating the
provisions of the resolutions adopted into a dialogue on
humanitarian issues between the parties concerned. Israel
in fact agreed to these proposals and indeed took part in
the first meeting in Switzerland, demonstrating its own
interest in these humanitarian concerns, as opposed to the
political path suggested here today.
Moreover, the convening of this emergency special
session represents a total abuse of the United Nations
system. Assembly resolution 377 (U) A of 3 November
1950, the “Uniting for peace” resolution, envisioned that
emergency special sessions would be held in the event of
a threat to international peace and security. Given the
wars and famines that have raged across the world, to
raise again an issue that more properly belongs on the
Israeli-Palestinian negotiating table is a destructive
definition of international priorities and a wasteful use of
international resources.
There are two paths for addressing Israeli-Palestinian
differences. Here the international community has a clear
choice. One is the path of one-sided United Nations
resolutions that will only encourage unilateralist
Palestinian options. This is the path followed here today,
and it should be opposed. For this reason Israel will vote
against the draft resolution.
The other path is the route of a negotiated
settlement, consistent with the commitments given in the
Oslo accords. It is our hope that States will responsibly
choose a course of action that will support compliance
with past commitments, rather than one that will only
encourage the erosion of signed agreements and increase
international anarchy.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
I call on the representative of Cuba on a point of
order.

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
Mr. Dausá Céspedes (Cuba) (interpretation from
Spanish): I have asked to take the floor to draw your
attention to the fact that, as announced last Friday by the
representative of the United Arab Emirates in introducing
the draft resolution, Cuba is one of the sponsors. I should
like to ask that the Secretariat duly take this fact into
account in preparing the final version of the text of the
draft resolution.
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/ES-0/L.5/Rev.1.
A recorded vote has been requested.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Egypt, Eritrea,
Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy,
Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Zimbabwe
Against:
Israel, United States of America
Abstaining:
Australia, Bahamas, Cameroon, Romania, Swaziland
The draft resolution was adopted by 115 votes to 2,
with 5 abstentions (resolution ES-10/6).

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
[Subsequently, the delegation of the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour.]
The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of vote
on the resolution just adopted.
May I again remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Duval (Canada) (interpretation from French):
Canada voted in favour of the resolution because we
support its principles. Canada remains greatly concerned
at Israeli settlement activities in East Jerusalem and
elsewhere in the occupied territories. We urge Israel to
stop these activities, which in Canada’s view are a
violation of international law and harmful to the peace
process. Canada believes that the Fourth Geneva
Convention applies to the territories occupied by Israel in
1967, including East Jerusalem. We call on Israel to
accept the de jure applicability of the Convention in the
occupied territories, including East Jerusalem.
We regret that the General Assembly is again using
the emergency special session mechanism in a manner
that to us does not seem helpful. Moreover, we find that
the resolution is complicated by language that will not
benefit the peace process and by elements that are not
germane to the question of the convening of the
conference on the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
As a High Contracting Party to the Fourth Geneva
Convention, Canada wishes to thank the Government of
Switzerland for its efforts in organizing the meeting of
experts held in October 1998 regarding the applicability
of the Fourth Geneva Convention to the occupied
territories in general. Our decision about the merits of
convening the conference called for in operative
paragraph 6 will be made after a full examination of the
necessity, possible outcome and costs of such a
conference, as well as, of course, after full consultations
with the other High Contracting Parties.
Canada is a strong supporter of the peace process
and an active participant in the search for a durable and
lasting peace in the Middle East. We are thus deeply
concerned by the current impasse in the negotiating
process and by the fact that no progress has been made in
implementing the Wye River Memorandum.

17

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999

It is incumbent on both the Israelis and Palestinians to
honour and implement in full the agreements that have been
concluded. We urge both parties not to take any unilateral
actions that might jeopardize peace or prejudge the outcome
of negotiations.

Despite the reservations we also have with regard to
several new elements introduced in the resolution,
Norway had no choice but to uphold our position of the
March 1998 emergency special session meeting and,
accordingly, to vote in favour of the resolution.

Mr. Crighton (Australia): Australia continues to
support the principles underlying the resolution relating to
the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention and
therefore regrets that it was not able to support the
resolution itself. We wish to make very clear our view that
we regard settlement activity in the occupied territories as
harmful to the peace process. Australia remains gravely
concerned about the current state of the peace process and
has consistently urged the parties to commit themselves to
effective negotiations.

Mr. Benítez Sáenz (Uruguay) (interpretation from
Spanish): Uruguay views with deep concern the
successive acts of violence between Israelis and
Palestinians that have endangered the peace agreements
signed in Madrid eight years ago.

Given the current situation in the region, including the
forthcoming elections in Israel, Australia considers that the
timing of this resolution is not appropriate, and we do not
believe that this is an appropriate mechanism for moving
the peace process forward.
We look forward to seeing further momentum in the
peace process. There is no substitute for frank, direct and
wide-ranging talks between the parties themselves.
We consider that the resolution will not advance the
peace process and therefore abstained.

Today once again we have attended the emergency
special session with the hope that the United Nations will
fulfil its primary obligation to ensure international peace
and security and respect for human rights. For this reason
my country once again urges Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to fully restore the process of peace and
cooperation that was started, thus promoting the
restoration of mutual trust. We urge both parties to halt
and refrain from all illegal acts that may make it difficult
to restart the process.
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution ES-10/6 above
all because it reaffirms the importance of international
humanitarian law, and it points out the obligation of the
High Contracting Parties to the Geneva Convention to
respect and foster respect for this legal instrument of
universal applicability.

Mr. Brattskar (Norway): Norway remains convinced
that it is the obligation and responsibility of the parties
themselves to carry the peace process forward and to
implement fully the Interim Agreement as well as the Wye
River Memorandum. Norway therefore urges the parties to
refrain from unilateral actions that might endanger the
peace process. We encourage the parties to step up the
direct bilateral negotiations, with a view to completing the
implementation of these agreements and to engage in
successful final status negotiations.

Nevertheless, some of this resolution’s paragraphs —
in particular operative paragraph 5 — contain assertions
that imply a prejudging of the issues that the conference
will have to discuss. We here enter a formal reservation
regarding this matter.

Norway is of the view that the holding of an
emergency special session of the General Assembly is not
conducive to progress in the peace process. We also
maintain our reservations in respect of several elements in
the resolution.

The Acting President: I call on the Observer of
Palestine.

At the same time, Norway is deeply concerned about
the continued Israeli settlement activities in the Palestinian
areas. Such unilateral steps serve to increase tension. They
are clearly not in the spirit of the agreements reached
between the two sides and are contrary to international law.

18

In keeping with our commitment to peace, we
appreciate and support all the actions and negotiations
undertaken by the Swiss Government aimed at finding an
acceptable and satisfactory solution for both parties.

Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from
Arabic): I would like to express our heartfelt thanks to all
the States that sponsored or voted in favour of the
important resolution that the tenth emergency special
session today adopted by such an overwhelming
majority — despite the fact that, in accordance with
Article 19 of the Charter, 42 Member States were unable
to vote.

General Assembly
Tenth emergency special session
We believe in the great importance of the resolutions
of the United Nations, and in particular of those adopted by
this emergency special session. We believe also that today’s
resolution, in addition to its traditional importance,
constitutes a step forward because it contains a specific
practical measures: the call to convene a conference of the
High Contracting Parties to the Fourth Geneva Convention
to consider measures to enforce the Convention in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem. That
conference is to be convened on 15 July at the United
Nations Office in Geneva. This undoubtedly is of the
utmost importance. We look forward to the timely
convening of the conference and to its outcome, which we
expect to be significant.
Before the adoption of the resolution, we heard a
statement by the Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the
United Nations. In that statement he raised a number of
important points, which we understood as an invitation to
the High Contracting Parties to translate their position in

12th plenary meeting
9 February 1999
support of the convening of the conference, as was
expressed today, into concrete and continued cooperation
with the depositary. We believe that this is important, and
on our part we will act accordingly.
We believe that the conference must be held under
any and all circumstances, but it is the cooperation of the
High Contracting Parties during the preparatory phase,
from now until the convening of the conference, that will
guarantee its complete success.
We had hoped that one more State would have
joined the large number of States that supported the draft
resolution, in view of the fact that Israel has not
responded to the efforts of that particular State in the field
of peace-building and in particular with regard to the Wye
River Memorandum. Unfortunately, this did not take
place, but we continue to hope that that State’s position
will change.
I reiterate our thanks to you, Mr. President, and to
all the friendly countries that supported resolution
ES-10/60.
The Acting President: The tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly is now adjourned
temporarily, in accordance with the terms of paragraph 10
of the resolution adopted at the present meeting.
I wish to thank the Member States, the Secretariat
and the observers for their cooperation.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

19
