TWENTY-

FIFTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

22/23 NOVEMBER

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

1970

agenda (S/Agenda/l558)

Page

, , . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . a. . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Adoption of the agenda , . . . , , , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . ,. . +. . . . . . 1
Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 22 November 1970from the Permanent Representative of Guinea
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/9987) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . * . . . . . . . . , . * . . . . . . 1

S/PV. 15.58

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters cornbined with $gures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published
in quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The
date of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

eld in New Y’ork

President:

Mr. George J. TOMEH

22 November

(Syria).

invited to sit at the Council table when the time comes
for them to address the Council.

Present: The representatives of the following
States: Burundi, China, Colombia, Finland, France,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
Of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America and Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/k?%)

1.

Adoption

2.

Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/9987).

of the agenda.

Adoption

1970, at 6 p.m.

on Sunday,

of the agenda

Complaint by Guinea
Letter dated 22 November 1970 from the Permanent
Representative
of Guinea to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
W9987)
1. The PRESIDENT
(imrpretatiun
J%WZ F~nclz):
I have just received written requests from the fepresentatives of Guinea [~/9991], Senegal [S/9992], Mali
[s/9993],
Saudi Arabia [S/9994] and Mauritania
/S/9995] to be allowed to participate in the Council’s
debate on the question before it.
2. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to invite the aforementioned representatives to
participate in the debate without the right to vote in
accordance with the Council’s rules of procedure and
its practice.
At the irzvitntion of the Presiderzt, Mr. A. Towe
(Guinea) took u place at the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
In view of the fact that the number of seats available
at the Council table is limited and in accordance with
the practice of the Council, I invite the representatives
of Senegal, Mali, Saudi Arabia and Mauritania to take
the seats reserved for them ‘at the side of the Council
Chamber, with the understanding that they will be

At the invitation

of the President,

Mr. I. Boye

(Senegal),
Mr. G. Sow (Mali), Mr. J. M. Baroody
(Saudi Arabia) and Mr. S. A. Uuld Taya (Mauritania)

took the places reserved for them.
4. The PRESIDENT
(im’erprctntion j?om French):
I should like to draw the attention of members of the
Council to the letter of the Chargk d’affaires of Portugal, which has been circulated as Security Council
document S/9989.
5. The Council is meeting today on the request of
Guinea, whose letter has been circulated as document
S/9987.
6. Before the Council begins its consideration of the
item on its agenda, I call on the Secretary-General
to make a statement.
7. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
At approximately 12.15 p.m. today I received a telephone call
from the representative of Guinea informing me that
he had received an urgent message from President
Ahmed Sekou Tour6 of Guinea addressed to me, I
asked him to be good enough to deliver the message
to me as soon as possible and he came to my residence
at 2 p.m. and delivered the message.
The message reads as follows:
“The Government
of the Republic of Guinea
informs the Secretary-General of the United Nations
that Guinean national territory was the object of
armed aggression by Portuguese forces this morning
at about 2 a.m. Landing craft, violating our territorial
waters, landed mercenary commando troops at
several points in Conakry, capital of the Republic
of Guinea, and carried out cowardly bombing of
several points of the town. Thanks to the immediate
reaction of the National Army and the population,
this treacherous attack has been checked. However,
the Government, whose sacred rights as a sovereign
State Member of the United Nations have been violated, requests the immediate intervention of airborne troops of the United Nations with a view,
in co-operation with’our National Army, to reducing
the last positions held by Portuguese mercenaries
and to driving the vessels of the aggressors from
our territoria: watzs. The Guinean Government is
certain that the United Nations will respond to its

13. That is all I have to report for the moment,

appeal without delay in order to put an end to this
unjustifiable
armed aggression carried out in disregard of our sovereignty and territorial integrity and
the basic principles of the Charter. The United
Nations obviously cannot remain indifferent before
this clear-cut violation of international
peace and
security.” IS/9988.]

14. The PRESIDENT
(inleipretation fitorn Frenc/l):
I now call on the first speaker on my list, the representative of Guinea.
15. Mr. TOURE
(Guinea) (interpretation
fi*orll
Frerzclz): The Republic of Guinea is at this moment
going through a very difficult time. The Security Council will recall that after Zambia, Congo (Kin&as@ and
Senegal, the Republic of Guinea on 22 December 1969)
brought a complaint before it against the Government
of Portugal for violations of its territory, its waters,
its air space, and for having seized an aeroplane. a
civilian ship, and the crews.

8. The representative of Guinea also informed me
that it was his Government’s earnest desire to request
an urgent meeting of the Security Council to consider
this matter.
9. I advised him to see the President of the Security
Council immediately and informed the President myself
of the message from the President of Guinea and also
the earnest desire of the Government of Guinea to
request an urgent meeting of the Security Council. You,
informed
me that you would
Mr. President,
immediately consult the members of the Security Council with a view to the convening of the Council meeting
late this evening.

16. Once again this year, in the debate in the General
Assembly, the head of the Guinean delegation, the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, comrade, stated:

10. At 5.30 p.m. today, I received the following message from the United Nations Development
Programme
Resident
Representative
in Conakry
addressed to Mr. Paul Hoffman, Administrator
of the
United Nations Development Programme.
The message reads as follows:

“Assured of the support of its , , , protectors and
convinced of the ineffectiveness of the United
Nations, Portugal continues deliberately to violate
the Charter and the resolutions of this international
Organization. This being the case, African countries
like the Republic of Guinea have repeatedly brought
to the attention of the United Nations violations by
Portuguese forces of their nationai territory, theil
air space and their territorial waters.

“Kindly inform U Thant at the request of Government confirm at 2 a.m. local time debarkment of
external forces described by Government as Portuguese took place in Conakry. Have seen personally
four debarkment ships and fighters flying over the
city. Due to heavy shooting around my own residence 1 cannot visit United Nations personnel. Situation very serious *justifying your personal consideration.”

“We bring now to the attention of world public
opinion the military and psychological preparations
now under way in Guinea (Bissau) against the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Guinea. Those
preparations which are taking place in special training camps in Guinea (Bissau) include the military
training of stateless Africans in the pay of imperialism and white mercenaries for the purpose of invading
the national territory of Guinea.

11. At 7.30 p.m. I received the following cabled message from the President of Guinea:

“All those diabolical and Machiavellian
plans
being hatched by imperialism are designed to curb
and jeopardize the economic and social developmenl
of Guinea, .’ . . [undertaken by the Revolutionary
People’s Government of the Republic of Guinea).
We repeat that the violation of our air space by Portuguese military aircraft happens all the time. The
most recent incident took place on Saturday, 19Sep
tember 1970, at 1615 hours GMT, in the administrative regions of BokC in lower Guinea and LabC in
mid-Guinea, along the river Komba.“’

“Following clear nggrcssion of which the Republic
of Guinea is victim since two o’clock this morning
by Portugal which has landed European and African
mercenaries at Conakry 1 have the honour to ask
you to convene urgently Security Council in order
to examine this grave situation which endangers
peace and world security. Your urgent reply would
oblige us.”
12. At 8 p.m. I sent the following
to the President of Guinea:

17. Moreover, as recently as last month about thirty
mercenaries acting against Guinea, in the pay of hxtuguese colonialists, were arrested and sentenced by
the brother Government of Gambia for subversion as
these mercenaries were preparing to invade Guinea
from Gambia. At the present time these Persons
opposed to Guinea are serving their sentences in Gambian prisons.

cabled message

“Upon receipt of your cable through the Permanent Representative of Guinea to United Nations,
steps were urgently taken to convene the meeting
of the Security Council this evening, 22 November.
I have just received your second cable asking me
to convene urgent meeting of the Security Council
and I wish you to know that the Council is about
to meet to consider the serious matters raised in
your messages. I shall cable you any decision taken
by the Council. Highest consideration.”

18. This morning, at 2 a.m. GMT, the national tei’ritory of the Republic of Guinea was the object of aggres1 Ofjcial
Records
Pkenary Meetings,

2

of the General

Assembly,

Twenty-Jjfil

1859th meeting, paras. 53-55.

SessiQn,

sion, armed aggression, premeditated and perpetrated
by Portuguese colonial forces. Warships, violating Guinean territorial waters, landed mercenaries at several
points in the capital.

the Republic of Guinea as well as the fundamental
ciples of the lJnited Nations Charter.

prin-

24. As this debate gets under way and without trying,
of course, to anticipate how it will proceed, may I
be allowed to say that the people of Guinea and the
party representing the masses, standing as one by its
unchallenged leader, President Ahmed Sekou TourC,
are confident that the Security Council will do everything that it must, everything that is requested of it.

19. In the face of this grave situation, the President
of the Republic of Guinea addressed to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations the message which he
has just read out and which I would like to read again
for the benefit of the Security Council. The message
is worded as follows:

25. We should like to bring to your attention that
the Security Council should demand the immediate cessation of aggression against the Republic of Guinea;
that the Security Council should demand the immediate
withdrawal of all Portuguese and mercenary troops and
all military or other epuipment used for the invasion
of the territory of the Republic of Guinea; that the
Security Council should decide immediately to send
the airborne, land and seaborne troops necessary to
restore peace and security in this area of Africa; that
the Council should unequivocally
condemn the
Government of Portugal for its premeditated attacks
against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Guinea; and that the Security Council,
and the Secretary-General, should consider themselves
entrusted with the application of these decisions, that
the Secretary-General should submit a report to the
Council, and also that the Security Council should,
in its, wisdom, keep this question on its agenda.

“The Government
of the Republic of Guinea
informs the Secretary-General of the United Nations
that Guinean national territory was the object of
armed aggression by Portuguese forces this morning
at about 2 a.m. Landing craft, violating our territorial
waters, landed mercenary commando troops at
several points in Conakry, capital of the Republic
of Guinea, and carried out cowardly bombing of
several points of the town. Thanks to the immediate
reaction of the National Army and the population,
this treacherous attack has been checked. However,
the Government, whose sacred rights as a sovereign
State Member of the United Nations have been violated, requests the immediate intervention of airborne troops of the United Nations with a view,
in co-operation with our National Army, to reducing
the last positions held by Portuguese mercenaries
and to driving the vessels of the aggressors from
qur territorial waters. The Guinean Government is
certain that the United Nations will respond to its
appeal without delay in order to put an end to this
Unjustifiable
armed aggression carried out in disregard of our sovereignty and territorial integrity and
the basic principles of the Charter. The United
Nations obviously cannot remain indifferent before
this clear-cut violation of international peace and
security.”

26. The PRESIDENT
(intcrpretn&‘orz fic)rn French):
The next speaker is the representative of Senegal, and
I now invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
27. Mr. BOYE
(Senegal) (irzterprcration
from
French): Mr. President, first I should like to thank
you and your colleagues in the Security Council for
having been good enough to grant me permission to
speak in this debate without the right to vote. I do
so out of solidarity with the fraternal Republic of
Guinea, because everyone is well aware here of the
links between Senegal and Guinea. But if I have
decided to speak immediately, it is particularly because
of the content of the telegram which a high official
of the United Nations, the United Nations Resident
sent to his Director,
Mr. Paul
Representative,
Hoffman, to tell him of the gravity of the events and
particularly to tell him that it was physically impossible
for him to carry out his duties normally.

20. Press reports specify, furthermore, that these
mercenaries, who were tr,ying to overthrow the populal
Guinean Government by sowing death and destruction
everywhere, left Guinea (Bissau) on ten Portuguese
ships militarily equipped for this purpose.
21. There has been continued fighting since last night.
One Portuguese mercenary captured by the Guinean
army, whose name is Captain Ambroise Fernando,
admitted that each mercenary had received from the
Portuguese Government the sum of 1 million escudos.
.22. In view of this serious violation of peace and security , the Guinean Government requests that United
Nations
air-borne troops be sent immediately
to
strengthen the national army.

28. I think this was a sufficiently serious reason for
the Security Council immediately to take the necessary
measures, not only to protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of a sovereign government, but also
to permit United Nations officials freely to carry out
their duties.

23. The United Nations-and
all justice and peaceloving countries-cannot remain
indifferent to this seriOUS
situation which has such grave implications. We
are sure that the United Nations will without delay
heed the appeal of the Guinean Government and put
an end to this clear-cut act of aggression which tramples
underfoot
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of

‘29. We have heard and we have read in reports that
vessels have landed Portuguese troops and mercenaries. Some people have even wondered whether
it was the Portuguese or whether it was a kind of a
coup d’Ctat that was going on. But when I heard the
Secretary-General
tell us just now that the Resident
3

Representative
of the United Nations Development
Programme in Conakr-y was not able to leave his house
to go to his office because there was aerial bombing
going on, I must say that I realized that the situation
was very serious and that no one here should shirk
his responsibilities
not only to protect the peaceful
population but also to protect the officials of the United
Nations who are sent to carry out their duties away
from Headquarters.
The Secretary-General
and the
Member States have the right to protect them.

Guinea happens to be a Moslem State, I reject such
a suspicion. I have taken the ff oor because any aggression against any Member State, regardless of its political system, ideology, religion or colour should concern
not only the members of the Security Council but,
when needs be, every Member of the United Nations.
37. YOU, Mr. President and members of the Security
Council, have been constituted to be the guardians
of peace. You are responsible to the United Nations
as the guardians of peace. And if someone like myself
whose State has never sought membership in the Security Council asks to be allowed to speak, it is because
we ask YOU never to abdicate your responsibility
whether by way of consensus or by adopting resolulions that cannot be put into action. Inasmuch as the
Security Council is responsible to all Members of [he
United Nations, it is on that basis that I speak tonight.

30. When I came here I had prepared. a written
speech, but I shall not read it because I have heard
what has been said by the Secretary-General
and I
know many of those seated at this table. I have worked
with some of them in the Security Council itself. I
have learned to appreciate them and, if you will permit
me, I wish to say that I have learned to enjoy theil
affection, and that is why, for the time being, I will
content myself with stressing to the members of the
Security Council how serious a situation it is, when,
because of foreign air,craft bombing
a sovereign
country, an official of the United Nations could not
even carry out his duties.

38. Sovereignty resides in the people of every State;
and the symbol of a State-and
not infrequently its
chief executive-is
its monarch or President, depending upon the political system the State has adopted.
The President of the Republic of Guinea has sent an
urgent cable whose contents were read out by ou1
beloved Secretary-General.
Therefore, we cannot
question either the flagrant aggression perpetrated by
external forces against Guinea, a Member State of the
United Natioris; nor should the Council fail to adopt
drastic measures to assist Guinea not only to repel
the aggressors who have violated its territorial intcyrity. Moreover, the Council should, I submit, Jrind effsctive ways and means for punishing the aggressor and,
if need be, those who are behind the aggressor.

3 1. The Council must act immediately, without delay.
That is the message which Senegal wishes to communicate to the Security Council for the time being.
I reserve the right to speak again later if I consider
it necessary.
32. The PRESIDENT
(iuterprctatian
front Frcrzch):
The Council having heard statements by the SecretaryGeneral and by the representatives
of Guinea and
Senegal, I propose, if there is no objection, to suspend
the meeting for half an hour for consultations. If I
hear no objection I shall take it that it is so decided.

The meeting was suspelzded
resumed at II .25 pm.

39. From the cables read..to us by the SecretaryGeneral and the representative of Guinea we deduce
that European and other mercenaries have been
deployed, most probably to change the Government
of a Member State by creating chaos and turmoil in
the hope that they could install a Government that
would be a tool in their hands. There could be more
than one State which has perpetrated this aggression.

at 8.40 p.m. and was

33. The PRESIDENT:
I wish to extend my apologies
to the members of the Council for the delay that has
occurred. I am sure that every one appreciates that
in view of the gravity of the matter long and careful
consultations have taken place.

40. Mercenaries could not possibly have launched a
campaign of such magnitude as has been reported without being thoroughly trained and adequately financed
by a colonial Power. The ships that carried the mercenaries can by no stretch of the imagination be considered as having hailed frotn Asia, Africa or Latin
America, We are assured that these ships were European and indisputably Portuguese in origin. HctWever~
they could be registered under any spurious flag. This
is flagrant aggression. The military craft did not flaunt
any sign of identification, but all the same these military
operations subjected Guinean territories to bombing
from the air and invasion from the sea, as if the Classical
combination of subversion and clandestine provocation
was not enough for interfering in the domestic affairs
of a State. By whom? By Western colonialists who
are now resorting to overt acts that remind US not OnlS
ofgunboat diplomacy but also of the colonial intrusions
of the nineteenth and early twentieth century.

34. The next speaker is the representative of Saudi
Arabia and I now invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
35. Mr. BAROODY (Saudi Arabia): I thank you, Mr.
President, and the members of the Council for allowing
me to speak on the item under consideration.
36. Some may question the reason which impelled
me to address myself to the latest aggression against
our African brothers. Is it mere solidarity of an Asian
with his African brother from Guinea? No, Sir. Solidarity bCtween brothers when they are wrong should be
out of order in the United Nations. It is United Nations
solidarity that should prevail amongst us. Some have
asked me whether I was taking the floor because
4

41. If the attack on Guinea was launched from Portuguese Guinea or any other Portuguese colony in
Africa, Portugal should account for this dastardly act.
Portugal, and possibly some of its allies, ludicrously,
but also cynically, consider its African colonies as mere
provinces of the mother country. So whether the aggyession against Guinea originated in an African territory under the Portuguese yoke or in Portugal proper
is beside the point: the aggressor has not descended
from the moon!

45. I repeat, only disciplinary action by the Council
will yield effective results. What should the Council
do? What kind of effective action should it take? I
submit that if-and it is a very big “if’‘-Portugal
and
any of its supporters are found to be guilty of this
aggressive operation, the least the Security Council
should do is to call on all the members of NATO to
discipline one of its members, namely, Portugal, and
whoever is behind Portugal.
46. The United Nations has reached the crossroads.
Now I am going to tell you and your colleagues, Sir,
how the League of Nations foundered, drawing not
from books but from my personal experience when
I happened to be in western Europe, as a political
refugee from my region. You all know how Mussolini
invaded Ethiopia, and the British Government ofthose
days pretended that it was against Mussolini. What
did the United Kingdom do? It spoke against Mussolini.
I was in London in those days. The papers had articles
decrying the Fascists, calling them the arch aggressors.
None other than Dame Sylvia Pankhurst told me this
when I appeared with her on a platform for the Ethiopian Red Cross-I believe it was in 1937. Later what
she told me was reaffirmed by a member of the Conservative Government of those days who was at odds
with his own Government:
that whilst the British
Government spoke against Mussolini, Mr. Chamberlain had sent his brother, Austen Chamberlain,
to
Rome to tell Mussolini that he could have the green
light in Ethiopia provided he did not ally himself with
Hitler.

42, It looks as though the invasion was undertaken
to overthrow the Government because the ideology
of that Government-I
mean the Government of
Guinea-and
the system it has adopted is unpalatable
to the Powers which want to impose their own system
on that State and on other African States. We have
seen what happened in the Congo and how one of
the world’s leaders, none other than the late Hammarskjold, became a victim of the conspiracy in the
heart of Africa. Those Powers think that the only way
to achieve their end is by again establishing Governments that would be mere clients, or, to put it bluntly,
stooges and puppets to serve their own interests without regard to the welfare of the people at large..
43. If it is ultimately found by the Council that Portugal was responsible for this aggression, then it should
be taken to task, not by condemnatory resolutions that
are not worth the paper on which they are printed.
I maintain that only disciplinary action of the Council
could yield effective results,
44. What could the Security Council do? Pass another
resolution like the one we have before us? A mission
might be sent to ascertain what is going on and a report
made to our illustrious Secretary-General, and he in
turn would read it to you gentlemen here who would
take note of it. But if no drastic action is taken by
the Council so that such aggressions may not be
repeated again, what assurances do the small States
have that they wil1 not be subjected to the machinations
of those who find it in their interests to subvert and
to interfere by all the means available to them in the
internal affairs of small States? Gentlemen, you are
the guardians here of our security. What have YOU
done about the security of small nations since the
United Nations was established? Oncein a while, when
there was no consensus or coexistence, at least the
great Powers heeded one another and sometimes produced results, if not by intent, at least in order to show
that they were not acting in a lackadaisical manner.
Hut what do we find today? After our colleague from
Guinea took the floor, and my brother from Senegal
spoke for a few minutes, you gentlemen were called
for consultations. I realize that consultations are necessary, and at least you had decided that there was no
objection to some of us being heard. Once a question
like this is before the Council it is no longer the property
of Guinea or any African State, it is the property of
all of us and our duty to address ourselves to it in
the best way we see fit, not only for the protection
of the weak who are under attack, but for the protection
of the interests of all States Members of the United
Nations. That is why I took the floor.

47, What assurance do we have that a member of
NATO is not conspiring wjth other members to see
to it that the systems inside Africa are changed to the
liking of NATO members. 7 If I knew that members
of the Warsaw Pact were conspiring to do the same
thing, they too would be brought to task by the Council;
but it would indeed be far-fetched that members of
the Warsaw Pact should find it profitable to engage
in such dastardly acts as are happening in Africa. It
seems only yesterday that I appeared in this very seat,
on 22 December 1969, when Guinea was subjected to
another act of aggression.
48. What will the Council do? Send a mission? I do
not think it should send a very big mission. I remember
that on more than two occasions the Secretary-General
wisely sent his representative in Geneva to find out
what was going on in certain regions where trouble
was rife. Why should there be so many consultations?
We are insolvent as an Organization. There need be
no deliberations about missions; if you authorize the
Secretary-General
to send him, none other than Mr.
Winspeare Guicciardi, like Mr. Spinelli before him,
could be instructed within twenty-four hours to find
out what is going on. I do not know what you are
doing, gentlemen; it is your Council. We are outsiders,
those who were invited to speak, but you need not
take much time. Authorize the Secretary-General to
send Mr. Winspeare Guicciardi or someone he can
spare. It does not cost much for a couple of men;
they can go and then report, not only to the Council
but to us, Member States of the United Nations. YOU
5

are responsible for maintaining peace on our behalf,’
not only the permanent members of the Council who
sit here by the provisions of the Charter, but you,
the rotating members, you are responsible to us too.

West Africa”; but the total trade between the United
Kingdom and Rhodesia and South West Africa has
increased-in
constant currency, not in inflated
money.

49, 81 want to confess to you, Sir, that I was
approached before I took the floor and was told, “This
is an African affair”. But this is not an African
affair. I was told also, “An Asian member should defer
to certain African members who have asked that Asian
member not to speak, or to postpone what he has to
say on the matter”. I maintain that I have the right,
like anybody else, to address myself to this item-not
because, as I said, it is wrong to keep silent when
a small Member State is subjected to aggression, but
because if we only concerned ourselves with the affairs
of States in our regions then this would spell the end
of the United Nations. Everyone has the right to
examine and scrutinize a situation that may subject
small Powers to similar aggression in the future. On
principle I think all of us should consider that we are
coIlectively responsible and should not abdicate our
responsibilities-with
all due respect to the Council.

55. Are we the false witnesses here? I do not think
I am picking on the United Kingdom; there is guilt
by association. In Anglo-Saxon criminal law anyone
who abets any crime is considered responsible, So I
address myself to the Western European community.
How can they rationalize supporting Portugal by mnking it a member of NATO? How can they rationalize 1
their increasing trade with South Africa, when they
know that it practises apartheid? How can they
rationalize the subversion, with their allies, of weak
States so as to change their system of government,
when the Charter is clear on the question of noninterference in the domestic affairs of States? Is it ink
on paper? Are we false witnesses of this?
56. As I mentioned, this is the crossroads of the
United Nations. The test is here. There should be some
norms adopted for the future, norms for action, not
for talk, not for rationalization.
Otherwise, let us fold
up gracefully and quit considering ourselves, including
the Security Council, as being the guardians of international peace.

SO. In the General Assembly we send recommendations to the Council, but there is a saying in
Arabic-you,
Sir, are a literary man but this is no line
of poetry-which
means, paraphrasing it in translation:
“Our rights, oriented by conscience, are attached to
your necks”.

57. The PRESIDEN’T:
I now call on the next speaker
on my list, the representative of Mali, to take a place
at the Security Council table and make his statement.

51. Shall we consider that once the draft resolution
is adopted-and
1 know my African brothers would
like to see it adopted tonight-it
will be another document in the archives of the United Nations, or shall
we turn a new page in the behaviour of the Security
Council towards the aggressor?

58. Mr. SOW (Mali) (interpretation from Fredz): I
thank you, Mr. President, for giving the delegation
of Mali the opportunity to take part, without the right
to vote, in this extremely important debate in the Security Council.

52. I would not cite from the Charter on what should
be done because somebody else will counter with
another paragraph of the Charter, which says,that we
should always resolve our problems by peaceful means.
But I maintain that if Portugal is responsible it should
be expelled from membership of NATO. That is the
least that could be done. It would not be worthy to
be a member of any all alliance that, allegedly, is to
bring peace to a certain area in Europe or, for that
matter, to maintain peace. Will the members of NATO
take such a drastic step? That remains to be seen.

59. The Council having heard the Secretxy-General
of the United Nations, the representative of the fraternal Republic of Guinea and the speaker who preceded
me, I do not think that there is need for yet another
speech. However, members will recall that at the same
time last year we drew the Security Council’s attention
to the serious threat posed by Portugal to the
sovereignty of independent African States, particularly
the Republic of Guinea. At that time it was a question
of the violation of the territorial integrity of the Republic of Guinea and some of the other neighbours of
Guinea (Bissau).

53. Otherwise, I must again warn you, Mr. President,
and the other members of the Council that we should
be wasting our time if the Council does not resort to
drastic measures. Once and for all, let this be a test
case.

60. For several hours, reports have been coming in
of a new clear act of aggression constituting a dangerous historical precedent, because never before have
we setn an independent State Member of the United
Nations conceive, prepare and commit an act of aggression against the sovereignty of another State Member
of the Organization in defiance of the principles and
the provisions of the Charter.

54. Look at what is happening in Rhodesia. It is
neither fish nor fowl. We do not know whether it is
a possession of the United Kingdom or an independent
de facto State. The United Kingdom has seen fit not
to declare Rhodesia other than a colony. But what
is the United
Kingdom
doing about Southern
Rhodesia? Why did the United Kingdom abdicate its
responsibility
for the mandate of South West Africa?
They say: “We do not like what is being done in South

61. Portugal in fact today attacked the Republic of
Guinea, landing on its coast armed troops consisting
essentially of mercenaries who have engaged in a veritable war against thepeacefulpopulation
of the Republic
of Guinea.
6

62. The heroic resistance of the people of Guinea
might have made it unnecessary for us to describe such
an act of aggression and the motives behind it as perfidious. My Government, faithful to the solidarity binding all peace-loving people, particularly the people of
Guinea, has already declared its unconditional support
for the valiant people of Guinea and its Government.

70. President Sekou Tour6 goes on to say that this
attack was checked thanks to the action of the National
Army and the population. However, he adds, the Guinean Government, whose sacred rights as a sovereign
State Member of the United Nations have been violated, requests the immediate intervention of air-borne
troops of the United Nations to take the last positions
held by the Portuguese mercenaries with the cooperation of the National Army and to drive the vessels
of the aggressors from the territorial waters of Guinea.

63. That is why we consider that the Security
council, unanimously and rapidly, should unequivocally condemn the barbarous act of aggression on the
part of Portugal and urgently take all necessary
measures to repel the Portuguese aggressive forces and
put a final end to the threat to and violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Guinea.

71. President Sekou Tour6 goes on to say: “The Guinean Government is certain that the United Nations
will respond to its appeal without delay in order to
put an end to this unjustifiable armed aggression”
[S /9988].
72. This is the situation on Sunday, 22 November,
in the Republic of Guinea from the very lips of those
responsible for the Guinean revolution. This earnest
appea1 to our Organization shows the gravity of the
situation and that it is a matter of the greatest urgency
for the Council to take a rapid and effective decision
in order to safeguard the peace and security of the
area.

64. With the Council’s authorization, Mali reserves
its right to speak at a later stage if we deem fit.
65. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the next speaker
on my list, the representative of Mauritania, to take
a place at the Security Council table and make his
statement.
66. Mr. OTJLD TAYA (Mauritania) (interpretation
f~onr French): Mr. President, first of all may I be
allowed to convey to you my congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. I am very pleased to see the Council
presided over by the representative of a country with
which my country is bound by so many links. I am
yuite convinced that under your distinguished guidance
the Council will take effective action to maintain international peace and security throughout the world.

73. Ever since its independence the Republic of
Guinea has had to deal constantly with the subversive
actions of imperialists,
neo-colonialists
and their
treacherous agents. Plots to overthrow the courageous
patriots who are at present in charge of this fraternal
country have been carried out within and outside of
the country, but on every occasion thepeople of Guinea
have put down those plots with courage and determination and their leaders have unequivocally denounced
those plots. The present attempt to land imperialist
African and European forces is but one further manifestation of this. The Portuguese forces and their mercenaries, who have been thrown back and disorganized
by the blows which have been struck at them daily
by the heroic fighters of the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea (Bissau) and the Cape Verde
Islands, are no longer satisfied with reprisals on the
borders of Senegal and Guinea; they are striking with
impunity today at the very heart of the capital of the
sister Republic of Guinea, they are striking at the very
heart of the capital of a sovereign Member of our
Qrganization.

67. I should also like to thank the Council for giving
my delegation this opportunity, although belatedly, to
speak in this debate. We feel that this is a particularly
great honour because this is a chance given to us by
the Council to support the complaint of a fraternal
country whose forward-looking policies and positions
have always been to the credit of Africa and to the
entire world. Its conduct has always been a positive
contribution
to the maintenance of peace and security.
68. The Republic of Guinea has once again been the
object of a brazen act of aggression on the part of
imperialist
and colonialist forces which, no longer
satisfied with plotting darkly with certain traitors as
accomplices, invade the territory of a sovereign State,
a Member of the United Nations, in broad daylight
and with powerful weapons,

74. Our countries have always denounced actions of
this kind, but we have always been heard with a
bemused smile and ,with a more or less deaf ear, as
if to say that according to us there are plots everywhere I
and that our statements and our denunciations are
prompted by internal politics.

69. The appeal to our Organization made by President
Ahmed Sekou Tour& and to all Africdn States leaves
no room for doubt as to the seriousness of the situation.
This appeal mentions that the territory of Guinea has
been the object of an act of armed aggression by the
Portuguese forces launched at about 2 a.m. Sunday.
Landing craft, violating the territorial waters of Guinea,
landed at several points in the capital and mercenary
commando troops shelled several points in the city.

75. Just how far does the indifference of the countries
responsible for the maintenance of peace and security
go? Should we continue to be silent at the risk of being
the accomplices of those who continue to harbour the
hope‘that they can stop the course of history and the
irreversible movement of the emancipation
of the
peoples of the world? To those we say that Guinea
will be the victor. Their failures for more than ten
years should show them that their efforts will be of
7

no avail. The people of Guinea united behind its leaders
has shown once and for all the path to independence,
that it is to say, the path of honour and dignity. Our
Organization can and must help them to persevere in
this course of action that the people and the leaders
of Guinea have chosen once again. The appeal by President Sekou Tour6 to our Organization will give members of the Council an excellent opportunity to act.
76. Africans have once again asked the Council to
respond favourably to the appeal by the Guinean
leaders, That appeal is doubtless one of the last appeals
which our countries will be addressing to the
Organization,
but we continue to harbour the hope
that our Organization can help the smaller countries
of the world.
77, On behalf of my delegation I would once again
appeal to the Council to take the necessary action to
stop this invasion.
78. The PRESIDENT:
I thank the representative of
Mauritania for the kind words he addressed to my country and to me personally.
79. Now I wish to draw the attention of the members
of the Council to the original draft resolution cosponsored by Burundi, Nepal, Sierra Leone, Syria and
Zambia [s/9990). I understand that the sponsors have
a new, revised draft, and in this connexion I call on
the representative of Nepal.
80. Mr. KHATRI
(Nepal): The Security Council is
called upon to consider the serious complaint by
Guinea regarding an armed attack on its territory. In
this connexion, we have heard the statements by the
Secretary-General
and the representative of Guinea.
At this stage it is of the utmost importance for the
Security Council, first, to put an end to the armed
attack and to effect the withdrawal of the attacking
forces, and, second, to have an impartial report on
the situation now prevailing in Guinea.
81. To that end the delegations of Burundi, Sierra
Leone, Syria, Zambia and Nepal have joined together
in preparing a draft resolution which it is my honour
now to submit formally for the consideration of the
Security Council. The draft resolution reads:
“The Security Council,
“Having heard the statement made by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of Guinea,
“Having taken note of the request made by the
President of the Republic of Guinea,
“1. Demands the immediate cessation of the
armed attack against the Republic of Guinea;
“2. Demands the immediate withdrawal of all
external armed forces and mercenaries, together
with the military equipment used in the armed attack
against the territory of the Republic of Guinea;

“3. Decides to send a special mission to the
Republic of Guinea to report on the situation
immediately;
“4. Decides that this special mission be formed
after consultation between the President of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General;
“5. Decides
agenda.”

to maintain

the matter

on its

82. This draft resolution is interim in nature, No
doubt the Council will take appropriate decisions in
this regard upon receipt of all available evidence, In
the meantime I request, in the names of the five delega.
tions, that before we proceed further in the consideration of this matter this draft resolution should be put
immediately to the vote on an urgent basis.
83. The PRESIDENT:
Before calling on the next
speaker I wish to draw the attention of members to
the French text of the draft resolution just introduced
by the representative of Nepal, Its paragraph 2 should
read :
“Exige le retruit imme’diat de toutes les forces
arme’es exte’rieures et de tous les mercenaires, oittsi
que du mate’riel militaire utilise’dnns l’attaque ortGe
centre le territoire de la Rbpublique de Grtirrc’e”.
84. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I should
like to comment briefly on the text that has just been
circulated. It is, as the Council is aware, the result
of consultations among the members, and represents
a wide area of agreement. However, there is one pamgraph to which we attach very great importance which
was not agreed. It is paragraph 4 and has to do with
the method of selection of the special mission which
it is proposed to dispatch.
85. It has seemed to us that the Council has two
choices here. It could, on the one hand, ask the
Secretary-General to send a representative to the area
to report. This is a procedure which has very often
been used in the past, and one that would be entirely
acceptable to us. On the other hand, we understand
that the sponsors preferred to have a mission composed
not of Secretariat officials, but of representatives of
Governments. That would, of course, be a political
mission, with a political complexion, and in that case
we attach the utmost importance to having an OpPortunity to pass ourselves upon the composition Of the
mission, and we think that all members would have
an equal concern, as members of the Council, in having
an opportunity themselves to express their views.
86. Therefore I should like to ,appeal to the sponsors
of the draft resolution that this paragraph 4 should
be altered to stop with the word “consultation’“,
so
that it would simply read: “Decides that this special
mission be formed after consultation”.
Since the Sectirity Council is adopting a resolution, obviously it would
be the Security Council which would be consulting*
I think that in the circumstances, and having in mind
the type of mission which I understand the sponsors

P

prefer, this would be a far preferable procedure to the
one which is suggested under paragraph 4 as it is
draftFed. I would strongly urge them and appeal to them,
in the interest of obtaining unanimous support for this
draft resolution, to consent to some such modification
of that paragraph.

the Council and of the Charter and with the normal
means of procedure.
92. I had hoped, and I still do hope, as I say, that
the sponsors, who, I am sure, are desirous of having
a unanimous vote, might see their way clear to accepting the change which I have suggested, or something
which would be very similar to it; for example,
“&c/&s
that the special mission be formed after consultation by the members of the Security Council”.
Something along that line would remove our difficulties, would accord this draft resolution with the
normal procedure of the Council, would uphold the
authority of the Council under the Charter and, I think,
would satisfy everyone. But if there is any question
about their agreeing to do so, I would, of course, be
prepared to submit this as a formal’, amendment,

87. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (ilzterprctation .fionz
French): My delegation had hoped not to have to take
the floor because of the extreme urgency of the
situation. However, in view of the way the discussion
has developed, as a co-sponsor of the draft resolution
I should like to add something to what the representative of Nepal has said about its interpretation.
88. The consultations to take place between thePresident of the Council and the Secretary-General should,
in our view, suit the members of the Council. The
President of the Security Council and the SecretaryGeneral have certain responsibilities which, if confused
with the responsibilities of the members of the Council,
would create even further confusion. Their role, when
properly discharged, of course, requires consultations
with all members. We hope that some understanding
will be shown on the part of those members of the
Council who hesitate to give their support to paragraph
4 of the draft resolution.

93.

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
tiussia/z): I am rather surprised by
the argument advanced by the United.States representative. If I have correctly understood his train of
thought from the interpretation,
it would seem that
a mission formed without the participation of the President of the Security Council would enjoy the Council’s
confidence, while a mission formed by the President
of the Security Council in consultation with the
Secretary-General would not. Strange reasoning, to put
it mildly.
(tmrdnted

89. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)
(fmnsla~ed jbn Russinn): I intended to speak on the
substance of the item under discussion. Since, however, the representative of Nepal, who introduced the
draft resolution on behalf of five delegations-Burundi,
Nepal, Sierra Leone, Syria and Zambia-wished
or
requested the Council to proceed forthwith to a vote
on the draft, I reserve the right to speak after the vote
on the draft resolution.

Mr. MALIK
fronz

94. If the Security Cou&il entrusts the forming of
this mission to the President and the SecretaryGeneral, why can they not settle the matter by joint
consultation? In this case we have equal confidence
in the President and in the Secretary-General. I therefore doubt the validity of the argument put forward
by the United States representative. I have the cleal
impression that an attempt is being made to delay the
establishment of the mission and to shield the aggress01
from immediate investigation by the special mission
to be dispatched by .the Security Council, which can
be formed and arranged by the President in consultation
with the Secretary-General.

90. With reference to the statement made by the
United States representative, it is my understanding
that he did not make a formal proposal but merely
expressed a wish. It might *therefore be in order fol
the Council to proceed to a vote on the draft resolution,
in order to avoid delaying a decision on the matter.
Those who wish to explain their position on this question may do so after the vote. My delegation reserves
its right to speak after the vote.

95. I therefore submit that the proposal made by the
five Afro-Asian States is fully cotipatible with the
Charter and meets the needs of the existing criticaI
situation, in which the Security Council should dispatch its mission immediately.

91. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I had
hoped that the sponsors might have found it possible
to agree to amend their draft resolution in order to
obtain unanimity on this point. As I say, it is one to
which we attach the very greatest importance. It is,
I think, without precedent that it has been suggested
that a special mission should be set up by the Security
Council in this particular way without providing that
the members of the Council themselves should all have
an opportunity to pass on its composition. Bearing in
mind the extreme importance of seeing to it that the
special mission to be dispatched would be one that
had the full confidence of the Council so that its report
back to us would hence be received with full credit
by all members, I do feel that it is of the utmost importance that we should follow this procedure, which
indeed is in strict accordance with the authority of

96. This arrangement will enable the President of the
Council and the Secretary-General swiftly to settle the
question of the composition of the mission and dispatch
it to make an on the spot investigation of the situation.
Consequently, any objection to this arrangement would
only result in delay. If the arrangement proposed by
the United States representative is accepted, consultations will have to begin. They may drag on and the
fifteen members of the Security Council may find it
more difficult to agree on the composition of this mission than would the President and the SecretaryGeneral. The United States representative envisages
the “speciaI mission” as a governmental mission.
Perhaps the President of the Council and the SecretaryGeneral will see fit to send a mission or representatives
9

who are not Permanent Representatives-in
other
words, a non-governmental mission. Let us try to give
them the opportunity and the right to do so and let
us show confidence in both the President and the
Secretary-General. My delegation sees no particular
danger in this and does not share the fears which the
United States delegation is trying to instil into the
Security Council.

101. The PRESIDENT:
We shall now proceed to
vote on the draft resolution contained in document
S/9990/Rev. 1.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
The8draft resolution was adopted unanimously.2
102. Mr. YOST (United States of America): I very
much regret that our amendment was not adopted but,
nevertheless, in view of the importance of the resolution and particularly in view of the assurances of one
of the sponsors, the representative of Burundi, to the
effect that he ,assumed that the President would be
consulting members of the Council about the mission,
we voted for the resolution on that understanding.

97. Mr. YOST (Urlited States of America): I do not
wish to prolong the debate, but I do not think the
Soviet representative fully understood my proposal,
which was that all members of the Council would have
the opportunity to pass on the selection of the special
mission. I would have thought this was in strict accord
with the position which the Soviet delegation has
always taken in this Council about upholding the Council’s rights and those of all of its members.

103. Sir Colin CROWE
(United Kingdom):
My
delegation, I must confess, would have very much preferred to see the amendment proposed by the United
States delegation to paragraph 4 of this resolution. But
we are glad to be able to vote in favour of the whole
resolution since we do feel that it is important that
an urgent call should go out from this Council for the
withdrawal of all external armed forces from Guinea
immediately and that the Council should be seen to
be acting as quickly as possible.

98. I think that agreement could be reached very
rapidly among the members of the Council. Of course
if we are thinking only of speed, obviously the quickest
thing to do is to request the Secretary-General to designate a representative, whom he could no doubt select
from one of his staff in the area, and the man could
be there in a matter of hours. That would certainly
be the most rapid way to investigate the matter. But
if there is some hesitation about doing that and there
is apreferencefor a mission composed of governmental
representatives, then, as I have said, I would feel very
strongly that this is a matter of such importance that
it should be passed on by all members of the Council
and I would certainly be prepared to co-operate in
doing so with great rapidity.

104. In accepting paragraph 4 of this resolution we
have taken note otthe statement by one of the sponsors,
the representative of Burundi, that he understands this
will, of course, mean consultation by the President
of the Council with members of the Council and that
he will secure their assent to his choice.

99. I would formally put forward this amendment:
that paragraph 4 should be amended to read:

105. Mr. MWAANGA
(Zambia): I realize that the
hour is late, but as the representative of a country
which has had the displeasure of bringing complaints
to the Security Council against Portugal, I conside
it incumbent upon me to make a brief statement.

“13ecr’des that the special mission be formed after
consultation
among members
of the Security
Council.”

106. My delegation listened very carefully to the telegram which was read out by the Secretary-General
containing an important request from the President of
the Republic of Guinea, Ahmed Sekou Tour& The
statement which was made by my brother and colleague, Ambassador Tour&, the Permanent Representative of Guinea to the United Nations, is indicative
of the grave situation the Security Council has been
asked to deal with. Only last December the Security
Council met to discuss Portuguese military aggression
against the Republic of Guinea 11522nd to K@U~
meetings]. As far as my delegation is concerned, what
has just happened represents one of the worst crimes
ever committed against any independent African State.
‘Any act of invasion of one State by another is serious
enough. It is even more serious when this is done by
Portugal in extension of its criminal colonial wars into
the sovereign territory of an independent African State.

100. The PRESIDENT:
As members of the Council
have heard, the representative of the United States
of America has formally submitted his amendment.
If no other member wishes to take the floor, therefore,
we shall proceed to a vote on the United States amendment.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
Znfcrvour: China, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Against:

None.

Abstaining:
Burundi, Colombia,
Finland, France,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Spain, Syria,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Zambia.
The result of the vote was 3 in favour,
with 12 abstentions.

none against,

107. Although we do not have any complete information, I can assure our Guinean brothers that our
delegation will demand that the most severe measures

The amendment was not adopted, having failed to
obtain the affirmative votes of nine members.

E See resolution

10

289 (1970).

sion against Guinea is also directed against the continental organization.

provided for by the United Nations Charter should
be applied against Portugal. The Security Council cannot remain indifferent to these premeditated acts of
violence. I know that people who have not been subjected to these barbaric Portuguese attacks just have
no idea about the war situation which exists on the
border between independent African States and the
Portuguese territories of Guinea (Bissau), Angola and
Mozambique.
We view this situation with grave concern because, together with the sister States of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Senegal and Tanzania, Zambia has been a victim of continuous Portuguese military aggression. This latest act of Portuguese aggression against Guinea is only an
indication of what is likely to happen tomorrow to other
independent African States bordering the territories
under Portuguese dominaiion.

113. Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (tr’anslnted frrlm R44ssim):
For the third time in
eleven months the Security Council is considering the
question of Portuguese aggression against African
countries. I am referring to the discussion in December
1969 of Portuguese aggression against Guinea [1522nd
to 1526th rneetirtgs] and Senegal 11516th to 1520th
nzeetings). At that time, the Security Council expressed
serious concern in its decisions about Portugal’s attack
on an independent African State-Guinea
lresolution
275 (1969)], In considering the question of Portuguese
aggression against Senegal, the Security Council
categorically condemned the Portuguese authorities for
their armed attack on that country [reuolutiorz 273
(1969)J

108. My delegation reserves the right to make a more
detailed intervention at a later stage.

114. The Security Council has now been examining
the third case of an armed attack and aggression by
Portugal against an African State. The Council has
thus established that Portugalis an active, armed vector
of colonial imperialism in our time and is disregarding
United Nations decisions and continuing its aggressive
policy against the African countries.

109. Mr. PASTINEN
(Finland): In the view of my
delegation, it is right that the Council has acted with
the urgency that the situation demands. As emphasized
by the representative of Nepal, in introducing the draft,
it is an interim measure, a preliminary step designed
to meet the immediate needs of the situation and to
give expression to the will of the Council to act in
accordance with its responsibilities. To take more substantive action the Council will obviously need to have
the full facts of the situation established. These can
only be established by an objective and impartial study
which should now be undertaken with all the necessary
speed and efficiency which the situation warrants.

115. The documents received from the President of
the Republic of Guinea and read out here by the
Secretary-General, as well as the statement by the representative of Guinea have established beyond doubt
that an act of armed aggression has been committed
against Guinea. The representatives of African and
Asian countries who have spoken here have given us
additional views, facts and information about the policy
and actions of the Portuguese colonialists in African
territory.

110. My delegation has voted for the resolution on
the understanding that paragraphs 3 and 4 of the resolution we have just adopted will be implemented in such
a way that those demands are met.

1 16. The Security Council therefore has before it official documents confirming a new act of aggression.
These acts by Portugal and its armed forces should
be viewed in the context ofPortugal’s colonialist policy
in Africa as a whole. Portugal is waging a bloody war
against the peoples of Mozambique, Angolaand Guinea
(Bissau). At the same time, it is committing acts of
military
provocation
and armed attacks against
sovereign African States which are actively fighting
to free Africa from the final grip of colonialism.

I 1 I. Mr. TERENCE
(Burundi) (zhuprctatiorz fi’0!?2
French): In line with the principle which I mentioned
earlier, I shall be very brief. I feel that I have some
responsibility,
some gratitude towards all the members
of the Council which, by a unanimous decision, have
just adopted this resolution. On the other hand, we
likewise thank some members which, while experiencing some hesitation, have joined in this action just taken
by the Security Council.

117. Portugal’s armed attack against Guinea illustrates yet again the threat which the continued existence of Portuguese colonialism poses to peace in
Africa.

112. Finally, my delegation would state that the
action just taken is dictated by a clear-cut incident,,
namely, aggression from abroad against a sovereign
State Member of the United Nations. Without even
identifying the nature of the act or establishing who
is responsible for the aggression, it is clear that peace
and security have been violated and therefore the Charter authorizes the Security Council to take action. For
these reasons the Republic of Burundi is pleased with
the decision just adopted by the Council and we would
reiterate our gratitude to the members who have cosponsored the draft resolution, and not only our
gratitude but that of Africa. Guinea being a member
of the Organization of African Unity, any act of aggres-

118. The acting Charg6 d’affaires of Portugal denies
in his letter [Z/9989] that this aggression took place,
But did his predecessor not deny acts of aggression
when the question of Portuguese aggression against
Guinea was under discussion? Did he not deny that
aggression had been committed when Portugal attacked
Senegal? Such denials were made on those occasions,
but the Security Council acted quite rightly in categorically condemning the Portuguese authorities and, consequently, the Portuguese Government and its armed
forces for these acts of aggression.
11

119. The Security Council resolution demands the
immediate cessation of aggression against the Republic
of Guinea, a sovereign African State, and the
immediate withdrawal of all Portuguese armed forces
from Guinean territory.

action against Portugal for this act of aggression, Fhe
stronger will be the peace and security of the African
peoples on the African continent.
125. The PRESIDENT:
of Guinea.

120. Admittedly some members of the Security Council have expressed doubts about whether these are Portuguese forces. Evidently they do not wish to believe
the official statements made here or the official documents submitted to the Security Council.

I call on the representative

126. Mr. TOURE
(Guinea) (interpwtrrtion jkm
Fre&z): My statement now will be merely to thank
all those here who have expressed their active solidarity with my country, which is at present going through
a very grave period.

121. The Security Council’s decision should be
implemented forthwith and brought to the notice of
the aggressor. The mission on which a decision has
been taken should be formed at once, with the participation of the President of the Security Council and
the Secretary-General and after consultation between
them. The sooner this is done, the better il: will be
for the cause of peace in Africa and for the protection
of the victims of aggression.

127. The operative part of the draft resolution the
Council has just adopted unanimously asks you, Mr.
President, in close co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral, to send a mission promptly-not
to establish
the facts, which we have done, but to make it perfectly
clear that the act of aggression against the.Repubiic
of Guinea and its peaceful people is in pursuance of
one single objective, namely, to overthrow all progressive regimes-in Africa and to subordinate the African
continent to the will of imperialism.

122. The objections raised here against the resolution
and the proposals that it should be modified put us
on our guard, and give rise to doUbts. It is not impossible that an attempt will now be made to delay the
formation of the mission. If so, this will be a clear
case of a policy of support and sympathy for the
aggressor. The Security Council must therefore urge
the President of the Council and the Secretary-General
to form the mission immediately, so that it can be dispatched to the scene tomorrow at the latest and report
to the S,ecurity Council as soon as possible on the
true state of affairs, in order to enable the Council
to re-examine the matter and take decisive action
against the aggressor. This is the only way in which
the Council can curb the aggressor and discourage him
from continuing his policy of aggression in African territory, which is undermining peace and security and
threatening the safety of African States and peoples.

128. This period is not difficult for the Republic of
Guinea alone. It is of concern to all peace-loving,
justice-loving
and freedom-loving
peoples and
countries throughout the world.
129. I hope your mission, Mr. President, wiIigo down
in history as a positive act and that it will show the
world that the Portuguese Government
is still
unpunished for its acts of aggression against other African countries and continues to feel secure because it
enjoys the support of certain Powers.
130. ‘The PRESIDENT:
I wish to assure the members
of the Council that I will do my utmost, with the help
of the Secretary-General, for the dispatch of the nnission as urgently as possible. The matter is grave and
His Excellency the President of the Republic of Guinea
is requesting urgent redress. The resolution just
adopred unanimously underlines strongly this sense of
immediacy and urgency. It is my earnest hope that
the resolution will be effective in putting an end to
the armed attack on the sister Republic of Guinea,
that international peace and security will be saved from
this grave threat and that the mission will be able to
establish the facts.

123. It has rightly been stated here that Portugal
would not have taken the risk of acting in such a way
in Africa without the assistance of other NATO
members.
124. We should therefore carefully heed the views
expressed here by Mr. Baroody, the representative
of Saudi Arabia, who linked Portugal’s actions with
general NATO policy. The sooner the Security Council
studies this new act of aggression and takes decisive

The meeting rose on Monday, 23 November,

12

rrt 1~1.~1~

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATtONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
the world.
Consult
Your
or Geneva.

may be obtained
bookstore
or write

from bookstores
and distributors
la: United
Notions,
Sales Section,

COMMENT

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

SE PROCURER

throughout
New York

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dana’ les librairies
et les agencer
dCpositoires
du monde entier.
Informewous
aup&
de votre .librairie
ou odrcssez.vous
b:
Nations
Unies, Section
des ventes,
New York ou Gen&ve.
KAK

I’lOIlYqMTb

M3AAHMfl

OPrAHM3A~MM

06bEAMHEHHblX

HAUktti

Ihnamx
O~EIIIIIXI~IISI
O~WJ~IIIICIIIILIS IIa@i
MCIKIIO Ii~IlIITL n I(IIIN;IILIIS
BIIWMIIII:~S
II
MCIITCTINX
II0 IICCX pahllnx
>lIlp.
bW&lITC
CIIpIWIilI
Ifi KI~~IIIIIIX
n Il:IIIIC~1 Ii1111iliIION
>litIWlIllO
ll!llI
IllIllIlITC
II0 n)l,pCCg:
O~~~IIII~~I\IIII
OB'LO~IWCIIIILIX
&lI(IIi!,
CCliI~IIJ~ 110
lI~Ol(ZlilfO
IKI@lIItir,
kO-1'lOpIt
IIJIII >Ik?IIOIIlt.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

Las pubticaciones
de Ias Nacioncs
Unidas est6n
en fodar
porter
del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
Ventos,
Nueva York o Gincbra.

: I.ilho

in Unilctl

N;llions.

New

York

Price:

$lJ.S.

UNIDAS

en vento en librerios
y cases distribuidoror
o dirijose
a: Nociones
,Unidas,
Secciirn

1.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

de

82lS54eptember

I973-2,050
