S/PV.9372

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9372nd meeting

Tuesday, 11 July 2023, 11.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Dame Barbara Woodward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. Wazima Szatmari
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mr. Olmedo
Ms. Betoe Ndojombouet
Mr. Anyanah
Mr. Hamamoto
Mr. Ciscaldi
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Chanda
Mr. Bastaki
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 June 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/484)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-20199 (E)
*2320199*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9372

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 27 June 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2023/484)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Adedeji Ebo,
Deputy to the High Representative of the United Nations
Office of Disarmament Affairs, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/484, which contains the text of a
letter dated 27 June 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Ebo.
Mr. Ebo: I thank Council members for the
opportunity to brief them on the implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013) on the elimination of the chemical
weapons programme of the Syrian Arab Republic.
I am providing this briefing on behalf of the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Ms. Izumi
Nakamitsu, who is currently away from Headquarters.
Since the last consideration of this matter by the
Council (see S/PV.9317), and consistent with established
practice, the Office for Disarmament Affairs has been
in regular contact with its counterparts in the Technical
Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on activities related to
resolution 2118 (2013). Since the Council last met on
this matter, the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT) has continued its efforts to clarify all outstanding
issues regarding the initial declaration and subsequent
declarations of the Syrian Arab Republic. Unfortunately,
efforts by the OPCW Technical Secretariat to organize
2/14

11/07/2023

the twenty-fifth round of consultations between the
DAT and the Syrian National Authority continue to be
unsuccessful.
As Council members were previously informed, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat has provided the Syrian
Arab Republic with the list of pending declarations
and other documents requested by the DAT since 2019
that could assist in resolving the current 20 outstanding
issues. The OPCW Technical Secretariat proposed, in
May 2022, to address the declaration-related issues
through exchange of correspondence. I have been
advised that, although the Syrian Arab Republic agreed
to that proposal, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has yet to receive from the Syrian Arab Republic
any declarations or other documents requested. That
includes the complete declaration of activities at the
Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) and
the declaration of quantities of nerve agents produced
at one chemical weapons production facility that was
declared by the Syrian Arab Republic as never having
been used to produce chemical weapons.
Owing to this situation, and in a further attempt to
implement its mandate, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
proposed to deploy a reduced team comprised of several
members of the DAT to the Syrian Arab Republic to
conduct limited in-country activities. The first such
deployment took place from 17 to 22 January, and the
second took place from 12 to 19 April. The outcome of
the first deployment was reported to the States parties
to the Chemical Weapons Convention in March, and the
outcomes of the second deployment will be reported to
the OPCW Executive Council in due course.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat remains fully
committed to implementing its mandate aimed at
verifying the fulfilment of the Syrian Arab Republic’s
declaration obligations under the Convention, decisions
by OPCW policymaking organs and resolution 2118
(2013). However, as has been previously emphasized,
full cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to closing
all outstanding issues. Considering the identified
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that remain
unresolved, at this time the OPCW Technical Secretariat
assesses that the declaration submitted by the Syrian
Arab Republic still cannot be considered accurate and
complete in accordance with the Chemical Weapons
Convention.
23-20199

11/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

With regard to the inspections of the Barzah and
Jamrayah facilities of the SSRC, I have been advised
that the OPCW Technical Secretariat continues to plan
the next round of inspections, to be held in 2023. I regret
to inform the Council that the Syrian Arab Republic
has yet to provide sufficient technical information or
explanations that would enable the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to close the issue related to the detection
of a Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah facilities of the
SSRC in November 2018.
Regarding the unauthorized movement of the two
cylinders related to the chemical weapon incident that
took place in Douma on 7 April 2018, which were
allegedly destroyed in an attack on a chemical weapons
production facility, the OPCW Technical Secretariat is
still awaiting information related to the unauthorized
movement of those cylinders. I again call upon the
Syrian Arab Republic to respond with urgency to all of
the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s requests.
With regard to the invitation extended by the
OPCW Director-General to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic to
an in-person meeting, I note that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat stands ready to engage further on an agreed
agenda for the meeting through the agreed channel.
It is my understanding that the United Nations
Office for Project Services (UNOPS) continues to
provide support to the OPCW fact-finding mission
in Syria in accordance with the tripartite agreement
concluded among OPCW, UNOPS and the Syrian
Arab Republic. The current extension of the agreement
remained in force up to and including 30 June. As of the
date of the most recent OPCW report (see S/2023/484),
the finalization of the new extension of that agreement
was in progress.
I have been advised that the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM) continues to study all available
information related to allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. In that context, on
28 June 2023, the OPCW Technical Secretariat issued
a report of the FFM regarding incidents of alleged use
of toxic chemicals as a weapon in Kharbit Masasnah
on 7 July and 4 August 2017. The report concluded that
the information obtained and analysed in line with the
FFM’s mandate did not provide reasonable grounds for
the FFM to determine that toxic chemicals were used
as a weapon in the reported incidents. I understand that

S/PV.9372

the FFM is currently preparing upcoming deployments
and will report to the OPCW Executive Council on the
results of its work in due course.
The Investigation and Identification Team also
continues its investigations into incidents in which the
FFM determined that chemical weapons were used or
likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic and will issue
further reports in due course.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate a call made
on numerous occasions by the High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs — the use of chemical weapons
anywhere, by anyone, under any circumstances, is a
grave violation of international law. There can be no
justification for their use. We must make every effort
to ensure the continued resilience of the taboo against
these horrific weapons. Those responsible for such
attacks must be identified and held accountable, for the
sake of the victims and as a deterrent to future chemical
warfare. The United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs stands ready to provide whatever support and
assistance it can.
The President: I thank Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Mr. Ebo for his briefing this morning and for
the continuing efforts of the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on this
important issue.
As we meet again to discuss serious, numerous
brazen violations of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and Security Council resolutions, we are reminded
of the many lives the Al-Assad regime has taken
through its chemical-weapons attacks, which have been
well documented in the OPCW’s reports, and we are
reminded of the sheer length of time we have worked to
address this issue and seek accountability.
We are approaching the 10-year mark since Syria
acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention, yet
Syria continues to hide details of its chemical-weapons
programme. It blatantly disregards its obligations
under resolution 2118 (2013) and remains in violation
of the Convention. The United States condemns in the
strongest terms the Syrian regime’s repeated use of
these horrific weapons, as documented, most recently,

23-201993/14

S/PV.9372

The situation in the Middle East

in the OPCW’s 27 January 2023 report, which attributed
the use of chemical weapons to the Al-Assad regime
during the 7 April 2018 attack on Douma.
Syria may wish to delay and obstruct efforts to
address its non-compliance and avoid accountability in
hopes that it can do so long enough that the international
community will lose interest. But we are committed
to working with our partners to make sure this does
not happen. We were successful in this effort at the
recently concluded fifth Review Conference of the
States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention, in
The Hague. While the Al-Assad regime and its enablers
sought to ignore or undermine the legitimacy of the
OPCW’s efforts on Syria, including the work of its
Declaration Assessment Team, Fact-Finding Mission
and Investigation and Identification Team, we worked
with a broad coalition of partners during the Review
Conference to stand firm in refusing to accept anything
that would undermine those efforts. And indeed, the
critical work of the OPCW on this file will continue.
It remains quite clear, including through the
proceedings of the Review Conference, that the
Al-Assad regime and its enablers are on the wrong side
of history and will be judged accordingly. This issue
will continue to demand our attention at the OPCW
and in the Security Council until Syria fully declares
its chemical-weapons programme and completely
and verifiably destroys its stockpiles and production
facilities and until there is accountability for the
use of chemical weapons in Syria and justice for the
victims of those attacks. Anything less than serious
full compliance is a threat to the global norm against
chemical-weapons use and against the very purpose of
the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We support the work of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, and other
entities collecting information and evidence that may
assist investigations and prosecutions of members of
the Al-Assad regime and of the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham who were responsible for chemical-weapons
attacks in Syria. We also support the efforts of third
countries exercising jurisdiction over international
crimes committed by former Al-Assad regime officials
and Da’esh members. The United States will continue
4/14

11/07/2023

to demand accountability for chemical-weapons
attacks and are even now pursuing investigations and
prosecutions of crimes involving chemical weapons.
We ask the Members of the Council to join us in such
efforts. The stakes are far too dire for us to do less.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We regret that today the members of the
Security Council must once again waste their time
discussing the Syrian chemical dossier, although there
have been no new developments over the past two
months requiring the attention of the Security Council.
Damascus, despite all the difficulties, continues
to cooperate with the Technical Secretariat of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). Recent reports by the Director-General
confirm that fact, but otherwise they are no different
from the formulaic and biased documents signed by
Mr. Arias.
We have stated many times that it would suffice to
discuss this topic in the Council once per quarter. That
would allow us to assess the situation on the ground and
progress in the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013).
However, as we can see from the repeated statements
made at every meeting by Western States, they have
long forgotten about the purpose of this resolution and
ignore all the actions taken by Damascus. After all,
their only goal is to use every opportunity to try to
discredit the Syrian authorities in the Security Council.
We have consistently rejected such an approach, which
does palpable damage to the authority of the Security
Council.
It is obvious that the reputation of the international
Organization is of little concern to the United States
and its allies. A clear example of that is the current
worrisome situation with the OPCW, whose Technical
Secretariat, under the influence of Western countries,
more or less openly states that it is promoting Western
interests. That is reflected in the recent report of the
Fact-Finding Mission, on incidents in Kharbit Masasnah
on 4 July and 7 August 2017, which was prepared upon
Syria’s request.
I would note that the related documentation was
circulated in the Security Council only yesterday, in
flagrant violation of the timelines for Council members
to study such voluminous documents, consult with
their capitals and establish their position. According
to the report, the experts were allegedly unable to reach
a conclusion on the use of toxic chemicals against the
23-20199

11/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian armed forces, citing a lack of evidence. Of
course, if the Technical Secretariat’s activities had
adhered strictly to the provisions of the Convention
and the fundamental principles of the conduct of an
investigation, particularly the collection and chain of
custody of evidence, no questions would have been
raised. However, the Technical Secretariat’s reputation
had already been disastrously undermined by its
unscrupulous violations of those principles during the
analysis of other incidents, when experts did not hesitate
to use open-source data or information obtained after
the fact from third parties, including some known to
be biased.
That did not prevent the OPCW experts from
drawing conclusions about Damascus’s culpability.
And when the available information ran counter to the
goal of vilifying the Syrian authorities, they would
go as far as to literally edit the prepared documents,
as in the case of the infamous report of the FactFinding Mission on the staged incident in Douma in
2018. Even the OPCW’s own experts talked about such
an egregious violation of its principles. But instead
of putting things right in its subsidiary body and
restoring the reputation of the Technical Secretariat,
the leadership, shielded by Western countries, has gone
even further. It is now openly defending the method of
substantiating various conclusions not with facts but
based on so-called “reasons to believe”. In practice,
the technical experts have already admitted that their
basis is an established political position into which
they fit whatever information they get, independently
of its plausibility. The inevitable inconsistencies that
arise are simply ignored. When the Western countries
need to blame the Syrian armed forces, the Technical
Secretariat boldly draws the appropriate conclusions. In
the remaining cases, the experts “throw up their hands”
and refuse to acknowledge the facts about terrorists
and militants’ use of chemical weapons, claiming a socalled lack of evidence.
Today the Western delegations in the Security
Council will say whatever it takes, true or not, to
“defend the honour” of the OPCW leadership, while
portraying our entirely justified concerns about its
activities as mere “Russian propaganda”. At the same
time, they will deliberately overlook the fact that
OPCW Director-General Arias himself spoke about the
above-mentioned method of analysis — if it can even
be considered a method — in this Chamber in February
(see S/PV.9255). We recall that, at the time, Mr. Arias

S/PV.9372

was trying to somehow justify the conclusions that the
illegitimate Investigation and Identification Team had
come to about the incident in Douma. It is a pity that
today the Council members will once again be unable
to ask him questions, of which we have many, about
the work of the entity he heads, which makes this
discussion all the more meaningless.
It is also futile to expect Western delegations to
acknowledge the consequences of their short-sighted
policies on the OPCW. The desire to transform the
Technical Secretariat from an impartial and authoritative
body into a mere convenient tool for putting pressure on
States that Washington finds undesirable has already led
to its decline. The same Investigation and Identification
Team was established in flagrant disregard for the
practice of decision-making by consensus and was
endowed with certain attributive functions in violation
of the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) itself, and we emphasize once again that no
product of the Team can be considered legitimate. That
tame entity’s conclusions have already been used to
justify the punitive decision by the OPCW Conference
of States Parties to suspend the rights of Syria, a
sovereign State that has conscientiously complied with
the Convention. In other words, if Washington and the
other Western capitals so decide, any party to the CWC
can be punished.
Moreover, in the current anti-Syrian frenzy,
genuinely important and burning issues, such as
the possibility of chemical weapons falling into the
hands of terrorists, are deliberately ignored because
they undermine the presumption of Damascus’s
guilt. As a result, instead of issues concerning the
cooperation between the United Nations and the
OPCW being discussed in the General Assembly or
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) being
discussed in the Security Council, all we hear are the
same old unsubstantiated accusations of Damascus.
Moreover, the Western countries have not limited
themselves to Syria. We would not be surprised if
today, for example, the United Kingdom presidency, as
it has done at previous meetings on the Syrian chemical
dossier, continued its disinformation campaign and
once again for no good reason brought up its claims
about Russia’s alleged use of chemical weapons. As
always, we will not respond to such fabrications.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize once again
that the reckless policies of the countries of the
collective West, based on their hatred for the legitimate

23-201995/14

S/PV.9372

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian Government, will have extremely negative
consequences for international security by undermining
the efforts of Member States in the work of ensuring the
non-proliferation and destruction of chemical weapons.
Our Western colleagues bear full responsibility for
that, regardless of their attempts to prove otherwise.
Mr. Afonso (Mozambique) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to make this statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council (A3), Gabon,
Ghana and my own country, Mozambique. We thank
Mr. Adedeji Ebo, Deputy to the High Representative of
the United Nations Office of Disarmament Affairs, for
the information he provided us with. We also welcome
the representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the
Islamic Republic of Iran and the Republic of Türkiye
to this meeting.
(spoke in English)
The A3 thanks the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for its 117th monthly
report (see S/2023/484), covering the period from
24 May to 23 June. We would like to express our
support for its work. In that regard, we welcome the
conduct of limited in-country activities by a small
group of members of the Declaration Assessment
Team, as part of the continued efforts of the OPCW
Technical Secretariat to carry out its mandate in line
with resolution 2118 (2013), and we look forward to the
outcome of that mission. We take note of the Syrian
National Authority’s submission of its 115th monthly
report concerning activities on its territory related to
the destruction of its chemical weapons, as well as its
chemical-weapon production facilities, as required by
the OPCW Executive Council.
We welcome the recent steps taken by the Syrian
Government in line with its obligations under resolution
2118 (2013). The Government’s response in April to
the results of the analysis of samples collected by the
Declaration Assessment Team in April 2019 is a step
in the right direction. Furthermore, the agreement
between the Syrian Government and the Technical
Secretariat to hold a meeting in Beirut to discuss all
matters pertinent to the country’s chemical-weapons
programme is to be commended. The A3 is hopeful that
the meeting will serve as a prelude to a direct high-level
exchange between Syria’s Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Expatriates and the OPCW Director-General. It
is the belief of Gabon, Ghana and Mozambique that a
meeting between the two dignitaries would be helpful
6/14

11/07/2023

in building confidence and providing the impetus
needed to advance the programme’s various aspects
and encourage further cooperation.
The recent steps taken by the Syrian Government, if
continued and extended to cover other pending issues, will
bring us closer to a resolution of the matter. However, we
remain concerned about the lack of substantive progress.
Going forward, we hope to see productive cooperation
between the OPCW Technical Secretariat and the Syrian
National Authority in dealing satisfactorily with all
outstanding issues.
The international community at large and the
Security Council in particular must continue to be
concerned about the potential re-emergence and
increasing threats of chemical warfare and take urgent
steps to accelerate actions towards a world free of
chemical weapons. The A3 collectively stands against the
use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under
any circumstance. We remain strongly committed to the
established norms against the use of chemical weapons
and all efforts to save humankind from the scourge of
such weapons, including their production, storage or
use. In this regard, we reaffirm our strong support for
resolution 2118 (2013).
We urge the support of the Council in addressing more
constructively those issues that constrain meaningful
progress in the full implementation of resolution 2118
(2013). The early closure and elimination of Syria’s
chemical weapons programme forms an important part
of our common goal in search of international peace
and security.
Finally, the A3 encourages continuous, constructive
dialogue and cooperation between both parties on all
outstanding issues. We wish to emphasize that the
destruction of all categories of chemical weapons under
strict international verification remains one of the major
objectives of the Convention on the Prohibition of the
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction.
Mr. Hamamoto (Japan): First, I would like to thank
the Deputy to the High Representative, Mr. Ebo, for
his briefing.
In May, the fifth Review Conference of the
Chemical Weapons Convention provided an invaluable
opportunity to address a wide range of topics related
to chemical weapons. It is regrettable that despite the
23-20199

11/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

dedicated efforts and intensive negotiations among the
States parties, we were unable to reach a consensus on
an outcome document for the Conference.
Nevertheless, during the Review Conference, 57
States parties united in a joint statement to reaffirm
their strong condemnation against the use, and the threat
of use, of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, at
any time and under any circumstance, including by
the Syrian Arab Air Force, as the Investigation and
Identification Team concluded in its report.
The use of chemical weapons by Syria remains
a threat to international peace and security. We must
express deep concerns with regard to the continuing
discrepancies, gaps and inconsistencies in Syria’s initial
and subsequent declarations, as once again confirmed
by the latest monthly report from the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2023/484). Japan urges Syria
to engage in good faith with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and provide all requested documents to
solve the outstanding issues related to the initial and
subsequent declarations submitted by Syria.
We welcome the continued efforts undertaken by
the OPCW and its Technical Secretariat to address
all outstanding issues, including the second round
of limited in-country activities conducted by the
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT). However, a
reduced team without any technical consultations
with the Syrian National Authority can never be
considered sufficient. We urge the Syrian Government
to fully comply with its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013) by
granting full and unhindered access to DAT staff to
verify compliance.
We also deplore the lack of progress in organizing
a high-level meeting between the Director-General of
the OPCW and the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs,
as well as the next round of consultations between the
DAT and the Syrian National Authority.
The Security Council cannot remain silent and allow
impunity for those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons against their own people. Japan reiterates
its strong support for the OPCW and its Technical
Secretariat in their efforts to hold the perpetrators of
the use of chemical weapons accountable and to ensure
the complete elimination of chemical weapons in Syria.

S/PV.9372

Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Deputy to the High Representative of the
Office for Disarmament Affairs, Mr. Adedeji Ebo,
for his briefing. We also welcome the presence of
the representatives of Syria, Iran and Türkiye at
today’s meeting.
We appreciate the efforts of the High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, as well as those of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), aimed at providing detailed and independent
information on the status of the complete and verifiable
elimination of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab
Republic. The OPCW report submitted to the Security
Council in accordance with paragraph 12 of resolution
2118 of 2013 (see S/2023/484) outlines once again the
lack of significant progress in the matter due to the
limitations imposed despite the efforts made by the
technical teams. This is why we urge the Syrian Arab
Republic to comply with the OPCW’s requirements,
promptly submit the required information to clarify
all the gaps identified in its declarations and allow
unrestricted access to all sites and locations under
investigation to the staff of the OPCW technical teams.
My delegation wishes to take this opportunity to
reaffirm the content of the joint statement on the use
of chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic
delivered by the representative of Ecuador on behalf
of 57 countries in the framework of the fifth Review
Conference of the States Parties to Chemical Weapons
Convention, which took place from 15 to 19 May 2023,
in The Hague, Kingdom of the Netherlands. This
statement was joined by eight members of the Security
Council, namely, Albania, France, Japan, Malta,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United
States, as well as my country, Ecuador.
In closing, I affirm Ecuador’s support for the work
of the OPCW and reiterate, as several delegations have
done, that no use of chemical weapons by any actor,
anywhere, at any time and under any circumstances can
or should go unpunished.
Mr. Ciscaldi (Malta): I thank Mr. Ebo for
his briefing.
Independent investigations by the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) have demonstrated that Syria
has used weapons of mass destruction against its
population nine times. After the adoption of resolution
2118 (2013) 10 years ago, Syria has yet to disclose all

23-201997/14

S/PV.9372

The situation in the Middle East

the necessary information regarding its stockpiles,
which have not been completely eliminated. The lack
of progress on the matter is extremely concerning, and
Syria bears complete responsibility for that situation.
Syria must comply with its mandated responsibility by
granting access to OPCW personnel for deployment in
the country.
The recent limited deployment of OPCW teams
observed last month is not a satisfactory substitute.
Syria must cease obstructing the efforts of the Technical
Secretariat and adhere to its international obligations.
Malta expresses its support for the independent,
unbiased and expert work carried out by the OPCW
and its Technical Secretariat. The crucial role in the
worldwide eradication of chemical weapons and in
guaranteeing the complete elimination of such weapons
in Syria is highly valued. Any baseless assertions
intended to undermine the credibility of the OPCW
or cast doubts on its findings must be appropriately
addressed and rebutted by the members of the Council.
In 2013, the Council reach a unanimous decision
that those responsible for the use of chemical weapons
should be held accountable. The use of chemical
weapons cannot and must not go unpunished. The only
means to ensure global confidence in the complete and
verifiable elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons
programme is through Syria’s substantive cooperation
with the OPCW. It must provide the necessary
assurances regarding its chemical weapons programme,
in line with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
Malta believes that the Security Council should
focus its efforts and resources on achieving significant
advancements in the implementation of resolution 2118
(2013). As members of the Council, we have the duty
to send the message that the use of chemical weapons
is intolerable, and that those who fail to fulfil their
obligations will be held responsible for their actions.
To conclude, Malta reiterates its full support to
the OPCW Technical Secretariat and its technical
teams that carry out their mandate independently
and impartially and in accordance with the highest
international standards. Malta reaffirms its strong
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons by any
actor, under any circumstances.
Mr. Stastoli (Albania): Let me begin by thanking
Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
8/14

11/07/2023

We condemn in the strongest terms the repeated
use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime and
the refusal to cooperate with the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and
support all efforts to hold the perpetrators to account.
We deplore the Al-Assad regime’s persistent refusal to
comply with the Chemical Weapons Convention and
resolution 2118 (2013), as well as its lack of goodwill
and its bad faith, as the 116th and 117th periodic
reports of the OPCW reveal. We condemn the refusal
of the Al-Assad regime to respond to 20 outstanding
questions concerning its faulty declarations since 2019.
We reiterate our condemnation of the refusal to issue
a visa to the senior technical expert of the Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT) since April 2021.The Syrian
regime behaves in an aberrant manner that should be
met with the scorn of the world and, above all, firm
action from the Council.
Against the backdrop of persistent non-cooperation
from the Syrian regime, we take note of the deployment
of a reduced DAT team in January and the arrival of
samples at the OPCW laboratories in June 2023 for
analysis. We eagerly await the results. Likewise, we
await with equal interest the inspections of the Barzah
and Jamrayah facilities.
We commend the work of the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM), which determined the use of chemicals
as weapons in Syria. The objective, rigorous and
impartial establishment of the facts is indispensable
to all of us. We welcome the most recent report of the
FFM, which dismisses the baseless allegations made
by the Syrian regime about the alleged use of chemical
weapons against the Syrian Arab Army on 7 July and
4 August 2017.
We welcome the work of the Investigation and
Identification Team and its reports, which identify the
perpetrators of the use of chemicals as weapons in Syria.
We fully endorse the findings of its third report, stating
that the Al-Assad regime is responsible for the deadly
chemical weapons attack on Douma on 7 April 2018.
We reiterate our call for robust international action
to ensure the Syrian regime fully declares and destroys
its chemical weapons stockpiles and chemical weapons
programme in a transparent and verifiable manner. The
Security Council needs to impress upon the Al-Assad
regime that there is no alternative to full cooperation
and implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). We
23-20199

11/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

reiterate our full support for the objective, impartial
and professional work of the OPCW and condemn
actions that seek to damage its reputation.
We remain steadfast in our condemnation of the
use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, at any
time and under any circumstances and the imperative
of ending impunity for those who have used them.
Mr. Olmedo (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
thank Mr. Ebo for his briefing.
As we all know, we are here because the Syrian
regime has used weapons of mass destruction against
its own population. Independent investigations by the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) have demonstrated that
nine times.
In January, the OPCW published a damning report
showing how the Syrian air force deliberately dropped
two barrels of chlorine on residential buildings, killing
43 people. France condemns in the strongest terms the
repeated use of such horrific weapons. Nevertheless,
almost a decade after the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013), the regime has still not shed any light on its
stockpiles. We know, however, that not all of them have
been destroyed.
It is therefore imperative that the Syrian regime
allow OPCW personnel to deploy in Syria, as per its
mandate. Limited deployment of OPCW teams is not
a viable alternative. Syria must stop obstructing the
work of the Technical Secretariat and comply with its
international obligations if it wants to regain its rights
and privileges.
Despite the obstacles it faces, I would like to
commend the independent, impartial and professional
work of the OPCW. We laud the work of the FactFinding Mission and the recent publication of its most
recent report on the two incidents at Kharbit Masasnah
in July and August 2017, which confirmed that there
was no evidence that chemical weapons had been used,
contrary to Syria’s claims.
No disinformation campaign can hide the regime’s
guilt. Exposing the truth is essential in order to hold
the perpetrators of those attacks responsible. There
must be no impunity for war criminals. The fight
against impunity is the foundation of the effectiveness
and credibility of the prohibition regime. France will
continue to uphold those principles with its partners.

S/PV.9372

Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks the Deputy to the High Representative of
the United Nations Office of Disarmament Affairs for
his briefing.
With regard to the issue of chemical weapons,
China’s position has been consistent. China firmly
opposes the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere, under any circumstances and for any purpose,
and hopes that our world will be free of all chemical
weapons at an early date. Dialogue and consultation are
the only way to resolve the issue of chemical weapons
in Syria. We welcome the high-level meeting between
the Syrian Government and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in Beirut
and look forward to the holding of a high-level meeting
between the Syrian Foreign Minister, the head of the
Syrian National Authority and the OPCW DirectorGeneral as soon as possible.
Concerning the different interpretations of a number
of issues by the Government of Syria and the Technical
Secretariat, we are in favour of respecting the scientific
facts, adhering to objectivity and fairness and ensuring
that the two sides continue to discuss the matter fully
and improve their convergence with a view to jointly
resolving the outstanding issues as soon as possible.
At the same time, China calls on the international
community to view Syria’s efforts objectively. We
hope that the Secretariat will also respond to Syria’s
concerns and demands in a professional and transparent
manner. The Secretariat should pay full attention to the
information previously provided by the Government of
Syria on the possession and use of chemical weapons
by terrorist organizations.
Finally, China reiterates that the Council should
reduce the frequency of its deliberations on the Syrian
chemical-weapons issue, which would help it save
resources and improve its efficiency.
Mr. Wazima Szatmari (Brazil): I thank Mr. Adedeji
Ebo, the Deputy to the High Representative of the
United Nations Office of Disarmament Affairs, for
his briefing and welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the representatives of the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Türkiye.
We have carefully read the report dated 23 June
by the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (S/2023/484)
and have once again found little new information that
would merit the Security Council’s attention. We

23-201999/14

S/PV.9372

The situation in the Middle East

continue to follow the results of the limited in-country
activities by members of the Declaration Assessment
Team. We welcome the fact that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and the Syrian National Authority have
agreed on holding a meeting to discuss matters related
to the Syrian chemical file. We hope those renewed
contacts will lead to further cooperation between the
OPCW and Syria to address all the outstanding issues
related to its initial declaration and the violations of the
Chemical Weapons Convention in the conflict in Syria.
We reiterate that the work of the OPCW in
establishing the factual truth regarding those incidents
must be carried out with an unequivocal commitment
to transparency, impartiality and technical rigour.
Only that can provide a basis for the attribution of
responsibility by the Security Council as the competent
body to deliver on that task. With that in mind, we
understand that all instances of investigation and factfinding deployed by the OPCW should be impervious
to any suspicion of political interference.
Brazil received with deep concern the most recent
report circulated by the Berlin Group 21 in The Hague
on the process that led to the publication of the final
report of the mission deployed to investigate the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Douma in April 2018. The
document raises a host of extremely concerning issues
that the OPCW should not ignore if it is to preserve
the credibility of its conclusions, regarding not only
the Douma incident but all aspects of non-verification
missions. We expect the OPCW Director-General and
the Secretariat to address the issues raised in the Berlin
Group review in a transparent manner, preferably by
the next session of the OPCW Executive Council. At
the very least, the OPCW should strengthen its internal
practices to stave off any suspicion of a lack of technical
rigour and to ensure freedom from political interference
in its verification activities.
In conclusion, I reiterate that Brazil strongly
condemns the use of chemical weapons, anywhere,
by anyone, under any circumstances. Any use of such
weapons represents a serious threat to international
peace and security. Closer cooperation both between
Syria and the OPCW and between the OPCW and the
United Nations remains our best hope for closing the
so-called Syrian chemical file and for preventing and
deterring any future use of such weapons.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would first like to thank Mr. Ebo, the Deputy to the
10/14

11/07/2023

High Representative of the United Nations Office of
Disarmament Affairs, for his briefing.
Switzerland considers the Chemical Weapons
Convention to be an important pillar of our collective
security. Ratified by nearly every State, including Syria in
2013, the Convention offers protection against the threats
and devastating effects of chemical weapons. Switzerland
was very pleased to learn of the announcement by the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) that the last stockpiles of
officially declared chemical weapons had been completely
destroyed. That is a historic step for multilateralism and
disarmament efforts.
On the other hand, we regret that the OPCW Member
States were unable to reach a consensus on an outcome
document for the fifth Review Conference of the
Convention in The Hague from 15 to 19 May. However,
the Conference showed that there is consensus on many
issues and that the vast majority of delegations believe that
the issue of chemical weapons in Syria remains a central
challenge to the Convention’s full implementation. In that
connection, I want to once again reaffirm my country’s
full confidence in the OPCW as the principal custodian
of the Convention. There is no doubt about the integrity
and professionalism of the OPCW and all its missions,
including those of the Investigation and Identification
Team. We therefore look forward to receiving the report
following the visit to Syria from 12 to 19 April by a small
team from the Declaration Assessment Team, as well as
the results of the analysis of samples currently under way
in OPCW-designated laboratories.
We welcome the meeting that took place between
the OPCW and Syria on 22 and 23 June in Beirut. We
also note the ongoing exchanges between the OPCW
and Syria with a view to a possible resumption of
consultations between the Declaration Assessment
Team and the Syrian National Authority, and we hope
those efforts will be successful in the very near future.
The obstacles posed by Syria to the restoration of full
cooperation with the OPCW represent a serious breach
of the obligations contained in resolution 2118 (2013).
Syria should provide immediate and unimpeded access
to OPCW personnel and respond to the 20 outstanding
issues identified by the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
The reports of the OPCW Investigation and
Identification Team have concluded that there have been
repeated instances of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, causing numerous casualties, including among
children. The use of such weapons is prohibited in all
23-20199

11/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

circumstances, and in armed conflicts can constitute
a war crime. It is essential that those crimes do not
to go unpunished and that the people responsible are
identified, prosecuted and punished. In that regard, we
welcome the formal cooperation between the OPCW and
the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. It is an important step
towards implementing resolution 2118 (2013), as well as
ensuring compliance with relevant international law.
Mr. Bastaki (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mr. Adedeji Ebo for his briefing.
I would also like to reiterate the firm position
of the United Arab Emirates whereby we reject and
explicitly condemn the use of chemical weapons by
anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances. Their
use constitutes a flagrant violation of the provisions of
the Chemical Weapons Convention and international
law. In the context of today’s topic, I would like to note
two issues.
First, a meaningful dialogue between the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and Syria remains essential if we want to
achieve tangible progress on this file. We reiterate the
need to work in accordance with the principles that
the OPCW, with its technical nature, was founded on,
foremost of which are consensus and non-politicization.
In that regard, we note the Fact-Finding Mission’s
recently issued report on the Kharbit Masasnah incident.
Secondly, the threat of chemical terrorism remains
an important challenge that requires considerable
attention, especially as Da’esh continues to carry out
terrorist attacks without hesitating to use any available
means or weapons to restore its control in Syria. It is
a serious threat to the security and stability not just of
Syria but the entire region.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses
once again the importance of making progress on the
Syria chemical weapons file, as well as across all files
related to resolving the Syrian crisis.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
I start by joining others in thanking Mr. Ebo for
his briefing.

S/PV.9372

Ten years after Syria’s accession to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, resolution 2118 (2013) and
117 monthly reports by the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons,
it remains impossible to verify the complete destruction
of Syria’s chemical weapons programme. That is not due
to lack of effort on behalf of the Technical Secretariat,
whose efforts and perseverance we commend — it is
entirely the responsibility of the Syrian authorities.
Syria has consistently denied retaining any
chemical weapons stockpiles, despite clear evidence
to the contrary. The whereabouts of several hundred
tons of chemical warfare agent remain unclear, and
their destruction still cannot be verified. Until States
parties and the Technical Secretariat are satisfied that
Syria is making meaningful progress in addressing the
20 outstanding issues with its declaration, we all need
to continue to put pressure on Syria to abide by all its
obligations. That includes the requirement for Syria
to cooperate fully with the Technical Secretariat in
good faith.
We should hold Syria accountable for its actions.
All States should urge Syria to abide by its obligations
under the Convention. Until outstanding issues are
resolved, we cannot rule out Syria retaining some sort
of chemical weapons programme. Given its repeated
flagrant use of chemical weapons, we cannot exclude
the possibility that the Al-Assad regime will use
chemical weapons again.
We should not let this go. Syria’s chemical weapons
programme remains a threat to international peace and
security. It matters to all of us.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to reiterate the
Syrian Arab Republic’s condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons at anytime, anywhere, by whomever
and under any circumstances. I would also like to
reiterate our total rejection of the false accusations and
desperate lies launched by certain countries against
my own.
Despite my country’s many reservations
concerning the working methods of the Technical
Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), the Syrian Arab Republic

23-2019911/14

S/PV.9372

The situation in the Middle East

continues to cooperate with the organization, guided by
its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) and in line with its strategic decision taken in
2013 to join the CWC and destroy its entire stockpile
and production facilities. In that context, I would like
to highlight the most recent developments related to
cooperation between the Syrian National Authority and
the OPCW Technical Secretariat.
First, the Syrian National Authority submitted
its 114th and 115th monthly reports for May and June
respectively regarding the activities it conducted on
Syrian territory.
Second, the Syrian National Authority facilitated two
visits by a reduced Declaration Assessment Team (DAT)
to Damascus this year, during which the Syrian National
Authority demonstrated the highest level of cooperation
by providing access to certain sites, facilitating the
collection of samples and doing interviews with
witnesses. In that context, we stress the importance of
holding the twenty-fifth round of consultations with the
DAT and working to expedite the closure of outstanding
issues, rather than insisting on procedural matters for
which there are many alternatives.
Third, upon the suggestion of the Syrian National
Authority, a separate higher-level meeting was held with
the DAT in Beirut at the end of last month. During that
meeting, the Syrian National Authority stressed the need
to understand the specificities of the Syrian dossier, as
well as the difficult circumstances surrounding it and the
importance of working to resolve all outstanding issues,
rather than raising issues that compromise national
sovereignty. It was also stressed that meetings should
continue to be held between the two sides, as the exchange
of correspondence currently falls short of meeting
the required purpose. The Syrian National Authority
underscored the need for the two parties to find common
ground and reach an understanding to ensure progress
towards closing the file as soon as possible. The Syrian
National Authority has also taken note of the concerns
raised by the delegation of the Technical Secretariat and
is currently considering ways to address those concerns.
Fourth, the Syrian National Authority recently
provided explanations for the results of the analysis of
samples collected by the DAT in April 2019.
Fifth, the Syrian National Authority agreed to
extend the tripartite agreement among the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW and the
United Nations Office for Project Services for a period
12/14

11/07/2023

of six months, until 31 December this year, in order
to facilitate the tasks and activities carried out by the
OPCW in Syria.
Sixth, the Syrian Arab Republic reiterates the
importance of holding a high-level meeting between
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates, the
Chairman of the Syrian National Authority and the
Director-General of the OPCW as soon as possible.
We also call for the continuation of ongoing contacts
between the two focal points on the agenda of
that meeting.
Seventh, the Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) recently
issued its report on the two incidents that took place on
7 July and 4 August 2017, which were reported by my
country. Sites of the Syrian Arab Army were targeted
in the Kharbit Masasnah area in Hama governorate
with poison gas mortars. For the past five years, my
country has repeatedly requested that the FFM issue its
reports on those two incidents, along with a number of
other incidents, especially after my country provided
the FFM with all the necessary evidence and assistance
to obtain witness testimonies and access hospital
records. We also provided the FFM with the necessary
clarifications and information from their sources.
However, my delegation regrets that the erroneous
working methods and the serious defects in the work
of the FFM — including its violation of the terms
of reference for its work and its departure from the
substance and provisions of the CWC, especially its
verification annex — have once again led the Mission
to unprofessional conclusions that reflect further
evidence of the double standards that the FFM applies
in its work.
In its investigations of other incidents, the FFM has
always relied on different methods of work, whereby it
depends on open or anonymous sources and has used
evidence gathered by terrorist groups. Moreover, the
FFM always drafts its conclusions in an indecisive
manner, thereby deepening mistrust in the work of
that team and proves its low level of professionalism
and objectivity.
In conclusion, it is regrettable that the cooperation
of the Syrian National Authority with the Technical
Secretariat of the OPCW is met with ingratitude
and denial, whether by minimizing aspects of our
cooperation or exaggerating certain procedural
measures, not to mention by focusing on negative rather
than positive aspects in the monthly reports issued by
23-20199

11/07/2023

The situation in the Middle East

the Technical Secretariat. My delegation stresses the
need for a comprehensive review of the erroneous
working methods of the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and its teams, as well as the need to ensure that the
Technical Secretariat does not become a political
tool to serve the hostile agendas of certain countries
against others.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): We
welcome the presence of Mr. Ebo, Deputy to the
High Representative of the United Nations Office of
Disarmament Affairs, at today’s briefing.
Iran once again condemns the use of chemical
weapons by anyone, anywhere and under any
circumstances. The use of such lethal weapons is a
flagrant violation of international law, constitutes a
crime against humanity and poses a serious threat to
international peace and security.
Iran has tragically been one of the primary victims
of chemical weapons. On 28 June 1987, the city of
Sardasht in Iran endured a devastating chemical weapon
attack, leading to the immense suffering and loss of
innocent civilians, including women and children.
Western countries, including France, the United
Kingdom and the United States, bear a responsibility for
supporting and collaborating with the Saddam Hussein
regime during Iraq’s war against Iran. Their complicity
enabled the systematic use of chemical weapons against
the Iranian people, an act that should not be forgotten.
The silence or active participation of Western countries
in those atrocities undermined the pursuit of justice
and revealed blatant double standards. That also
hindered the Security Council’s ability to fulfil its
responsibilities and hold perpetrators accountable for
such heinous crimes.
The Syrian Arab Republic remains steadfast in
its commitment to fulfilling its obligations under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. In alignment with that
commitment, the Syrian Government has maintained
a constructive and cooperative approach towards the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW).
The report of the OPCW Technical Secretariat (see
S/2023/484) confirms that all 27 declared chemical
weapons production facilities in Syria have been
successfully destroyed. To ensure transparency and

S/PV.9372

accountability, Syria has been regularly submitting
monthly reports on the progress of chemical
weapons dismantlement.
In May and June 2023, Syria submitted its 114th
and 115th monthly reports to the OPCW DirectorGeneral, providing details of the activities carried out
to dismantle chemical weapons and their production
facilities. Moreover, Syria has facilitated two visits
by a reduced team from the Declaration Assessment
Team to Damascus this year. During those visits, the
Syrian National Authority extended its full cooperation
by allowing access to sites, collecting samples and
conducting interviews with witnesses.
In line with the suggestion made by the Syrian
National Authority, a separate meeting with a higherlevel Declaration Assessment Team was held in
Beirut at the end of the last month, demonstrating
Syria’s commitment to engagement and cooperation.
Additionally, the Syrian National Authority has agreed
to extend the tripartite agreement among the Syrian
Arab Republic, the OPCW Technical Secretariat and
the United Nations Office for Project Services. The
extension, effective until 31 December, aims to facilitate
the tasks and activities of the OPCW in Syria. Through
those actions, Syria is actively demonstrating its
dedication to fulfilling its obligations and cooperating
with the OPCW in the pursuit of the complete
eradication of chemical weapons within its territory.
We fully support promoting constructive dialogue
between Syria and the OPCW at the highest level and
setting a specific time frame to address any remaining
issues and bring the file to a final and conclusive
closure. Such an approach will ensure transparency,
accountability and a satisfactory resolution to all
outstanding matters related to chemical weapons in
Syria. In that context, we applaud Syria’s determination
to convene such a high-level meeting.
The integrity and credibility of the OPCW, as an
international body, hinge on its ability to remain neutral
and objective, guided solely by scientific and technical
considerations. That approach is essential in effectively
preventing the use of chemical weapons and advancing
the goals of the Convention.
Furthermore, any investigation must be impartial,
professional, reliable and objective. Such investigations
must fully adhere to the requirements and procedures
outlined in the Convention. To effectively address
unresolved issues and maintain the technical nature of

23-2019913/14

S/PV.9372

The situation in the Middle East

discussions, it is crucial to avoid politicizing the matter
and employing double standards. By doing so, we can
work towards justice, accountability and the prevention
of further atrocities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Çetin (Türkiye): We thank Director Ebo for
his briefing.
The latest monthly report of the Director-General
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2023/484) demonstrates that
the outstanding issues in relation to the Syrian regime’s
initial and subsequent declarations persist. Owing to
identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that
remain unresolved, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
still cannot consider that declaration accurate and
complete. Moreover, as we have heard from Director
Ebo today, the OPCW Secretariat is still waiting for
responses to its inquiries sent to the regime regarding
its chemical weapons production facilities and
unauthorized movement of chlorine cylinders related to
the 2018 Douma attack.
We note the information on the second round of
limited in-country activities conducted by a reduced
Declaration Assessment Team from 12 to 19 April.

14/14

11/07/2023

The periodic report, however, shows that the reasons
preventing the holding of the next round of consultations
between the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team and
the Syrian National Authority still persist. We call on
the Syrian regime to fully cooperate with the OPCW
Technical Secretariat, submit pending declarations and
documents and fulfil its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013).
The work of the OPCW fact-finding mission and
investigations by the Investigation and Identification
Team are critical if we are to establish the truth
about chemical weapons use in Syria. In that respect,
we take note of the recent report of the fact-finding
mission regarding two incidents of alleged use of toxic
chemicals as weapons in Kharbit Masasnah on 7 July
and 4 August 2017.
Let me reiterate that the use of chemical weapons is
a grave violation of international law and unacceptable
under any circumstances. We will continue to support
the efforts by the United Nations and the OPCW aimed
at ensuring accountability for the repeated use of
chemical weapons in Syria.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

23-20199
