S/PV.7311

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7311th meeting

Wednesday, 12 November 2014, 2.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Quinlan .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Australia)

Members:

Argentina .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Oyarzábal
Mr. Mangaral
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Omaish
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Laro
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Pankin
Mr. Nduhungirehe
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2014/136)

14-62253 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1462253*

Ukraine

S/PV.7311

The meeting was called to order at 2.30 p.m.

reforms to which the Ukrainian authorities have
committed themselves. Clearly, the ability of the
leading coalition to work constructively alongside
the opposition bloc will also be key for the unity and
stability of Ukraine. We also hope to see an urgent
start of a comprehensive national dialogue to rebuild
cohesion and address all outstanding critical national
issues.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Letter dated 28 February 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2014/136)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ukraine to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jens Anders
Toyberg-Frandzen, Assistant Secretary-General ad
interim for Political Affairs; Ambassador Ertuğrul
Apakan, Chief Monitor of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission to Ukraine; and Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini,
representative of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Ambassadors
Apakan and Tagliavini, who are joining today’s meeting
by video teleconference from Kyiv.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen.
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: My briefing today will
focus on two specific issues: political developments
in Ukraine and the latest developments related to the
conflict in the east of the country. I will also provide a
brief update on the United Nations activities in relation
to Ukraine.
On 26 October, Ukraine held its early parliamentary
elections. Although there was no voting in Crimea and
the parts of Donbas under rebel control, elections were
held throughout the rest of Ukraine in a manner that
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) observers welcomed as largely upholding
democratic commitments. Yesterday, 11 November, the
Central Electoral Commission announced the official
results of the elections.
Discussions are under way for the formation of
a Government, and we are hopeful that the leading
coalition will be committed to the rapid implementation
of the comprehensive political, legal and economic

2/24

12/11/2014

On 2 November, rebels in Donetsk and Luhansk
held their own elections, in defiance of the Ukrainian
Government, which were deplored by many in the
international community, including the SecretaryGeneral. These elections have been condemned by the
Ukrainian authorities as being outside the framework
of the Ukrainian Constitution and law. Following the
elections, the rebels have engaged in inflammatory
rhetoric, declaring themselves as de facto independent
from Ukraine and threatening to expand the territory
under their control. A full mobilization, including the
creation of local armies and security forces, was also
announced. In response, President Poroshenko has
proposed that Parliament revoke the law providing
for three years of greater autonomy or special status
for the rebel-controlled areas that had been offered as
fulfilment of a key tenet of the Minsk protocol. Also, on
5 November, Prime Minister Yatsenyuk announced that
pensions and subsidies would be halted to areas under
rebel control.
On 3 November, hostilities in the east reignited,
with the potential to further undermine the Minsk
agreement. Currently, the security situation in Donetsk
and Luhansk almost rivals the period immediately
preceding the ceasefire agreement of 5 September.
Citing credible threats from the rebel leadership that
it would launch a new offensive, on 4 November,
President Poroshenko ordered army reinforcements to
key cities in southern and eastern Ukraine. Reaffirming
that Kyiv sees no military solution to the conflict and
that it would not attempt to retake rebel areas held by
rebel force, the President’s stated objective is to protect
Ukraine’s territory from any further incursions.
This past weekend, particularly on the night of
9 November, hostilities were reported to be at their
worst in months, with a heavy exchange of artillery
and shelling in and around Donetsk. A similar level of
fighting was reported today. Lives continue to be lost
daily, including those of two schoolchildren as a result
of shelling in Donetsk on 5 November.

14-62253

12/11/2014

Ukraine

The upsurge in fighting comes amidst regular
reports from the OSCE of an influx of large convoys of
heavy weapons, tanks and troops flowing into rebel-held
areas. In that connection, there is no doubt that a failure
to secure the Russian-Ukrainian border is a factor that
continues to impede the path to peace. Meanwhile, the
humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate in parts
of Donbas. With the onset of harsh winter conditions,
the number of internally displaced persons is expected
to increase. If there is a return to full-scale fighting, the
numbers could grow exponentially.
While Ambassador Apakan will brief members
in more detail as to the situation on the ground, one
thing is clear — the ceasefire of 5 September is
under continuous and serious strain. If the prevailing
hostilities continue, the Minsk agreements could
undoubtedly be in jeopardy. Further consultations of
the Trilateral Contact Group with rebel representatives
have not been scheduled, while the self-proclaimed
leaders of the Donetsk and Luhansk people’s republics
have reportedly signalled that they would not participate
in future consultations, appointing persons of lesser
authority in their place. Ambassador Tagliavini will be
providing further details on that issue.
Yet, while these agreements have been breached in
various respects and are fragile, it is critical to note that
no side has unilaterally abrogated them. In recent days,
there have been some small, albeit positive steps toward
implementation, such as a meeting between the general
staff of the Russian and Ukrainian military on a line
of delimitation. Although no agreement was reached
at that time, subsequent meetings are reported to soon
take place. What my predecessor, Assistant SecretaryGeneral Fernández-Taranco, said in his most recent
briefing to this Council on 24 October (see S/PV.7287)
remains valid today. It is incumbent on all actors to
fulfil their responsibilities and refocus their efforts
towards full implementation of the Minsk agreements,
and it is incumbent on all of us to assist them.
The human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine
has continued its work providing objective and regular
reporting on the human rights situation throughout
the country and on factors that could negatively affect
the social, political and security situation and efforts
towards the solution of a crisis. The mission’s seventh
monthly report will be published on 20 November. In
the meantime, the mission is seeking an extension of its
presence in the country beyond 15 December.

S/PV.7311

With nearly 1 million people now displaced by
this conflict, both within Ukraine and to neighbouring
countries, humanitarian agencies continue to scale
up their presence and respond to the growing needs.
The United Nations is also leading a comprehensive
recovery and peacebuilding assessment to conflictaffected, Government-held areas in eastern Ukraine
that also includes participation by the European Union
and the World Bank. Finally, in continuation of the
Secretary-General’s good offices, Under-SecretaryGeneral Feltman is slated to travel to Ukraine again
in the near future, pending the formation of the new
Government.
In conclusion, the promise of renewal and of renewed
energy towards solving Ukraine’s problems embodied
in the recent parliamentary elections threatens to be
overshadowed by the worsening security situation in
the east of the country. Nonetheless, the prospect that
a new, reform-oriented ruling coalition will be formed,
empowering it to move the country closer to a path
of peace and stability, provides the avenue for all to
support Ukraine out of this debilitating conflict.
With the Minsk agreements in question and
uncertainty over how much strain the ceasefire can
withstand, we are deeply concerned by the possibility
of a return to full-scale fighting. Alternatively, the
conflict may simmer this way for months, with sporadic,
low-level battles marked by periods of increased
hostilities and further casualties. While either scenario
would be a catastrophe for Ukraine, a third prospect of
concern is that of a frozen or protracted conflict that
would entrench the current status quo in south-eastern
Ukraine for years or several decades to come.
It is our collective responsibility to ensure that none
of those scenarios take hold. The only alternative is for
the fighting to end so that all Ukrainians can rebuild
their lives in a stable and secure country, with Ukraine’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity preserved. The
road to that solution is renewed commitment by all
concerned parties to the Minsk agreements and shared
responsibility for their full and urgent implementation.
The United Nations also stands ready to support that
process in any way deemed appropriate.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Apakan.
Mr. Apakan: I am pleased to have the opportunity
to speak to the Council about the current situation in
Ukraine.

14-622533/24

S/PV.7311

Ukraine

The Special Monitoring Mission to Ukraine has
operated throughout Ukraine since April and has
implemented tasks such as monitoring human rights
and basic freedoms, establishing facts and reporting
thereon. Its mandate has also included dialogue and
consultation, especially at the regional level. The
Mission has been designed as a civilian observer
mission with a political mandate that has been approved
by 57 participating States. The Special Monitoring
Mission adapted right from the start to a quickly
changing environment.
We welcome the Minsk documents and the efforts
to implement a ceasefire. In recent days, however,
the level of violence in eastern Ukraine and the risk
of further escalation remain high. We have observed
ongoing fighting in many locations in the Luhansk and
Donetsk regions. Artillery and mortar shelling often hit
residential areas, causing casualties among the civilian
population. Our monitors have on three separate
occasions observed convoys of unmarked trucks, heavy
weapons and tanks in areas controlled by armed groups.

12/11/2014

However, strong political will is needed to make
this structure work. Part of implementing the Minsk
documents is also to secure the Ukrainian-Russian
State border. The Special Monitoring Mission has
been at the border whenever access and the security
situation has allowed it, and the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) stands
ready to expand its border monitoring. The stretch of
the border beyond the control of the Ukrainian forces
is around 400 kilometres long. In order to increase its
monitoring capability, the Special Monitoring Mission
has deployed civilian unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs).
Since the UAVs started flying, on 28 October, they have
encountered jamming devices and, on one occasion,
were shot at.
I would now like to emphasize the heavy toll that
the conflict is taking on the civilian population. There
are more than 430,000 internally displaced persons
inside Ukraine, including those from Crimea. That
deepens the humanitarian crisis, particularly as winter
approaches.

The ability of the Special Monitoring Mission to
monitor the implementation of the Minsk documents,
including ceasefire monitoring, poses considerable
security and operational challenges to the Mission.
It has necessitated an expansion of the Mission to
the maximum of 500 monitors, in accordance with
our mandate. The Mission currently consists of 266
international Mission members from 42 participating
States. Of those, 170 are deployed in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions.

President Porochenko’s peace plan and the Minsk
documents provide a framework and a road map for
the normalization of the situation and for a stable
and pluralistic Ukraine. The parliamentary elections
of 26 October brought about a new and positive
atmosphere. The Special Monitoring Mission will
continue to facilitate the dialogue on the ground in order
to reduce tensions and promote the normalization of the
situation. That dialogue will foster the empowerment of
civil society and women.

We have been communicating with all those
involved in the process related to the Minsk protocol
and memorandum, including the trilateral contact
group, Ukrainian authorities, representatives of the
general staffs of Ukraine and Russia engaged in the
Mariupol Joint Centre for Control and Coordination
(JCCC) and representatives of certain areas of Donetsk
and Luhansk. I have been in regular contact with my
colleague, Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini. A security
zone and a contact line would be established by the
Minsk memorandum to serve as a reference point for
the withdrawal of military personnel and equipment.
This has not yet been accomplished. JCCC is a bilateral
Ukrainian/Russian initiative and entirely separate from
the Special Monitoring Mission, but the Mission will
continue to do what it can to help.

The security environment remains a significant
constraint. The Special Monitoring Mission conducts
constant coordination with all its monitors and
observers in order to ensure proper security for them.
The Special Monitoring Mission’s access and freedom of
movement remain obstructed, particularly in areas such
as Horlivka and south of Debaltsevo and in some other
border regions. The Minsk protocol and memorandum
do not introduce limitations on the Mission’s activities,
geographically or otherwise. I must stress that the
foundation of all Special Monitoring Mission activities
remains the consensus decision of all participating
States on the OSCE Permanent Council.

4/24

The Special Monitoring Mission will continue to
monitor the situation in all of Ukraine, including in the
two eastern regions. In eastern Ukraine, the Special
Monitoring Mission will monitoring not only the

14-62253

12/11/2014

Ukraine

security zone but also the entire regions of Luhansk and
Donetsk up to and at the State border between Ukraine
and the Russian Federation.
While the Special Monitoring Mission continues
to facilitate initiatives put forward to reduce tensions
and foster peace, a sustainable ceasefire can be reached
only by all involved. The Special Monitoring Mission
will continue to cooperate with the United Nations,
including the Department of Political Affairs, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the United Nations Development Programme
and UN-Women.
Once again, we need de-escalation and maximum
restraint. The Special Monitoring Mission will continue
its impartial monitoring and independent objective
reporting. We ask all concerned to urgently commit
to the full implementation of the Minsk documents,
designed to bring peace and stability to Ukraine.
The President: I thank Ambassador Apakan for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Tagliavini.
Ms. Tagliavini: As of this moment, fighting in the
eastern part of Ukraine is very probably going on. The
two documents signed by members of the Trilateral
Contact Group and representatives of certain areas
of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions at the meetings
in Minsk — the protocol of 5 September and the
memorandum of 19 September 2014 — continue, to
our understanding, to be valid and to be binding upon
all signatories. Indeed, they are the two ground-laying
political and legal instruments on which the ceasefire
in eastern Ukraine and other issues related to the
ceasefire are being based.
It must be acknowledged that much of the fighting
has stopped since the signing of the Minsk documents,
but there continues to be fighting at some strategic
locations, among which are the city outskirts of the Black
Sea port Mariupol and around Donetsk airport. The
fighting is severe, involving use of heavy weaponry. It
is costing the lives of servicemen and civilians, together
with many persons severely injured on an almost daily
basis, not to mention the very substantial losses in terms
of infrastructure, facilities and personal property. As
yet, there are no signs of it letting up — there are many
who even fear a worsening of the present situation, as
we are receiving reports about a continuing military
build up in the conflict zone.

S/PV.7311

That is, in the briefest of terms, the status of
the implementation of the ceasefire as of now. The
question is what must be done to overcome the obvious
shortcomings. It goes without saying that the central
issue now is to make sure that all signatories are keeping
their commitments and doing so in good faith and in
strict compliance with the agreements in the first place.
There is a similar need to carry out other important
provisions related to the ceasefire, among which is the
full respect for the so-called line of contact, separating
the opposing forces and serving as a reference line
for the withdrawal of heavy military equipment to an
agreed distance back from the line.
I would like to recall that the signatories to the
Minsk documents also committed to the withdrawal
of all foreign and illegal armed formations, military
hardware and militants and mercenaries from the
territory of Ukraine. There is naturally a continued
need to strictly observe the political elements of the
Minsk commitments as well. In that context, I wish to
underline with all clarity that the so-called elections held
in certain areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions on
2 November of this year were called unacceptable and
invalid by the Government of Ukraine, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and a
large majority of the international community, while
another signatory Power to the two Minsk documents
spoke of respecting the expression of will of the
population without going any further.
It is clear from the foregoing that the implementation
process for the documents signed in Minsk is now
at a crossroads. On the one hand, we have achieved
progress, with a ceasefire holding long stretches of
the conflict area. There has also been no new major
military operations since the signing. Among further
positive results, I would note the release of hundreds of
hostages and illegally detained persons, which needs to
be continued.
On the other hand, we are faced with examples of
blunt disregard for certain commitments undertaken
in Minsk, as we see the continuation of fighting at the
number of important places covered by the ceasefire.
There has also been a lack of proper understanding
of, if not open disregard for, certain political elements
of the Minsk documents, as shown by the so-called
elections that took place in November in some areas of
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.

14-622535/24

S/PV.7311

Ukraine

It is against this background that I repeat my
call for strict observance of all the provisions of the
Minsk arrangements. I also invite all parties to the
conflict to join me in an effort to further develop the
peace process by agreeing to additional elements for
the implementation and the further strengthening of
arrangements signed in Minsk on 5 and 19 September
2014.
One of those elements should be an inclusive
political dialogue, which may also include round-table
discussions with a broad spectrum of participants.
There is also an urgent need for the elaboration of a
comprehensive economic rehabilitation programme,
and even more so for providing humanitarian assistance
to the population in the conflict zone, keeping in mind
that winter conditions are already setting in.
Last but not least, I wish to point out that a sustained
ceasefire between the opposing forces will never be
achieved without complete and firm control over the
international border between Ukraine and Russia, and
that additional efforts are needed to reach that goal,
based on the provisions of the Minsk documents.
In concluding my remarks, let me reiterate my firm
belief that the conflict in eastern Ukraine can be solved
only by peaceful means and at the negotiation table. We
see the two agreements signed in Minsk as milestones on
that path. In the effort to achieve their implementation,
I feel united with my friend and colleague the Chief
Monitor of the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission,
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan.
The President: I thank Ambassador Tagliavini for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting on
the ongoing crisis in Ukraine. We also thank Assistant
Secretary-General Toyberg-Frandzen for his clear and
objective briefing. We are grateful to Ambassadors
Apakan and Tagliavini for briefing us today and for the
brave and critically important role that the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is
continuing to play on the ground.
This is the Security Council’s twenty-sixth meeting
on the current crisis in Ukraine. If our message and the
message of other countries today on the deteriorating
situation in eastern Ukraine sounds familiar, it is

6/24

12/11/2014

for good reason. For while the situation has evolved,
the root of the problem remains the same: Russia’s
flagrant violation of Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. Time and again, Russia has made
commitments and then failed to live up to them, and
subsequently offered explanations to the Council that it
knows are untrue.
The most recent example involves the joint
commitments made by Russia, the separatists it
supports and Ukraine on 5 September in Minsk. They
include an immediate end to the ceasefire violations,
the restoration of Ukrainian control of its side of the
international border, OSCE monitoring of the border
and a security zone on either side of the border, as well
as the withdrawal of foreign forces, mercenaries and
equipment from Ukraine and the release of hostages
and prisoners. On none of those have Russia or the
separatists lived up to their word. At Minsk, all sides
committed to an immediate ceasefire. Yet, rather
than observe the ceasefire, the separatists have taken
advantage of the agreed-upon pause in the fighting to
try and expand their territory beyond Minsk lines.
Meanwhile, Ukraine has maintained a full
ceasefire along the agreed lines, as it defends its forces
and population from separatists’ push for more. Over
the last few days separatist attacks have increased
significantly, including on positions around Donetsk
airport, the city of Debaltseve and,of course, near
Mariupol.
At Minsk, all sides committed to permitting the
OSCE to monitor and verify the ceasefire. Yet Russianbacked separatists have fired on OSCE monitoring
drones and used jamming signals to interfere with its
team members’ electronics using equipment supplied
by Moscow. At Minsk, all sides agreed to permanent
monitoring at the Ukrainian-Russian State border
and the creation of a security zone along the border.
Yet Russia has done nothing to restore Ukrainian
Government control over the international border.
Russia has refused to press separatists to allow the
OSCE access to the border, and Russia continues to
flout Ukrainian air space with its helicopters and
unmanned aerial vehicles. It also continues to send
so-called humanitarian convoys — convoys it will not
allow Ukrainian customs authorities or international
monitors to search.
At Minsk, all sides committed to immediately free
all hostages and illegally held persons. Yet Russia and

14-62253

12/11/2014

Ukraine

the separatists it backs continue to hold approximately
500 captives. Those captives include Ukrainian pilot
Nadia Savchenko and Ukrainian film director Oleg
Sentsov, both of whom were captured by separatists on
Ukrainian soil and illegally transported against their
will to Russia.
At Minsk, Russia committed to remove all illegal
military formations, military equipment and militants
from Ukraine. Yet, rather than withdrawing its military
forces from Ukraine and rather than cutting off its
support for separatists, Russia is instead surging more
forces and more equipment across the border. The
Russian military has maintained a forward presence
in eastern Ukraine since the ceasefire took effect. We
have information indicating that a Russian air-defence
system was operating near one of the separatist convoys
in Donetsk. Russia has not provided that type of airdefence system to separatists to date, suggesting that
Russian forces were protecting the convoy.
On 9 November, the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission reported two convoys of 17 unmarked
green trucks moving west through Donetsk towards
the ceasefire line. Yesterday, 11 November, OSCE
monitors observed the movement of 43 unmarked
military vehicles on the eastern outskirts of Donetsk.
Five were seen towing 120-millimetre howitzers
and five others were towing multiple-launch rocket
systems. NATO confirmed it had observed columns
of Russian equipment — primarily Russian tanks,
Russian artillery, Russian air-defence systems and
Russian combat troops — entering Ukraine over the
past 48 hours.
The list goes on, but the pattern is clear. Where
Russia has made commitments, it has failed to
meet them. Russia negotiated a peace plan, then
systematically undermined it at every step. It talks of
peace, but it keeps fuelling war. That is not all. On
2 November, Russian-backed separatists held illegal
elections in the parts of the Donetsk and Luhansk
regions that they control. The elections contravene
Ukraine’s laws and its sovereignty. They defied point 9
of the Minsk protocol. But if Russia and the separatists
intended the elections to cast a veneer of legitimacy
on their actions, they failed. Instead, the world saw
the elections for what they are: a shameless attempt to
validate territory seized at the barrel of the gun — a
gun provided by Russia.

S/PV.7311

In keeping with its efforts to escalate rather than
de-escalate at every turn, rather than condemn the
separatists’ sham election like most of the international
community, Russia encouraged it. Foreign Minister
Lavrov even tried to argue that the elections were part
of the Minsk agreements, which clearly stipulate that
the elections be local and conducted “in accordance
with the law of Ukraine”.
Russian and separatist actions in eastern Ukraine
currently have nothing to do with improving the
humanitarian situation in Donbas, or decentralizing
power, as called for in points 3 and 8 of the Minsk
protocol. A recent Associated Press (AP) report from
the rebel-held town of Perevalsk, part of the territory
that recently declared independence from Ukraine,
revealed the town was ruled by a local warlord who goes
by the name of “batya” — or “daddy”. Daddy’s power
is maintained by a group of armed Cossacks, whom he
calls his Great Don Army, and four tanks outside his
office fly Russian and rebel flags. Asked where his
authority came from, Daddy told the AP reporter:
“We are an independent organization and we
don’t depend on anyone. I am answerable only to
President Putin and Our Lord.”
In neighbouring Alchevsk village rebel leaders
preside over the kangaroo trials of people accused of
crimes. Defendants are not given lawyers and their
judges are whatever members of the community show
up, who vote by a simple show of hands. That is what
the separatist democracy looks like. We continue to
see similar repressive tendencies in Russian-occupied
Crimea, where members of the Tatar minority have
been relentlessly persecuted and the free press muzzled.
By contrast, Ukraine has made a genuine effort
to live up to its agreements at Minsk and continues
to show considerable restraint in response to constant
provocation and attack. The Ukrainian people have
repeatedly chosen leaders who call for de-escalation
over escalation, first in the presidential election and
then in parliamentary elections.
Ukraine has also put in motion critically important
reforms to reduce corruption and grant greater
authority to its regions through constitutional reform.
It has sought to maintain the ceasefire along the lines
established at Minsk. The United States continues to
support the Minsk peace process, and we continue to
call for its full implementation. We remain prepared to
roll back sanctions if the fighting stops, the border is

14-622537/24

S/PV.7311

Ukraine

closed, the foreign forces and equipment are withdrawn
and hostages are released. We have said all along that
there is no military solution to the crisis. The solution,
as has been said, by the OSCE here today and United
Nations, must be political. With Minsk we have a road
map to reach that solution. The problem is, as it has long
been throughout this crisis, you cannot reach a political
solution if only one side is committed to forging it,
and you cannot effectively implement a road map with
parties who, like the Russians and the separatists they
back, so consistently fail to keep their word.
We have seen Russia’s playbook in Transnistria,
South Ossetia, Abkhazia and Crimea — so the question
is not what Russia will try to do in eastern Ukraine,
the question is what we, the international community,
will seek to do to prevent yet another frozen conflict in
Europe manufactured by Russia.
The Minsk agreement was brokered under the
auspices of the international community; as such,
there must be consequences when Russia flouts the
commitments it has made and continues to destabilize
its neighbour.
Russia has not earned the good faith we would
wish to bestow. Even when Russia claims, as Foreign
Minister Lavrov did today, “the inadmissibility of
disrupting the implementation of the Minsk ceasefire
agreements” actions are all that matter — and actions
alongside these words show intentions. The Donetsk
airport has come under attacks from artillery and arms
fire four times in the past 24 hours, and in the past day
Ukrainian positions have been shelled near Debaltseve,
Avdiyivka, Hirske and Krasnohorivka.
What we can do — what we must do — is keep
ratcheting up the pressure on Russia until it abides
by Minsk and chooses the path of de-escalation.
Russia’s actions in Ukraine are a threat not only to the
countries in Russia’s immediate vicinity but also to the
international order.
Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to
thank Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, Assistant
Secretary-General Ad Interim for Political Affairs,
Ambassador Ertuğrul Apakan, Chief Monitor of
the special monitoring mission to Ukraine of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), and Ambassador Heidi Tagliavini,
representative of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office, for
their briefings on the ongoing crisis in Ukraine. I would
also like to recognize the presence in the Chamber of

8/24

12/11/2014

the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United
Nations.
Since our last briefing, on 24 October (see
S/PV.7287), the security situation in Ukraine has
deteriorated further, despite the extensive diplomatic
efforts deployed in the region over the past month.
It seems that when the region takes a step forward,
the parties respond with two steps backwards, at
the expense of the civilian population. We should
remember, as Ambassador Tagliavini has reminded us,
that winter is around the corner and that with increased
fighting, coupled with a shortage of gas in Ukraine, a
humanitarian disaster is looming.
It is disappointing that despite the signing of the
Minsk protocol and memorandum on 5 and 19 September,
respectively, the parties seem unwilling to implement
those agreements. We are seriously concerned about the
continued violation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine, the massive reinforcement of the
armed separatists with heavy weaponry, including via
military convoys, as well as the continued shelling in
populated areas, including, last week, of a school. In that
context, we commend the OSCE Special Monitoring
Mission for its continuing role in verifying the ceasefire
on Ukraine’s eastern border. We note that it is facing
serious challenges, including problems with the safety
of its personnel and a lack of necessary equipment. We
urge all parties, particularly the armed separatists, to
assist the Mission in implementing its mandate, and we
also encourage those who have the capacity to provide
the monitors with the equipment they need to do so, in
order to improve the success of its activities.
It is unfortunate that the deterioration of the
security situation in Ukraine comes on the heels of
the parliamentary elections of 26 October, which were
viewed as free, fair and peaceful, despite the fact that
there were no polling stations in the rebel-held areas.
In that regard, we believe that the subsequent elections
organized on 2 November by the armed separatists are
unconstitutional and undermine the Minsk protocol and
memorandum. In a context of heightened tension and
escalation, we note with concern statements from all sides
that may jeopardize even the provisions of the Minsk
agreements that had begun to be implemented, such as
those on the exchange of prisoners of war and the law on
interim local self-government. It is therefore imperative
that, given the alarming situation, all the signatories
recommit to implementing the Minsk agreements and
that members of the Trilateral Contact Group use their

14-62253

12/11/2014

Ukraine

influence to end the dangerous escalation. Otherwise,
despite our collective commitment made yesterday on
the occasion of Remembrance Day, the situation could
get out of hand and lead to another full-blown regional
war on the European continent.
I would like to conclude by recalling that, despite
the fact that we all agree that the situation in Ukraine
has become a threat to international peace and security,
the Security Council is still discussing it based on
letters sent by Permanent Representatives in New York
back in February (S/2014/136) and April (S/2014/264).
While I am aware of the deep division in the Council on
the substance, as demonstrated by its persistent lack of
any pronouncement on the issue, I believe it is time for
the 15 to at least agree that the Council should remain
seized of the matter under a specific agenda item, “The
situation in Ukraine”.
Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Ambassadors Tagliavini and Apakan
for their statements, and Mr. Jens Anders ToybergFrandzen, Assistant Secretary-General Ad Interim for
Political Affairs, for his briefing.
Chad remains concerned about the deterioration
of the security situation in Ukraine, particularly in
the eastern part of the country. In the past few days
we have seen a resurgence in the fighting between
the Ukrainian army and the separatists. The city of
Donetsk is the scene of exchanges of artillery, mortar
and automatic weapon fire. Several sources also
confirm that the parties to conflict have been firing
fragmentation shells in urban areas. Chad condemns
such acts of violence and calls for an immediate end to
armed confrontations in accordance with the ceasefire
established by the Minsk agreement. Chad also
deplores the radicalization of the parties’ positions,
with the announcement, on one hand, by Poroshenko’s
Government that it has suspended all financial aid to
Donbas and frozen €2.6 million in salaries and various
forms of assistance, and, on the other, the separatists’
holding of elections on 2 November in Donetsk and
Luhansk, in flagrant violation of the Minsk agreement
and the Constitution of Ukraine. All of that chiefly
affects the civilian population, which has already paid
a heavy toll in the conflict. According to the United
Nations, since the start of the conflict in April more
than 4,000 people have died, many of them civilians,
and more than 5,000, whose situation will worsen as
winter approaches, have been internally displaced.

S/PV.7311

In the face of this escalating situation, we urge the
parties to the conflict to act calmly and with restraint.
Like other members of the Council, Chad believes
that finding a political solution is the only way to
emerge from the crisis. In that regard, we encourage
the Government of Ukraine to find a path to a direct
and inclusive national dialogue focused on national
reconciliation. Chad also urges the countries that have
the capacity to influence the parties to the conflict to
use that influence to help achieve peace in Ukraine,
with respect for its territorial integrity, sovereignty
and unity, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank the briefers for their
statements.
We are concerned by the escalating violence and
mounting civilian casualties in eastern Ukraine. The
constant shelling, the fragile security situation, the
teetering economy and an atmosphere of uncertainty
are obstacles to the attainment of peace in the region.
Strict adherence by all parties to the provisions of the
Minsk protocol and the memorandum of 19 September
is vital and urgent. We call on all concerned to keep
genuine channels of communication open and take
concrete steps to consolidate the ceasefire agreement.
We emphasize that there can be no military solution to
the crisis.
The elections conducted on 2 November in the
separatist republics of Donetsk and Luhansk run counter
to the spirit of the Minsk protocol and pose a threat to the
peace, unity and sovereignty of Ukraine. Although the
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe recently stated that the
elections would further complicate the implementation
of the Minsk protocol, and we share that view, we urge
all concerned, and in particular nations with influence
over the parties, to continue to facilitate dialogue with a
view to easing tensions, de-escalating the violence and
ultimately arriving at a peaceful solution to the crisis.
We would like to see Ukraine return to normalcy and
its independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity
respected, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.
Mr. Omaish (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I, too,
would like to thank the briefers for their presentations
this afternoon.
Jordan is extremely concerned by the worsening
security situation and the increase in shelling in eastern

14-622539/24

S/PV.7311

Ukraine

12/11/2014

Ukraine, which follows a period of tenuous calm in the
region. We now fear a resumption of full-scale fighting.
If the situation is not brought under control, there could
be spillover effects beyond Ukraine and into the entire
region.

We also recall that it is crucial that there be no
impunity or immunity for those having perpetrated
violations or acts of violence. We further recall that such
individuals must be brought before justice to ensure
that the situation in Ukraine not further deteriorate.

Jordan believes that the military build-up and the
illegal flow of weapons into Ukraine, as stated in the
report of the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, are violations of the Minsk agreements.
Any attempt by the parties to resume the fighting
flouts international efforts aimed at reaching a lasting
and peaceful solution to the conflict. We reiterate
our call to all parties, in particular armed groups, to
show restraint and discipline, calm the situation and
make intensive, serious and sincere efforts to prevent a
further worsening of the situation, which would be dire
for all concerned.

Mr. Oyarzábal (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to begin by thanking
Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen, Ambassador Tagliavini and
Ambassador Apakan for their statements. We also
welcome the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to
the Council.

Any deferral of a political solution based on the
peace agreements will only further exacerbate violence
and instability and bring about a worsening of the
humanitarian situation, which must be addressed. Any
delay will only further prolong the ongoing investigation
of the Malaysia Airlines Flight MH-17 crash. The
shared challenges have to be tackled by all Ukrainians
across the board, be they in the east or the west of the
country. I am referring to the political reforms, national
reconciliation and economic development. Those shared
challenges and can be tackled only through cooperation
among all the parties so as to ensure that the conflict
not worsen irreversibly.
In that regard, the holding of legislative elections
in the country on 26 October was an important step
on the path to political reform, which the Ukrainian
Government has committed itself to. We therefore
encourage the Government to continue its efforts to
step up the national dialogue and to put in place all
the necessary political and economic reforms that can
contribute to the national reconciliation process among
all members of Ukrainian society.
Jordan will continue to back the Minsk agreements.
We stress the importance of cooperation among all
parties for a comprehensive and swift implementation
of all the provisions of the agreements, including
provisions regarding the ceasefire and the halting of
weapons flows. We emphasize the need to uphold and
maintain the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
Ukraine, as undermining those would be a violation of
international law.

10/24

The signing of the Minsk protocol, on 5 September,
and of the ceasefire memorandum, on 19 September,
under the auspices of the Trilateral Contact Group,
were steps that had broad support from the international
community and raised the hope that we could begin
to overcome the conflict in eastern Ukraine. Both
agreements established a basis and set broad criteria for
a negotiated exit from the crisis and for a reduction in
the levels of violence, including the decentralization of
power and the holding of an inclusive national dialogue.
Unfortunately, the implementation of the
agreements has been very slow. We are concerned about
the information indicating that the ceasefire, which
was never fully carried out, is at risk of completely
collapsing. That would be a tragedy. It would lead to the
loss of more lives, the aggravation of the humanitarian
situation and an entrenching of the positions, which
would lead only to a prolongation of the conflict.
In that context, avoiding any new escalation of
hostilities is a priority. The parties must demonstrate
moderation and refrain from taking unilateral actions
that run counter to the peace initiatives. All the relevant
actors must return to the letter and spirit of Minsk in
order to re-establish the conditions that make it possible
to renew dialogue.
It is also up to the international community to
do its utmost to facilitate the swift implementation
of the Minsk protocol and Minsk memorandum, in
the context of respect for international law and the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Any
intervention in affairs that are within Ukraine’s internal
jurisdiction — whether it be military, political or
economic in nature — must be avoided. In that context,
we appreciate the actions taken by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe. We underscore
once again the Council’s political and institutional

14-62253

12/11/2014

Ukraine

responsibility to safeguard international peace and
security.
We deplore the fact that, until now, despite the
many times we have met to deal with this situation, we
have not been able to play a positive role and overcome
the divisions that prevent the Council from contributing
to the parties finding the necessary points in common
in order to move forward towards a diplomatic solution
and put an end to the confrontations, which are
especially punishing on the civilian population.
As we seek to move the crisis onto the diplomatic
track, there is a need to cotinue to respond to the
difficult humanitarian situation being experienced by
persons affected by the crisis. We recognize the work
being carried out by humanitarian workers to ensure
access to assistance to those who need it, in a context
that poses many security challenges. We call on all
parties to facilitate the distribution of humanitarian
assistance on the basis of non-discrimination and in
full cooperation with humanitarian actors.
At the same time, we underscore that it is essential
that independent investigations be conducted in
response to all reports of human rights violations and
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law, so that those responsible, no matter to whom they
report, be accountable for their actions.
The parties in Ukraine and those who have
influence on them are facing a critical moment.
They have two clear options before them — working
in a genuine fashion to restore calm and peacefully
resolve the crisis so that Ukraine may return to the
path of growth with inclusion, or immersing itself in
unnecessary and fruitless conflict. It is not too late to
choose the first path. Argentina will continue to firmly
support all efforts for peace and the decisions taken to
that end.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank the Assistant Secretary-General ad
interim for Political Affairs, Mr. Jens Anders ToybergFrandzen, for his briefing. I also thank Ambassador
Ertuğrul Apakan, Chief Monitor of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Special Monitoring Mission, and Ambassador Heidi
Tagliavini, representative of the OSCE Chairperson-inOffice, for making themselves available to us and for
the invaluable information they have provided to the
Council on the critical situation in Ukraine.

S/PV.7311

Luxembourg fully supports the efforts of the
Swiss Chairman-in-Office of the OSCE to find a
political solution to the crisis, while fully upholding the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. We also
support the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, which
has a key role to play to promote the de-escalation of
tensions by providing objective information on the
situation on the ground.
We are very concerned by the serious deterioration
of the situation in eastern Ukraine since 2 November,
when the separatists held illegal elections in the regions
of the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts under their control.
While the Minsk protocol and memorandum, signed on
5 and 19 September, respectively, paved the way for a
peaceful end to the conflict, non-compliance with key
provisions of the Minsk agreements has led to a new
escalation of tensions and a worsening situation in
several regions of eastern Ukraine.
The growing number of violations of the
5 September ceasefire agreement are compounded by
worrisome omens. We are concerned about the recent
build-up of Russian troops in the immediate proximity
of the Ukrainian border. We are also concerned
about the increased movements of military convoy in
separatist-controlled areas heading for Ukrainian army
positions. As has been noted, in recent days the OSCE
Special Monitoring Mission has reported sightings of
large convoys of military trucks without license plates
transporting troops and heavy weapons, including
howitzers. A convoy of nine tanks — four T-72s and
five T-64s — heading west was observed by the Mission
on Saturday, 8 November. These movements of troops
and heavy weaponry are accompanied by intensified
bombing, especially in Donetsk.
We condemn the sham elections held on 2 November
in the eastern regions of Ukraine controlled by the
separatists, with the blessing of Russia. We do not
recognize those elections. They are illegal under the
Constitution and Ukrainian law. They constitute a
flagrant violation of the commitments that Russia and
the representatives of illegal armed groups made when
signing the Minsk protocol. Those sham elections do
not legitimize the warlords at the head of the selfproclaimed republics of Donetsk and Luhansk, just as
the illegal referendum in Crimea does not and will not
legitimize the annexation of the peninsula by Russia.
Successive reports of the Special Monitoring Mission
bear witness to serious violations of human rights
committed since April in areas occupied by armed

14-6225311/24

S/PV.7311

Ukraine

separatist groups. These individuals cannot claim to
speak for the people of Donbas. The Secretary-General
and the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office have rightly
denounced the elections of 2 November as an obstacle
to efforts to find a political solution to the conflict.
We welcome the concrete steps taken by Ukraine to
meet its commitments under the Minsk agreements, in
particular the adoption of laws providing for amnesty
and the temporary status of local autonomy. In addition
to scrupulously observing a ceasefire, of particular
importance is the withdrawal of armed groups, military
equipment, combatants and illegal mercenaries, as well
as securing the border between Ukraine and Russia and
its permanent monitoring with OSCE verification. It is
crucial in this context that the Mission’s monitoring of
the border posts at Gukovo and Donetsk be extended to
other border-crossing areas as soon as possible.
It becomes more urgent every day to end the
conflict impacting Ukraine. The conflict has already
killed more than 4,000 people since April. The victims
include numerous children, including two struck down
on 5 November by mortar shells on a school playing field
in Donetsk. The killing must stop. The solution to the
conflict has been identified; it includes the good-faith
implementation of the Minsk protocol of 5 September
and the Minsk memorandum of 19 September, signed by
all parties to the conflict, with the decisive verification
support of the OSCE.
Ukraine has demonstrated in deed its determination
to pursue the path of peace. We call on the separatists
and Russia to do the same so as to halt the spiral
of conflict. We call on the Russian Federation to
shoulder its responsibilities in the full and complete
implementation of the Minsk agreements by preventing
all military movement of weapons or combatants from
its territory into Ukraine and by exercising its influence
on the separatists to fulfil the obligations to which they
have subscribed under the Minsk agreements.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen, Ambassador Apakan
and Ambassador Tagliavini for their briefings on the
situation in eastern Ukraine.
We are acutely alarmed by the observations
reported by the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission,
detailing the influx of military equipment, weapons
and armed personnel into the region of Ukraine held
by armed rebel groups. It represents a clear violation
of the Minsk agreements, a serious encroachment on

12/24

12/11/2014

the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine,
and a challenge to the future of the country. The Minsk
protocol and memorandum of September offered the
basis for hope towards a peaceful and viable resolution
of the crisis. They provided the parties concerned with
a measure of political space to build upon. However,
such early hopes have turned into worries that the
conflict may again escalate. The withdrawal of foreign
troops and military equipment under OSCE monitoring
is an integral part of the Minsk agreements, which must
be fully implemented. We urge all concerned parties to
stop any provocative actions that may derail the fragile
peace process, as embodied in the Minsk agreements.
All outside military intervention in the situation must
cease immediately.
Regarding political developments in the country,
we welcome the holding of parliamentary elections on
26 October, which proved to be orderly and peaceful.
We very much hope that the election results, together
with national reconciliation and a process of dialogue,
will pave the way for much needed stability throughout
the country. In that regard, the separate elections held
by armed rebel groups in eastern Ukraine earlier this
month run counter to the spirit of a dialogue-based
resolution of the situation. They also undermine
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
We hope that the political track based on the Minsk
agreements can be restored and put back into force as
soon as possible.
We commend the role of OSCE, the United Nations
and other partners in seeking a peaceful political
resolution of the situation, and we stand ready to
support such efforts.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I thank
the three briefers for their briefings this afternoon.
As others have pointed out, the Council has met
many times on Ukraine over the past six months. There
is a reason for that. The situation in Ukraine continues
to be a severe threat and indeed an escalating threat
to international peace and security. There is a reason
why that is so. Since the start of the crisis, Russian
actions have been consistently designed to undermine,
interfere with and transgress Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity in a way that flouts international
norms, including the Charter of the United Nations.
Since the Council last met on 24 October to discuss
Ukraine (see S/PV.7287), Russia and the separatists
it supports have repeatedly undermined and ignored

14-62253

12/11/2014

Ukraine

the Minsk agreements. Russian leaders have told us
one thing and then ordered their military, their special
forces and their separatist rebel proxies to do another.
The ceasefire has been breached. Attempts to monitor
and verify the ceasefire and the border have been
blocked. Russia continues to supply its soldiers in
Ukraine and the separatists they fight alongside with
heavy weaponry, artillery, tanks and armoured vehicles
in flagrant breach of the Minsk protocols.
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) reporting in recent days lays bare the
extent of that Russian support. On several separate
occasions, the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission has
witnessed significant numbers of troops and military
equipment moving in convoy in separatist-held areas. I
will mention just one such report. On 8 November, the
Mission observed a convoy of more than 40 unmarked
military vehicles moving west on the outskirts of
Donetsk. It included 19 unmarked Kamaz trucks,
each towing a howitzer artillery piece and carrying
personnel in green uniforms without insignia; 15
Kraz troop carriers; 6 fuel tankers; and an unmarked
Bronetransporter armoured personnel carrier. We
have seen this pattern before — unmarked columns of
military vehicles entering Ukraine to support continued
fighting by separatists. Efforts to remove markings
and insignia from those vehicles cannot disguise the
fact that they come from Russia. What other credible
explanation is there?
Yet Russia continues to deny that fact, despite
the fact that its attempts at deception turned to farce
only yesterday when Russian television station NTV
broadcast footage of an armoured personnel carrier
at the head of a column in Donetsk bearing markings
from the Russian city of Ryazan. If Russia is not
supplying separatists across the border, then why does
it continue to block any expansion of OSCE border
monitoring? Russia must implement the commitment
it made at Minsk to allow the monitoring of its border
with Ukraine, of which only 2 kilometres are currently
observed by the OSCE. Flights of OSCE unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) above Donetsk must also be
allowed to proceed unhindered. OSCE reports that
UAVs are being jammed electronically by militarygrade equipment call into question the credibility of the
commitment towards the Minsk agreements of those
who control that territory and their Russian supporters.
The United Kingdom deeply regrets that illegal
elections took place in separatist-controlled areas of

S/PV.7311

Donetsk and Luhansk on 2 November. The SecretaryGeneral could not have been clearer in his public
message that the elections were illegal under Ukrainian
law and seriously undermined the Minsk protocol. The
Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE was equally clear
that the elections ran counter to the letter and spirit of
the Minsk protocol and would further complicate its
implementation.
When the leadership of international organizations
to which Russia belongs issue such statements, one
would expect Russia to listen. Instead, Russia has
offered support to the elections. Russia has said that
it will respect the will of the citizens of the Donbas
despite the fact that, as President Poroshenko has made
clear, the so-called elections were “a farce at gunpoint
that had nothing in common with the real expression
of the people’s will”. Russia’s refusal to disavow the
elections is a continuation of a pattern of Russian
behaviour that flouts the Minsk agreements and is
designed to destabilize the situation in Ukraine.
Although the focus of today’s discussion is the
increase in fighting and the illegal elections held
in eastern Ukraine, the Council must not lose sight
of the deteriorating human rights situation in areas
under separatist control in eastern Ukraine and in
particular in the illegally annexed Crimean peninsula,
which the mission of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights is still unable
to visit. We continue to receive disturbing reports of
intimidation and harassment of Crimean Tatars, ethnic
Ukrainians and all those who have refused Russian
citizenship.
The de facto Crimean authorities have undertaken
a campaign to rid the Crimean peninsula of its
Ukrainian and Tatar identity. Citizenship provisions,
the educational syllabus and the media are all being
ruthlessly engineered to that end. Crimean Tatars are
being targeted by security forces; 18 prominent Tatars
remain missing and 1 body has been found. That is an
issue that we will need to come back to discuss when
the mission of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights produces its next
report.
We have said in the past that Russia must be
judged by actions, not words. What we see is that
Russia’s actions continue to escalate tensions rather
than contribute to a peaceful resolution of the crisis.
The Minsk agreements offer a framework that can

14-6225313/24

S/PV.7311

Ukraine

move the situation away from the current crisis and
towards stability based upon de-escalation and respect
for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
However, that requires genuine commitment of a kind
we have not yet seen from Russia. Instead, Russia is
taking a cynical and selective approach towards the
agreements while it continues its destabilization of
Ukraine. That must change.
We therefore call again on Russia to withdraw
its equipment, weapons and troops from Ukrainian
territory, as it undertook to do in September, and
to use its influence to secure a lasting ceasefire. Its
continued support for the armed separatists serves only
to escalate an already perilous situation and will only
lead to a further deterioration in Russia’s relations with
the international community.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General ad interim ToynbergFrandzen, Ambassador Apakan and Ambassador
Tagliavini for their briefings just now.
While the overall security situation in eastern
Ukraine has been stable recently, violent attacks have
continued to take place and have caused loss of life and
property. China is concerned about that. At the same
time, China welcomes the recent agreement signed
between Russia and Ukraine on natural gas and hopes
that the agreement will contribute to easing the current
tensions and enhancing a political solution to the crisis
in Ukraine. China believes that a political solution is
the only way to resolve the question of Ukraine. For
the next stage, all the parties concerned should truly
implement the Minsk agreement in a comprehensive
manner so as to ensure that a ceasefire is achieved, the
violence in eastern Ukraine is brought to an end and the
humanitarian situation in affected areas is alleviated.
The question of Ukraine involves both complex
history and current reality. A fundamental solution to
the question of Ukraine should take into full account
the legitimate rights, interests and wishes of all regions
and ethnic groups in Ukraine. It should also seek to
satisfy the reasonable concerns of all parties and
achieve a balance of interests among them. We hope
that all parties will continue to engage in constructive
dialogue with a view to agreeing on a balanced, lasting
and comprehensive political solution. All parties should
work together to achieve that goal.
China has always abided by the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of other

14/24

12/11/2014

countries and respected the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all countries, including Ukraine. China
supports all actions that will contribute to dialogue
and consultation and to finding a political solution to
the crisis. China will continue to play a positive and
constructive role in favour of a political solution to the
question of Ukraine.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen for his briefing, and
Ms. Tagliavini and Mr. Apakan for theirs.
Almost a year ago, Ukraine entered into a period
of unprecedented transformation after years of
administrative inefficiencies and political blockage.
This transformation came from deep within Ukrainian
society. Following the presidential election in May,
the Ukrainian parliamentary elections of October 26
represent a new phase in the process of democratization
taking place in Ukraine. The elections neatly confirm
the fundamental choices of the Ukrainian people in
favour of a deep transformation and a deep economic
and social modernization of Ukraine. The forward
march of Ukraine to the rule of law and political
pluralism can continue. The path will be long. Agreed
steps must now be translated into the implementation of
necessary reforms in the areas of the economy, rule of
law, decentralization and reconstruction.
However, since Ukraine has embarked on the path
of reform, it has been constrained in moving forward.
The separatist agitation helped from outside the country
has spread to the eastern part of Ukraine, first in
Crimea — annexed in violation of the law — and then
in the Donbas region, causing disturbances, human
rights violations and a serious humanitarian situation.
We condemn in the strongest terms this interference in
Ukrainian internal affairs, which has taken place with
flagrant disregard for its sovereignty and territorial
integrity. As occurred in Crimea in March, so-called
elections were held on 2 November by the separatists
in the part of Donbas that they occupy. These elections
violate the letter and the spirit of the Minsk protocol,
which provides for local elections in accordance with
Ukrainian law. It is essential to quickly reach full
compliance with the ceasefire and pursue further
negotiations on the provisional status of the regions of
the east.
With the signing of the ceasefire in Minsk on
5 September and an agreement on 19 September, a
diplomatic process was finally set in motion between

14-62253

12/11/2014

Ukraine

Kyiv and Moscow. These agreements remain a good
basis for bringing about an end to the crisis based on three
principles: respect for the ceasefire, monitoring of the
eastern border of Ukraine, and political discussions for
the purposes of finding a lasting solution. The priority
now must be to remain on the path of dialogue and to
continue the implementation of the agreements. Our
goal is to bring Ukrainians, separatists and Russians
to the negotiating table in order to stop the escalation.
That is a crucial aspect of the Minsk protocol.
Military movements last weekend at the RussianUkrainian border, confirmed by the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), are
cause for great alarm in that respect. Several dozens
of military vehicles including tanks entered Ukraine
in recent days. The strengthening of the military
presence of the separatists and the proliferation of troop
movements have raised fears of renewed fighting on a
larger scale. The announcement of the creation of a
Donbas army and a general mobilization is particularly
worrying. The separatists and their supporters must
prove they are ready for dialogue and the search for
peace. In this context, we call once again for Russia to
prevent the transfer of arms and men across its border
and to use all its influence on the separatists so that the
ceasefire is fully respected.
The issue of monitoring the Russian-Ukrainian
border remains a focal point for reaching a political
solution to the crisis. We expressed our readiness to
provide the OSCE with our surveillance capabilities.
The utility of drones has been shown in that they can
be alternative and exclusive sources of information.
We are in discussions with our Russian and Ukrainian
partners on the subject. These discussions are difficult,
but they are crucial if there is to be progress. We
also believe that the mandate of the OSCE mission in
Russian territory should be strengthened and expanded
as quickly as possible to other border posts.
In this context, our political approach is based on
firmness and dialogue. The sanctions are not intended
to punish but to encourage dialogue. Sanctions are a
tool, but they are not the only one. The conclusion of
the negotiations on the supply of natural gas 10 days
ago is a sign that some progress can be achieved
through dialogue. Europe gave a clear alternative —
heavier sanctions if the destabilizing actions continued
and worsened, or a re-examination of the question
if the situation on the ground bears witness to a real
implementation of the agreements of 5 September. It

S/PV.7311

is high time that we all rally in favour of de-escalation
and the re-establishment of good-neighbourly relations
between independent and sovereign States. No one has
interest to fan the flames and return to the rhetoric of
another century.
Mr. Olguín Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank the Assistant Secretary-General ad interim
for Political Affairs, Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen, and we
appreciate the presence of Ambassadors Apakan
and Tagliavini at this meeting. We also welcome
Ambassador Sergeyev, Permanent Representative of
Ukraine, to the Security Council today.
We regret that the Council has had to be convened
today and express our deep concern at the further
escalation of the crisis in the east and south of Ukraine.
We are concerned about information with respect to a
possible foreign military support in eastern Ukraine
and what the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) has told us. It is urgent that the
ceasefire be fully respected, monitored and verified by
the OSCE Special Monitoring Mission, in accordance
with the provisions of the Minsk agreements. We trust
that all the parties will be able to implement the Minsk
agreement, which is an inclusive political instrument
aimed at achieving peace and calm for the entire
population of eastern Ukraine.
We regret the worsening security situation in the
east of the country which has had serious consequences
for the civilian population, which continues to suffer
violations and human rights abuses from all actors.
It is urgent that the increasing humanitarian needs
in south-eastern Ukraine be addressed, as the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and
other United Nations agencies have pointed out. The
dramatic increase in the number of internally displaced
persons is one of the most disturbing elements. The
delivery of humanitarian assistance must go forward
without delay and in accordance with humanitarian
principles. The efforts of the international community
must be harnessed in support of the host Government,
which bears the primary responsibility for assistance
and protection.
We stress the importance of strengthening the rule
of law and the obligation to respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
General Assembly resolution 68/262 and international
law. It is also necessary to observe the principle of

14-6225315/24

S/PV.7311

Ukraine

non-intervention and non-interference in the internal
affairs of another State. Finally, we urge the parties to
seek a peaceful solution to this crisis through direct
political dialogue, exercise restraint and refrain from
unilateral actions that could increase tensions.
We reiterate our support for the efforts that the
Secretary-General and the United Nations continue
to undertake to resolve the situation in Ukraine. We
also hope that the various independent international
mechanisms will continue to contribute to finding a
solution to the crisis.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): An undeclared war
is being waged by Russia against Ukraine. By now, it is
barely making the world’s headlines because it is slow
and creeping — a few more metres of captured land,
a few more explosions, a few more Russian tanks, a
few more dead at a time. As Europe marks the twentyfifth anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall and the
reunification of Europe, Russia is doing its best to
resuscitate the bygone era of division and brinkmanship,
continuing its aggression against Ukraine, buttressed
by bogus claims of defending Russian speakers from
the advances of fascism and by outlandish accusations
against Europe and the West.
The abduction of an Estonian intelligence officer on
the Estonia side of the border and of a Ukrainian pilot in
Ukraine; the alarming rise in the intensity and gravity
of provocations involving Russian reconnaissance and
fighter jets over an increasing territory, from the Baltic
Sea region to Portugal, the United States, Canada
and Japan — all point to a more aggressive unilateral
Russian military posture going well beyond Ukraine’s
borders.
The conflict in Ukraine is not an internal affair.
It is neither a civil war nor a rebellion of disgruntled
citizens. It is Russia’s war against Ukraine for daring
to choose a different, European path. Sponsored by the
Kremlin, the illegal armed separatists, many of whom
carry Russian passports, have inflicted heavy damage
on the Ukrainian forces and civilian population before
and during the ceasefire, using sophisticated weaponry,
tanks, multiple rocket launchers and heavy artillery.
While Ukraine honoured the ceasefire agreement,
Russia-backed separatists used the time to rearm and
grab more territory. By now, those illegal armed groups
are probably better armed than some of the smaller
European armies — all thanks to Russia’s continued
support and supplies.

16/24

12/11/2014

We are profoundly worried by the recent reports
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Special Monitoring Mission
in Ukraine, registering unmarked convoys of trucks
carrying substantial amounts of heavy weaponry,
ammunition, Grad multiple-launch rocket systems and
howitzers, as well as armoured personnel carriers and
tanks, moving cross the border and westwards inside
the separatist held areas. That is a clear and blatant
violation of the ceasefire agreement, which called for
the withdrawal of Russian weapons and troops from
Ukraine and a sealing of the border under international
observation. Let us not forget that despite relevant
provisions of the Minsk protocol on the establishment of
a permanent OSCE presence along the Ukraine-Russia
border, Russia single-handedly prevented the expansion
of such a presence on the border, as a result of which
OSCE observers monitor only 2 kilometres of the
Russia-Ukraine border out of a total of 400 kilometres.
The holding by the separatists of illegal elections in
eastern Ukraine is another clear violation of the Minsk
agreements. Russia alone endorsed those sham elections
and even arranged the presence of “observers” — a
bunch of hard-line nationalists, Nazi sympathizers and
xenophobes, tried and tested in the illegal plebiscite
in Crimea. If Council members google the name
of Mateusz Piskorski, they will find him posing in
front of a swastika flag. Frank Creyelman is an open
xenophobe, known for demanding amnesty for those
who collaborated with the Hitler regime during the
Second World War. Marton Gyongyosy once suggested
that Hungarian Jews should be tallied up because they
pose a threat to the State. Srđa Trif ković is defender of
Slobodan Milošević and an Islamophobe. Ewald Stadler
is known for delivering one of the most racist speech
ever in a European parliament. The list could go on.
It is with the help of such odious characters that
Moscow is “fighting Fascism” in Ukraine. Little does it
matter that Ukraine’s population squarely rejected the
extreme forces during the recent national elections. As
Russia flirts with Europe’s extremist fringe, the myth
of Ukraine’s fascist junta continues to be advanced
by Russia’s propaganda machine. What the Russian
propaganda machine will not say, however, is that since
Russian troops “liberated” Crimea, the human rights
situation in the region has deteriorated dramatically,
and that the separatist-held regions in eastern Ukraine
have been repeatedly described by United Nations

14-62253

12/11/2014

Ukraine

human rights reports as an abyss of lawlessness and
criminality.
Russia’s disdain for the internationally accepted
norms of behaviour, international law and the Charter
of the United Nations is astounding, including the
manipulation of all things humanitarian. Under
the pretext of humanitarian aid, we have seen the
preparation of what may be the seventh convoy now to
be sent into Ukraine without Ukraine’s consent and in
violation of Ukraine’s borders. While the humanitarian
needs in the region have not diminished and remain
dire, the armed separatists have been gaining ground
with each new convoy. Today, the cost of Russia’s
aggression against Ukraine is some 400,000 displaced,
at least 4,000 killed, over 9,000 wounded, and some
5.2 million people living in conflict-affected areas.
The result of Russia’s aggression against Ukraine is
also Russia’s own young men returning home dead and
anonymous in the notorious Cargo 200 boxes.
The Geneva statement, the Berlin joint declaration,
the Minsk protocol and Minsk memorandum are
the latest additions to the long list of documents and
treaties that Russia has breached, from the 1991 AlmaAta Declaration, the 1994 Budapest Memorandum
on Security Assurances, the 1997 Black Sea
FleetAgreement Between the Russian Federation and
Ukraine, and the Charter of the United Nations itself.
Only a full and sustainable return to the ceasefire by all
parties can defuse this increasingly bloody crisis before
it gets completely out of hand — and that, with Russian
troops amassed near Ukraine’s borders and increasing
military movements in separatist held areas, could
happen at any time.
Ukraine has been doing its part, and must continue
to do so, by pursuing a wide range of necessary
reforms, fighting corruption and reaching out to the
affected regions to rebuild popular trust in the national
Government. The onus, however, is on Russia and
its militant proxies in eastern Ukraine to do theirs.
Russia must stop threatening its neighbours, accept
the spirit and letter of the Minsk agreements and allow
unhindered international monitoring of the UkrainianRussian border. Russia must disown the separatists and
condemn all attempts on the part of the self-proclaimed
leaders to create parallel power structures in eastern
Ukraine. As per the Minsk agreements, it must also
withdraw its equipment, weapons and troops from
Ukrainian territory and seal its borders to the movement
of arms and mercenaries into the separatist-held areas.

S/PV.7311

A peaceful settlement of the crisis in eastern
Ukraine is squarely in Russia’s hands. It bears full
responsibility for the further escalation of the situation,
and for creating another frozen conflict in Europe.
Attempts to redraw Europe’s borders by military force
25 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall are criminal
and undermine the very foundations on which the
United Nations is built.
My delegation thanks the OSCE and the United
Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights for the important observation and monitoring
work that is being done on the ground, and stresses
the importance of ensuring their continuing reporting
and presence in the conflict-affected area. Providing
an objective, unbiased alternative narrative is critical
as Russia’s propaganda machinery expands its reach.
My delegation reiterates its full support to Ukraine’s
independence, sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity. Ukraine’s European choice is not an imposition
from the outside. It is the choice of the Ukrainian
people who a year ago showed clearly that they have
had enough of corruption, enough of cronyism, enough
of kleptocracy. That choice was reaffirmed in the recent
national elections and must be respected by all.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would call on my colleagues on
the Security Council not to turn the Council’s meetings
into farces of rabid hysterics.
We carefully listened to the briefing of the Assistant
Secretary-General ad interim for PoliticalAffairs,
Mr. Toynberg-Frandzen and thank him for the
information provided. We also thank the Chief Monitor
of the Organization of Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine,
Mr. Apakan, and the representative of the OSCE
Chairperson-in-Office of the OSCE, Ms. Tagliavini.
We were interested to hear the evaluations of those who
are directly working on the ground every day to resolve
the situation in south-eastern the Ukraine.
At the same time, we believe that inviting
international players acting under an OSCE mandate
to Security Council meetings is not totally appropriate,
not to mention that it distracts them from their direct
obligations and unnecessarily politicizes practical
activities. The fact that inviting them was for precisely
that purpose has been confirmed by the statements we
have heard today by several Council members, who
have used our platform and the OSCE representatives

14-6225317/24

S/PV.7311

Ukraine

not to constructively seek a solution to an internal
Ukrainian crisis, but rather to make another foray into
propaganda, with new flourishes.
The situation in the Donetsk and Luhansk provinces
unquestionably remains tense. The ceasefire regime is
not being fully complied with, and the withdrawal of
heavy weaponry and equipment has not begun. On the
contrary, during the entire period of the ceasefire we
have seen Ukrainian forces concentrated along almost
all the front lines. It is important to note that that
concentration of the Ukrainian forces is taking place
very close to the cities of Donbas, which the rebels are
forced to protect. As a result, there have been clashes
between the parties along the front lines. Innocent
civilians are being killed every day, especially in
territory controlled by the Ukrainian armed forces in
the residential areas of Avdeyevka and Peski. There
is systematic shelling in residential areas of Donetsk
near the airport. On 6 November, a mortar shell
launched from that neighbourhood in a north-westerly
direction — which has been confirmed by the OSCE
monitors — fell on a Donetsk sports school soccer
field, killing two boys and injuring three. Cluster
munitions fired from the same position at the beginning
of October killed some workers from the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
In the Russian language the word “truth” exists
only in the singular. It has no plural, unlike the word
“lie”, and in the context of that silenced truth, it would
seem logical that the strengthened rebel positions the
OSCE monitors have seen are in areas that are under
constant attack by the armed forces. Apparently Kyiv’s
fear of the rebel forces is so great that in order to justify
their failures and the massive deployment of people and
equipment to the front, we are once again hearing loud
assertions about Russia sending weapons and members
of its regular army. In the Western capitals and through
NATO they are shouting pronouncements about virtual
deployment of convoys and fighters from Russian
territory. But no one is presenting any real facts to
confirm such assertions, because this is all empty talk
and the usual propagandistic lies. It should be clear that
in the current conditions, the Russia-Ukraine border is
subject to particularly careful attention and observation
and is easy to monitor, including from space.
We are unfortunately compelled to admit that we
are discouraged by the almost complete lack of reaction
from the OSCE Mission concerning the movements
and strengthening of positions of the Ukrainian armed

18/24

12/11/2014

forces and its other armed sub-divisions, which, by the
way, have their own “Daddies”, as one of our colleagues
expressed it here in the Chamber. We do not know to
whom or how they are accountable. But on 9 November
heavy artillery and tanks entered Karlivka; on
8 November Grad and Uragan multiple-launch rocket
systems and Scud missile launchers arrived in the
Luhansk area, and a group of 500 Ukrainian military
entered the Krasna Talivka district in the Luhansk
region. On 7 November, 32 tanks approached the eastern
outskirts of Horlivka, while 13 tanks, 15 Shilka selfguided anti-aircraft guns, 7 Tochka-U tactical missile
launch systems, 6 Grad multiple launch rocket systems
and a Smerch multiple rocket launcher headed for
Artemivsk. On 6 November a tank convoy entered the
outskirts of Yasynuvata in Donetsk province. Those are
statistics. Why are these facts not being talked about? It
must be clear to everyone that the lack of information on
this in the OSCE report creates a false and provocative
picture of what has happened. We hope that gap will
be filled.
We believe that the full, thorough compliance of
the parties to the conflict with the Minsk agreement
is essential. In that regard, he first major issue is
establishing a genuine ceasefire that both sides would
observe responsibly. No less important, however,
are the elements of the agreements concerning the
decentralization of authority and establishing an
inclusive nationwide dialogue and measures for
improving the humanitarian and economic situation in
Donbas. But the Ukrainian authorities are doing none
of those things.
We are concerned about President Poroshenko’s
decision to recall the law on a special status for specific
areas of Luhansk and Donetsk provinces. After all, that
is a cornerstone of the Minsk agreements, which will
essentially be made completely null and void. The law
was not ideal and had limited legitimacy; the previous
convocation of the Verkhovna Rada did not indicate
the boundaries of the districts that would have special
status, and the date of 7 December for elections cited
in the law was notdiscussed with representatives from
Donetsk and Luhansk and violated Ukraine’s own
Constitution. Despite that, the law could have become
a basis for further talks between Kyiv and the rebels.
Kyiv also failed to implement another important
provision of the Minsk agreement, the law granting
amnesty to those who have participated in the events.
Moreover, it appears that the Chair of the Verkhovna

14-62253

12/11/2014

Ukraine

Rada is proposing that it be rescinded. No guarantees of
personal security for participants in the consultations
were provided.
Turning now to the humanitarian aspects of the
agreements, we find that instead of taking measures
to rebuild Donbas, the Ukrainian Government has
established a new order for financing its budgetary
institutions and meeting social and pension
payments — they have simply been cancelled. How
can there be any talk of trust from ordinary people’s
point of view when their homes being bombed and they
themselves lack the wherewithal to live? In that regard,
we reject any accusations directed at Russia’s efforts to
send humanitarian convoys carrying food, medicines
and building materials to Donetsk and Luhansk. In the
worsening circumstances, such accusations are simply
amoral. And we have had enough of the fabrications
and distortions on this subject. Kyiv is informed about
every humanitarian convoy fully and in good time,
but getting its cooperation is problematic. We get the
feeling that it is not very concern about the fate of its
own people in those regions.
Regarding the elections held in the Luhansk and
Donetsk regions on 2 November, over which a number
of delegations have expressed exaggerated horror, as if
the process was not a democratic one, I would like to
emphasize the following points. The Russian Federation
respects the will of the people of the south-east as they
have expressed it. On the whole, the elections were
conducted in an orderly way and oter turn-out was high,
and certainly not forced at gunpoint. It is particularly
important that the elected representatives received
a mandate to resolve the practical issues of restoring
normal life in the region. They pose no threats to the
Minsk agreements and the peace process. Moreover,
they present a unique opportunity for launching a
sustainable dialogue between the central Ukrainian
authorities and the representatives of Donbas, with the
goal of finding comprehensive political solutions that
can eliminate the accumulated disagreements.
We have been talking since the spring about the
fact that there is no alternative to an inclusive dialogue
conducted on a mutually respectful and equal basis.
It is high time for Kyiv to fulfil the obligations it
undertook in Geneva, particularly given that it now has
representative partners in the negotiations.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Australia.

S/PV.7311

I thank our briefers today, including those from
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), in which we place great confidence
for its indispensable monitoring role on the ground.
We also welcome Ukraine’s Permanent Representative,
Ambassador Sergeyev.
Two weeks ago, Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Fernandez-Taranco told the Council
the Minsk protocols were not being fully implemented
and that the ceasefire was being violated regularly,
causing violent loss of life. He described how the
security situation was hampering the return and
settlement of internally displaced persons, which was
becoming increasingly urgent with the onset of winter.
His report was of concern then, but the situation in
eastern Ukraine has now deteriorated much further.
As Assistant Secretary-General Toyberg-Frandzen
has just told us, the ceasefire is “under continuous
and serious strain” and Minsk is “in jeopardy”.
Ambassador Tagliavini spoke of the “blunt disregard
for ... commitments undertaken in Minsk”. We have
seen consistent and credible reports of Russiansupplied military reinforcements, including heavy
weapons and tanks, moving to the front line of the
conflict in eastern Ukraine. The OSCE Chief Monitor,
Ambassador Apakan, has just described three separate
sightings of such convoys by OSCE monitors.
We must all be seriously concerned at these further
escalations in eastern Ukraine and at Russia’s ongoing
violations of the Minsk protocols, particularly its
failure to withdraw all its personnel from Ukraine.
And, in further violation of the Minsk protocols, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) has been prevented from monitoring adequately
the Ukraine/Russia border, where Russian troops
appear — once again — to be massing in significant
numbers. As Assistant Secretary-General ToybergFrandzen has just told us, failure to secure the border is
a threat to peace. This is all ominously reminiscent of
the situation prior to Russia’s purported annexation of
Crimea. We have seen this positioning before.
These recent developments come against the
backdrop of the so-called elections in eastern
Ukraine. These illegitimate, pseudo-elections have
been widely condemned around the world, including
by the Secretary-General. They were another direct
contravention of the Minsk protocol, which clearly

14-6225319/24

S/PV.7311

Ukraine

states that elections must be held “in accordance with
the law of Ukraine”.
Australia welcomes the legitimate parliamentary
elections that were held in Ukraine on 26 October. It
was encouraging to note the report from the OSCE
affiliated Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights praising the conduct of the Ukrainian
parliamentary elections and the impartial and efficient
Central Election Commission. Australia looks forward
to working with the new Government of Ukraine. It is
wrong, of course, that people in Crimea and many in
the separatist-controlled territories in eastern Ukraine
were unable to exercise their democratic right to vote.
We commend the Ukrainian authorities for their efforts
to enfranchise as many people as possible in these very
difficult circumstances.
The Jordanian representative a few moments ago
mentioned the risk from the deteriorating security
situation to access to the MH-17 crash site. I must
emphasize that Australia remains determined to do
all it can to bring those responsible for the downing of
MH-17 to justice. We are committed to making a full
international return to the MH-17 crash site when it
is safe to do so and in the company of our Dutch and
Malaysian partners. We appreciate Russian President
Putin’s confirmation to Australian Prime Minister
Tony Abbott yesterday, meeting in Beijing, of Russia’s
commitment to resolution 2166 (2014), which we all
adopted in July, including its support for a full, thorough
and independent international investigation into the
cause of the crash, and for ensuring complete access
for international experts to the crash site. This can,
however, happen only if Russian-backed and Russianarmed separatists comply with the ceasefire.
More broadly, adherence to the ceasefire and to the
commitments made in the Minsk protocol is essential
to move to a lasting political solution in Ukraine, which
must be based on respect for Ukraine’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity. But without a genuine engagement
from Russia, this plan will obviously come to nothing.
This brings us back to the root cause of the deteriorating
security situation in Ukraine: Russia’s persistent
campaign of deliberate destabilization. Russia’s actions
are continuing to fuel the unrest and are undermining
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine. The
Russian economy is already paying a heavy price for
that action, and any further actions can only inevitably
lead to even greater consequences for Russia.

20/24

12/11/2014

There is a clear path forward to end the violence in
eastern Ukraine: Russia must withdraw all support to
the separatists; remove all its personnel and assets from
Ukraine; and engage in genuine dialogue with Ukraine.
The OSCE must also be allowed to do its job and
monitor unimpeded the Ukraine/Russia border as set
out in the Minsk protocol. Russia’s continued refusal to
heed the international community’s call to de-escalate
the crisis can only lead to Russia’s further isolation.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I wish to start by thanking
all of the briefers for the information they brought
back from the ground. I thank Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen
and our colleagues the Ambassadors for their political
observations. I also thank the Security Council for having
responded to my letter of 7 November (S/2014/798) and
convened today’s meeting. In that letter, I drew the
attention of the Council to the dangerously deteriorating
security situation in the eastern part of Ukraine, which
threatens our territorial integrity and shows a tendency
to transform into a “frozen conflict”, and thus continues
to be a challenge to peace and stability in the whole of
Europe and beyond.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank all
present for the solidarity that they have demonstrated
today and in the past and for their constant support
for our territorial integrity and the inviolability of our
borders.
Ukraine remains devoted to the settlement of the
conflict through diplomatic means. The establishment
of a Trilateral Contact Group of senior representatives
of Ukraine, the Russian Federation and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Chairman-in-Office is aimed at finding a political
and diplomatic solution to the crisis. The Group
held several meetings, including those in Minsk, on
5 and 19 September. The agreements reached at those
meetings — a protocol and a memorandum dated 5 and
19 September, respectively — were supposed to become
an important step towards a sustainable, mutually
agreed ceasefire, a secure Russian/Ukrainian border
and the return of peace and stability to eastern Ukraine,
with the establishment of a special status zone, which
is to be empowered with strong local self-government
under Ukrainian law.

14-62253

12/11/2014

Ukraine

The commitment to the implementation of the
agreements was confirmed during the high-level
meeting held in Milan on 17 October, in which the
President of the Russian Federation participated.
Despite their claims, the separatists and the Russian
Federation, as their sponsor, continue to commit
gross violations of the Minsk agreements. SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, for his part, has expressed his
disappointment and called upon the parties involved to
fulfil their obligations.
I agree with what my Russian colleague said
earlier, that in Russian the word “truth” has no plural
form but that the word “lie” does. In that regard, I wish
to draw the Council’s attention to a few major points
concerning violations of the Minsk agreements.
The first point is that we agreed in Minsk on an
immediate bilateral ceasefire and the withdrawal of
illegal armed groups, military equipment and fighters
and mercenaries from the territory of Ukraine. What
happened instead? In breach of all of the agreements,
militants backed by Russian regular forces continue
to shell the Ukrainian military as well as civilian
locations, in particular using Grad and Smerch systems.
Since 5 September, Ukrainian forces and civilians have
been shelled over 2,800 times. A total of 131 Ukrainian
servicemen have been killed and more than 568 have
been wounded. At least 65 civilians lost their lives.
Militants inspired by Russia are disregarding
efforts to set up the touchline and continue to conduct
offensive operations, trying to expand the area under
their control. The large-scale recruitment and training
of militants is taking place in the area of Donbas,
which is temporarily out of Ukrainian Government
control, as well as on the Russian side of the border.
An offensive is expected in a number of locations
along the touchline. We cannot exclude the possibility
of an attempt to create a land corridor from Russia to
temporarily occupied Crimea.
Another clear indication of violation of the Minsk
agreements is the large amount of heavy weaponry, along
with personnel and fuel, that after 5 September illegally
entered Ukraine from Russian territory. A dangerous
shipment of illegal armament supplies from Russia to
militants was observed by Ukraine and the OSCE in the
past few days. On 6 November, Ukrainian authorities
detected the large-scale movement of heavy weaponry
from Russian territory to the town of Krasny Luch in
Ukraine: two columns, including 32 tanks, 16 howitzers

S/PV.7311

and 30 Kamaz trucks, with soldiers and ammunition.
The OSCE confirmed on 8 November the movement of
two columns of 50 fully loaded trucks. Almost every
truck had an artillery mount in tow. On 9 November,
the OSCE recorded a convoy of 17 trucks 15 kilometres
to the east of Donetsk. Five trucks transported Grad
systems. On 10 November, the OSCE spotted another
convoy of 17 trucks that supplied the terrorists with
122-millimetre howitzers and radio-location stations.
On the same day, a second convoy of trucks, three of
which carried radio-location stations, illegally crossed
the border. Yesterday, the OSCE recorded a convoy of
43 trucks in the eastern part of Donetsk. Five of these
trucks carried 122-millimetre howitzers and five others
carried Grads. A Pantsir-1 anti-aircraft missile and
gun system was spotted in the vicinity of the militants’
checkpoint near the town of Novoazovsk.
Illegal Russian convoys with heavy weapons are
reported literally every day. The Russian delegation
insisted today that its Government does not provide any
military assistance to the separatists in Ukraine. This
means that someone else besides the State has missiles,
tanks and guns, and is supplying them to the illegal
armed groups in Ukraine. It means that somebody else
in Russia has attack aircraft and helicopters that are
continually violating our State air border. The Russian
delegation keeps saying that the Russian armed forces
and military equipment have never crossed the borders
of Ukraine. Does this mean that it is not the Russian
Federation’s border guard that controls its side of
the Ukraine-Russia border, but someone else who is
permitting the illegal crossing of military convoys?
We have heard many times, here and from Moscow,
about their readiness to withdraw the vast amount of
arms and troops from the borders of Ukraine. Today,
we have all the evidence we need to conclude that
Ukraine is surrounded by a huge amount of armaments
and troops. We demand that Russia explain here and
now why it needs to maintain 200 tanks, 1,600 vehicles,
640 artillery units, 191 attack aircraft and 121 attack
helicopters on our borders. Still, neither Ukraine nor
the OSCE has received any kind of explanation.
The illegal movement of cargo from the territory
of the Russian Federation through the State border,
which the Russian delegation today characterized as
humanitarian aid, to the civilians of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions, is also a matter of deep concern to
Ukraine. It was organized without seeking the official
consent of the Ukrainian side, without completing the

14-6225321/24

S/PV.7311

Ukraine

necessary border and customs procedures by the relevant
Ukrainian authorities, and without coordinating with
the International Committee of the Red Cross for its
representatives to accompany the cargo, in breach of
the national legislation of Ukraine and the agreements
reached earlier. The latest so-called humanitarian
convoys crossed the State border of Ukraine on
31 October and 2 and 4 November. We demand that the
Russian Federation stop using the issue of humanitarian
aid as a cover for delivering illegal supplies of troops,
mercenaries and weapons to eastern Ukraine.
Contrary to these hostile actions and Russian
propaganda myths, Ukrainian forces are observing
the ceasefire regime. They make every effort to avoid
full-scale military actions and use weapons only to
defend themselves against militants’ attacks. Let me
say very clearly that the only reason why open war
has not started yet in the east of Ukraine is because of
Ukraine’s restraint. We remain committed to a peaceful
settlement and the Minsk arrangements, and urge
Russia to do the same.
We agreed in Minsk that the OSCE would ensure
the monitoring and verification of the ceasefire. We
also agreed to that the OSCE would ensure the ongoing
monitoring and verification of the Ukrainian-Russian
border, and envisaged the creation of security zones
in the border regions of Ukraine and the Russian
Federation. Where are we with that? Ukraine has
rendered all necessary assistance to the OSCE Special
Monitoring Mission in Ukraine to effectively implement
its mandate.
Russian-supported militants have not extended
security guarantees to OSCE personnel in all areas that
they control, and obstruct the Mission’s monitoring
activities. Moreover, in order to hide its violations,
the Russian military uses cutting-edge electronic
technology to jam OSCE drones, thereby disturbing
monitoring efforts in the region in spite of the Minsk
agreements. The Russian side has also refused to join the
consensus on the proposed expansion of the mandate of
the existing OSCE observation mission at two Russian
border checkpoints to all Russian checkpoints along the
400-kilometre section of the border in the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions.
With the Mission’s mandate set to expire on
23 November, we urge the Russian side to demonstrate
a clear commitment to the peaceful resolution of the
crisis in the eastern Ukraine by agreeing to allow OSCE

22/24

12/11/2014

observers to conduct their monitoring activities at all
border crossings with Ukraine and along the entire
length of the border in the area. That would contribute to
establishing effective border verification by the OSCE,
as foreseen in the Minsk agreements. Why is there such
a stark difference in the approaches adopted by Ukraine
and Russia to the role that the OSCE monitors can play
in the current situation? Ukraine is open to transparent
monitoring and control. Russia and its puppets are not.
Let me turn to my third point. We agreed in
Minsk to adopt the Ukrainian law on provisional
arrangements for local government in some areas of
Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts — the law on special
status — and to ensure within the provisions of that
law early local elections in some areas of Donetsk and
Luhansk oblasts. The new law was adopted by the
Ukrainian Parliament on 16 September. According
to that law, local elections in some areas of Donetsk
and Luhansk regions were scheduled for 7 December
and were intended to produce legitimate local selfgovernance that would make proper use of enhanced
powers, engage in an inclusive national dialogue and
ensure the reconstruction of Donbas, which has been
severely damaged by the military activities of illegal
armed groups. Ukraine rejects any rumours about
alleged additional agreements on this issue. What was
agreed was signed and what was signed was published,
including the OSCE press releases.
Contrary to this, on 2 November Russian-backed
terrorists held illegitimate elections for the so-called
presidents and parliaments of illegitimate selfproclaimed entities in certain areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions. These so-called elections were
conducted in violation of Ukrainian legislation and
international standards and contrary to the third and
ninth articles of the Minsk protocol. By opting to
recognize the illegal and illegitimate so-called elections
in certain areas of Donbas, Russia has chosen time and
again to violate the norms of international law and
fundamental OSCE principles and commitments. It has
chosen to act in breach of the Minsk agreements.
We are very concerned by the approach of the
Russian Federation that consists in manipulating
peoples’ right to self-determination. Once again, it
has, as we saw in Crimea, only one priority — to feed
separatism and create frozen conflicts in sovereign
States that Russia treats as zones of national interest.
That is why neither Ukraine nor the international
community will ever recognize the illegal referendum

14-62253

12/11/2014

Ukraine

in Crimea or the illegal pseudo-elections in certain
areas of the Donetsk and Lugansk regions, whatever
their outcomes.
The Ukrainian leadership has already expressed its
deep concern over the violation of the Minsk agreements
by Russia and the ring-leaders under its control in eastern
Ukraine. Illegal elections and continuous violations of
the ceasefire regime by militants, as well as a sharp
increase in the illegal supply of weapons and military
equipment across the border by the Russian Federation,
have seriously undermined the Minsk process towards
a peaceful settlement. They undermine any trust placed
in signatories who fail to keep their word. Nevertheless,
Kyiv has confirmed its commitment to continuing to
observe the ceasefire regime in line with the Minsk
agreements, and called on all involved in the process to
swiftly resume settlement efforts.
We are seeking to make use of all possible
mechanisms to forge a peaceful solution to the situation.
We call on Russia, the European Union and the United
States to meet together in the Geneva format in order to
send a clear and consolidated message as well as strong
impetus to the parties concerned to strictly adhere to
the letter and spirit of the Minsk agreements. However,
we will not yield to Russia’s attempts to compel implicit
international recognition of the ring leaders of illegal
entities in the Donbas by inviting them to this meeting.
We continue to demand that the Russian Federation
stop backing illegal armed groups; immediately
and strictly comply with the Minsk agreements by
withdrawing its military forces and weaponry from
the territory of Ukraine; establish joint customs and
border control; release all Ukrainian hostages captured
by Russian forces and their proxies; and stop its
protracted military exercise in close vicinity to our
borders. We continue to call on the Council to finally
assume its Charter responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security in order to put an
end to the Russian aggression against Ukraine.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
I do not want to engage in polemics with the Permanent
Representative of Ukraine, but all the same I wish to
call attention to a few things.

S/PV.7311

First, I have said, and I repeat, that of course the
ceasefire and the normalization of the situation are
the key tasks, but they require trust. When we heard
the statements of Ukraine’s representatives in late
October, early November and more recently, we were
convinced that Kyiv was not committed to a diplomatic
solution to the conflict. From the very beginning, the
Kyiv authorities have made no secret of the fact that the
ceasefire would be used for a realignment of forces and
the pursuit of military activities.
In the framework of what I have said, there is only
one truth. I would like to cite two statements, the first
made by Yuri Lytsenko, an adviser to the President of
Ukraine, on 24 October, before the elections, on the
Ukrainian radio. He said:
“The ceasefire and the achievement of peace
are going to work in our favour. All four tank
factories are working three shifts. Several hundred
armed vehicles have been fully rebuilt and have
entered the anti-terrorist operation area. We need
the ceasefire regime to receive high-tech equipment
and military and financing assistance from the
West.”
Markiyan Lubkivsky, an adviser to the head of the
Security Service of Ukraine, also said on the national
radio, on 2 November and again on 7 November:
“Sooner or later, we are going to have to engage
in very proactive activities” and that “we will need
three or four years to resolve the situation. We
think we could win this war based on the Croatian
scenario. In 1991, Croatia began the war and it
ended in 1995 as a result of successful special
operations.”
As we can see, there is not a single word about the
implementation of the Minsk agreement here, just about
a victory on the battlefield.
Secondly, of course some activities do not help the
situation from the Ukrainian perspective. For example,
with respect to the serious matter of the delimitation
of territory, an agreement had been almost 80 per cent
concluded. Then suddenly on 28 October, the Ukrainian
representative General Dumansky, without offering
any reasons, annulled an accord in which over 80 per
cent of the lines of opposing forces had been delimited.
Lastly, as I understand it, the Ukrainian representative
asked me here and now to an answer the question why
several hundred units and vast amounts of Russian

14-6225323/24

S/PV.7311

Ukraine

military equipment are being concentrated on the
Ukrainian border. First, I cannot answer because I do
not know if that is true or what sources of information
are being cited. Those are horrific numbers; they are
very striking, even to me. I am ready to respond to that
question in a more specific manner. It will be agreed
that the equipment and the Russian armed forces are
on the territory of my country and are not threatening
Ukraine. They are not leaving my country. Thus,
inciting such emotions in the Security Council, as if
there were going to be such huge attack on Ukraine,
does not help the constructive discussions that all here
are counselling and that we too endorse.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Ukraine to make a further statement.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I too do not want to
continue this dialogue because it is going nowhere. I
would just remind our Russian colleague, citing one of
the most famous Russian writers, Turgenev:
(spoke in Russian)
“There is one truth for everyone. Everyone has
their own truth, but there is only one real truth.”
(spoke in English)
The problem is that the Russian representative
quoted two advisers to somebody, and raised the
issue of trust. I do not have the quotation, but all of us
remember that three or four times the Russian President
promised the world community — the last time it was a
decision — to withdraw those troops. That is why they
are worrying about what is going on. We are worrying
about where the armaments are coming from — from

24/24

12/11/2014

the regular Russian army or from somebody else
in Russia? That is the question. I am asking about
the position of the Russian leadership. Why, despite
the promises, are huge amounts of armaments and
personnel — around 49,000 people — still positioned
along the Ukrainian border? This is about trust. How
can we come back if we have lost confidence, if the
Russian leadership — not our adviser to somebody,
stating something — promised and and yet has failed
to deliver?
I will give the Council the figures. They are not
secret because they come from different sources.
Council members may brief their colleagues in any
format convenient to them, but that is what we have
from a variety of sources. The OSCE keeps demanding,
under agreements to which the Russian Federation is
party, information concerning those flanks, limits and
excercises which Russia is obligated to report. What are
the troops doing? They have been carrying out exercises
since February or March, without explanation. That is
about trust.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. Before concluding, I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General ad interim
Toynberg-Frandzen and Ambassadors Apakan and
Talgliavini for their briefings, especially given the late
hour in Kyiv and the demands on both of them on the
ground.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

14-62253
