TWENTY-THIRD

YEAR
th
MEETING: 2 MAY 1968

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS’
Page
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 14 19) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/8560);
(bl Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution
2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem (S/8146) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV.1419

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutionsand Decisionsof the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FOURTEENHUNDREDAN

NINETEENTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Thursday, 2 May 1968, at 11.30 a.m.
President :Lord CARADON (United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

members of the Council and to the Secretary-General for
taking up a few moments of their time, but I should like to
ask the President what action has been taken in response to
the request made by the Algerian delegation at the 1418th
meeting that the photographs to which the Jordanian
representative referred in his statement should be appended
to the record of that meeting, either as an annex or in
whatever manner seems most appropriate. I have before me
the record of the meeting, but I do not know what has been
done regarding my request. Yesterday the President was
good enough to say that he would report to us,this morning
on what would be done about it.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Algeria, Brazil, Canada, China, ?lenmark, Ethiopia, France,
Hungary, India, Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l41 9)

I,

Adoption of the agenda.

5. The PRESIDENT: I am grateful to the representative of
Algeria for bringing up the matter which he duly raised
yesterday. I made inquiries on the matter that he proposed
to us, and I learned that the photographs to which he
referred were previously circulated as an attachment to the
representative of Jordan’s letter to the Secretary-General,
which was circulated this morning as document S/8568 of
1 May 1968 and also as a document in the General
Assembly series. I had thought that since the same
photographs had been fully circulated both to the Security
Council and to the General Assembly that might meet the
request of the representative of Algeria, I would wish to
inquire from him whether he considers that adequate, or
whether he wishes further action to be taken,

2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/8560);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under General
Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to
Jerusalem (S/8 146).
Adoption of the agenda

The agenda wasadopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 25 April 1968 from the Permanent
Representative of Jordan addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/8560);
lb) Report of the Secretary-General under General Assembly resolution 2254 (ES-V) relating to Jerusalem
(S/81 46)

6. Mr, BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
French): I thank the President for his very explicit reply.
However, for reasons of form rather than of principles-and
those reasons are very important to us-my delegation
would like its request to be considered. I know that the
photographs have been circulated to Members of the
Organization in the document containing the communication from the Jordanian representative; but it seems
to me that if a member of the Security Council makes a
request to which there is no objection, it is only fair that it
be taken into consideration. I could advance other reasons
in support of my request, but I do not wish to take up the
Council’s time.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decision
previously taken by the Council, I shall now invite the
representatives of Jordan and Israel to take places at the
Council table in order to participate, without the right to
vote, in the Council’s discussion.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. M, H. El-Farra
(Jordan) and Mr, Y. Telcoah (Israel) took places at the
Council table.

7. Therefore, for the reasons I have already given and for
other reasons which I do not wish to enter into at this
point, I wish, with all due respect, to repeat my hope that,
since there are no objections, my request will be taken into
account and the photographs in question appended to the
record of the 1418th meeting.

2. The PRESIDENT: The Council will now continue its
consideration of the question before it. First I would ask
the Secretary-General if he has any report to make to us.
3. Before I call on the Secretary-General, the representative of Algeria wishes to speak on a point of order.
4. Mr.
French):

8. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will have heard
that the representative of Algeria renews the suggestion he
made to us yesterday that the documents in question

BOUATTOURA
(Algeria) (translated from
I wish to apologize to the President, to the
1

should be circulated as an annex to the record of the
1418th meeting. I shall, therefore, seek any view any
member of the Council may wish to express on this matter.
9. If there are no views which members of the Council
wish to express, I shall take it that there is no objection to
the proposal put forward by the representative of Algeria.
Since there is no objection, I shall take it that it is so
decided.
It was so decided.

10. I shall now turn to the Secretary-General and ask him
if he has any statement to make to us.
11. The SECRETARY-GENERAL;
The parade in Jerusalem which was the subject of Security Council resolution
250(1968) of 27 April 1968 has been held today as
scheduled. A further report on the details of the parade as
requested of me by that resolution, presenting such
information of a reliable nature ashas been available to me,
will be circulated in the Council early this afternoon.

Litho

in U.N.

Price: $U.S.O.SO

(or

equivalent

12. The PRESIDENT:
The Secretary-General was good
enough to give me advance notice of the statement he has
just made and I have had an opportunity of consulting a
number of members of the Council. I think it is the generJ
wish of the Council that we should await the further report
from the Secretary-General before we continue our discussion. I would therefore seek the views of the Council on
whether we should adjourn our meeting this morning aad
meet again this afternoon. I should also report to tlrc
Council that I have received a request that the Council meet
as soon as possible after the report of the Secretary-General
becomes available. A proposal has been put to me that the
Council should resume at 2.30 o’clock this afternoon, or as
soon as possible thereafter. Unless there are any other views
which members of the Council wish to express as to the
best time for us to resume, I would therefore propose that
we meet at 2.30 o’clock this afternoon, or as soon ar;
possible thereafter. I would hope that we may use the titlp:
in the interval for valuable consultations on how tltc
Council may hope to proceed.

in other

The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

currencies)

35358-March

1970-2JOo
