UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1998/19
2 July 1998
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH, FRENCH
AND RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3901st meeting of the Security Council, held on 2 July 1998, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Croatia", the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 11 June 1998 (S/1998/500) pursuant to its resolution 1145 (1997)
of 19 December 1997.
"The Security Council notes that the overall security situation in the
Danube region is relatively stable. It also notes that the generally
satisfactory performance of the Croatian police in the region is largely
due to comprehensive monitoring by the United Nations Police Support Group
and the special attention paid to the situation by the Ministry of the
Interior of the Republic of Croatia. However, the Council is concerned
that, despite the large presence of the Croatian police, ethnically-related
incidents, evictions and housing intimidation cases have not been stopped,
and that such incidents have increased in the recent period.
"The Security Council expresses its grave concern that a large number
of Serb residents and displaced persons have emigrated from the Republic of
Croatia since late 1996, mainly because of continued security incidents,
ethnically-related intimidation, a dire economic situation, bureaucratic
hurdles, discriminatory legislation and a stalled return programme. A
continuation of this trend could have a seriously negative effect on the
restoration of a multi-ethnic society in the Republic of Croatia. The
Council, therefore, welcomes the adoption by the Government of Croatia, on
20 June 1998, of a nationwide programme for the return and accommodation of
displaced persons, refugees and resettled persons (S/1998/589) and calls
for its prompt and full implementation at all levels, including the
abolition of discriminatory property laws and the establishment of
effective mechanisms allowing owners to recover their property. It
stresses the importance of the prompt and full implementation of the
Programme on Reconciliation at all levels throughout Croatia and of
preventing and responding to incidents of harassment and unlawful
evictions.

98-19161 (E)

020798

/...

S/PRST/1998/19
English
Page 2

"The Security Council reiterates the continuing obligations of the
Government of Croatia under the Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (S/1995/951, annex) as well as under
international conventions and other agreements. It notes with satisfaction
that the Government of Croatia has met the majority of its obligations
concerning the provision of public services and employment within the
public sector, set out in the Basic Agreement. The Council, however,
reiterates that a number of obligations have yet to be fulfilled in such
areas as the implementation of the Convalidation Law and the Amnesty Law,
the functioning of local municipalities and the permanent funding of the
Joint Council of Municipalities. In this regard, the Council stresses the
significance of the Article 11 Commission, formed under the provisions of
article 11 of the Basic Agreement, as a key instrument in encouraging the
Government of Croatia to meet its obligations fully and in underscoring
continued international commitment to the successful completion of peaceful
reintegration.
"The Security Council calls upon the Government of Croatia to improve
police response to ethnically-related incidents, evictions and housing
intimidation cases and to take other measures to strengthen public
confidence in the police, including through public information and police
preventive action. In this context, the Council stresses the importance of
the implementation of the guidelines issued by the Ministry of the Interior
on 9 January 1998 and the institution of a community policing programme by
the Ministry.
"The Security Council fully supports the activities of the United
Nations Police Support Group and the United Nations Liaison Office in
Zagreb. It welcomes the decision of the OSCE Permanent Council of
25 June 1998 to deploy civilian police monitors to assume, from
15 October 1998, the responsibilities of the United Nations Police Support
Group. It also welcomes the invitation by the Representative of the
Secretary-General to the Head of the OSCE Mission in Croatia to begin
planning for the intended transfer of the police monitoring function in the
region to the OSCE. It supports the establishment of a timetable for the
handover of the functions of the Support Group to the OSCE and agrees with
the intention of the Secretary-General to reduce gradually the number of
civilian police monitors, under the conditions specified in his report.
The Council looks forward to a report by the Secretary-General by
mid-September detailing the arrangements for the termination of the Support
Group mandate by 15 October 1998."

-----
