A /70/PV.52

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

52nd plenary meeting

Friday, 13 November 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda items 15, 116 and 123 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
United Nations reform: measures and proposals
The President: In connection with agenda items 15
and 116, members will recall that the Assembly held the
United Nations Summit for the adoption of the post-2015
development agenda at its 4th to 11th plenary meetings,
from 25 to 27 September, and adopted resolution 70/1,
entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, at its 4th plenary meeting,
on 25 September.
Mr. González Franco (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): The delegation of Paraguay stresses the
importance of the implementation and comprehensive
and integrated follow-up of all decisions adopted at
the major United Nations conferences and summits.
They must help us achieve the goals of sustainable
development adopted in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development (resolution 70/1). The Republic of
Paraguay believes that no one must be left behind in
our efforts to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable
development, as manifested in its economic, social and
environmental aspects. In order to achieve those goals,
we must take into account the specific circumstances of
all countries, especially the most vulnerable.

In that regard, my country’s delegation stresses
the progress achieved by and outcomes of all the
major conferences and summits of United Nations
organizations, in particular the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, the
third United Nations World Conference on Disaster
Risk Reduction, the third International Conference
on Financing for Development, the third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States and
the United Nations Summit to adopt the post-2015
development agenda, in addition to other instruments
recently adopted within the international framework.
The delegation of Paraguay underscores its
readiness to actively contribute to the processes under
way, aimed at the adoption of documents resulting
from the twenty-first session of the Conference of the
Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change — in which we must recognize
all the vulnerabilities of the landlocked developing
countries to climate change, such as desertification,
droughts and floods — and the World Summit on
the Information Society, as well as the review of the
Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the Decade 2011-2020.
In that regard, we must not lose sight of the fact
that, while every country faces specific challenges
in its quest for sustainable development, particular
attention must be paid to the most vulnerable countries,
such as landlocked developing countries. The Vienna
Declaration and Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries is particularly relevant in that
respect. From a pragmatic point of view, the delegation

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-36475 (E)

*1536475*

A/70/PV.52

13/11/2015

of Paraguay stresses the urgent need to develop
and improve the systems for collecting, analysing
and disseminating data through the implementation
of appropriate processes for producing official,
comparable and reliable information for the successful
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Vienna
Programme of Action, as well as other international
framework instruments.

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Ihor Humennyi, Mr. Conrad Hunte,
Mr. Eihab Omaish, Mr. Babou Sene and Mr. Tesfa
Alem Seyoum as members of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for a
three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2016?

Accomplishing those goals will be possible only
if our capacities and potential are all complemented,
supported and strengthened by all participants in the
world alliance for sustainable development. Similarly,
regarding the Vienna Declaration and Programme
of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries, my
country’s delegation calls on all landlocked countries,
transit countries, their development partners, the United
Nations system and all other actors to implement at
all levels, in a coordinated and coherent manner and
without delay, the measures that have been approved
in the six priority areas of the Vienna Programme of
Action.

(b) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Contributions

Finally, I reiterate the firm commitment of the
Government of the Republic of Paraguay to ensuring
the coordinated and comprehensive implementation of
the decisions adopted at the conferences and summits
of the United Nations.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda items 15, 116
and 123.
Agenda item 114 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/539)
The President: In paragraph 6 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2016: Mr. Ihor Humennyi
(Ukraine), Mr. Conrad Hunte (Antigua and Barbuda),
Mr. Eihab Omaish (Jordan), Mr. Babou Sene (Senegal)
and Mr. Tesfa Alem Seyoum (Eritrea).

2/3

It was so decided.

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/540)
The President: In paragraph 4 of its report,
the Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members of
the Committee on Contributions for a three-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2016: Mr. Syed Yawar Ali
(Pakistan), Ms. Jasminka Dinić (Croatia), Mr. Edward
Faris (United States of America), Mr. Toshiro Ozawa
(Japan), Mr. Tõnis Saar (Estonia) and Mr. Josiel
Motumisi Tawana (South Africa).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint Mr. Syed Yawar Ali, Ms. Jasminka Dinić,
Mr. Edward Faris, Mr. Toshiro Ozawa, Mr. Tõnis Saar
and Mr. Josiel Motumisi Tawana as members of the
Committee on Contributions for a three-year term of
office beginning on 1 January 2016?
It was so decided.
(d) Appointment of a member of the Board
of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/541)
The President: The Fifth Committee recommends
in paragraph 4 of its report that the General Assembly
appoint the German Supreme Audit Institution as a
member of the Board of Auditors for a six-year term of
office beginning on 1 July 2016.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint the German Supreme Audit Institution as a
member of the Board of Auditors for a six-year term of
office beginning on 1 July 2016?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-items (a), (b) and (d) of agenda item 114?

15-36475

13/11/2015

It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee under
agenda items 135 and 137. If there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Fifth Committee which are before it today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote. The positions of
delegations regarding the recommendations of the Fifth
Committee have been made clear in the Committee and
are reflected in the relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7
of decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
when the same draft resolution is considered in a Main
Committee and in a plenary meeting, a delegation
should as far as possible explain its vote only once, that
is, either in the Committee or in the plenary meeting,
unless that delegation’s vote in the plenary meeting is
different from its vote in the Committee.
May I further remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before I begin to take action on the recommendations
contained in the report of the Fifth Committee, I should
like to advise representatives that we are going to
proceed to take decisions in the same manner as was

A/70/PV.52

done in the Fifth Committee unless notified otherwise
in advance.
Agenda item 135
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/439)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/8).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 135.
Agenda item 137
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/70/450)
The President: The Assembly has before it a draft
resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee in
paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 70/9).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 137.
The meeting rose at 10.20 a.m.

15-364753/3
