S/2016/60

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 January 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014),
2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the twenty-third submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014), paragraph 10 of Council resolution 2165
(2014), paragraph 5 of Council resolution 2191 (2014) and paragraph 5 of Council
resolution 2258 (2015), in which the Council requested the Secretary -General to
report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolutions by all parties to the
conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The information contained herein is based on the information available to
United Nations agencies on the ground, from the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic, other Syrian sources and open sources. Data from United Nations
agencies on their humanitarian deliveries have been reported for the period from
1 to 31 December 2015. More recent data have been included, where available.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Widespread conflict and high levels of violence continued throughout the
Syrian Arab Republic in December. Indiscriminate and disproportionate aerial
bombings and ground attacks by Government forces and indiscriminate shelling by
non-State armed opposition groups and designated terrorist groups continued to k ill,
injure and displace civilians. The conduct of hostilities by all parties continued to be
characterized by a widespread disregard for the rules of international humanitarian
law and the obligation of all parties to protect civilians.
4.
In December, deaths of civilians were reported by different actors. The Syrian
Network for Human Rights documented the killing of 1,446 civilians, while the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic reported that 222 civilians had been killed
and 585 injured. The United Nations received reports of the alleged use of barrel
bombs by Government forces, reportedly resulting in the deaths of 76 individuals,
including 12 children in December. The United Nations was not able to
independently verify those numbers.

16-00701 (E)

*
1
6
0
7

220116

S/2016/60

5.
Heavy fighting continued to be reported in Damascus and Rif Dimashq in
December. Government forces carried out several offensives. According to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
between 4 and 16 December, some 72 civilians in Duma, including 19 children,
were reportedly killed in air strikes and ground offensives. OHCHR also received
reports of air strikes hitting the Souk al-Tijari market in Jisreen on 4 December,
reportedly killing 26 civilians, including six children. On th e same day, the main
square in Kafr Batna was reportedly hit, killing 15 civilians, including four children.
On 25 December, the leader of the Army of Islam, Zahran Alloush, and five other
members of the group were killed in an air strike on Duma, which, a lthough
publicly claimed by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, was attributed to
the Russian Federation by the Army of Islam.
6.
On 22 and 23 December, Syrian Government forces reportedly attacked a
rebel-held town south-west of Damascus, in Moadamiya, with artillery fire and
helicopters dropping barrel bombs. Local activists, opposition groups and monitors
accused the Government of using chemical weapons in the operation, alleging that
five people, including one civilian, died of suffocation following a missile attack on
22 December. It was not possible to verify that claim.
7.
Non-State armed opposition groups continued to launch mortars and shell
Damascus city during the reporting period. According to sources on the ground, on
2 December, 3 civilians were reportedly killed and 26 others injured, including
14 students at the Al-Sham Higher Institute in the Rukn al-Din neighbourhood,
which was hit by mortars. On the same day, a mortar struck the Civil Engineering
College in the Baramkeh neighbourhood of Damascus city, injuring two students
and a professor. According to reports by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic,
on 3 December, 14 mortars and rockets hit the capital, killing 3 persons and injuring
26 others. Later, on 8 December, 12 rockets and missiles hit a school, a hospital and
sports facilities, injuring seven persons. On 12 and 13 December, 91 rockets and
missiles hit mainly civilian areas, killing 15 persons and injuring 56 others. On
14 December, the Permanent Mission of the Syrian Arab Republic to the United
Nations in Geneva informed OHCHR that the “Beiruni” and “French” hospitals in
Damascus had been hit on 8 December by rocket fire, killing one staff member and
injuring another.
8.
On 19 December, Lebanese militant and member of Hizbullah, Samir Kuntar,
was killed by an explosion that destroyed a six-story residential building in
Jaramana, south-east of Damascus. The explosion also reportedly killed eight
others, including Hizbullah commanders, and injured several more. According to
official Syrian sources, Samir Kuntar was killed by a “rocket attack”. Hizbullah
alleged that two Israeli jets had penetrated Syrian airspace to carry out the attack.
The United Nations is not in a position to confirm or deny that assertion.
9.
During the reporting period, intensive fighting continued in different parts of
Aleppo governorate. Pro-Government ground forces, supported by Government and
Russian air strikes, hit areas controlled by non-State armed opposition groups close
to the Turkish-Syrian border, including several villages close to the Bab al -Hawa
and Bab al-Salam border crossings. In southern Aleppo, Government forces made
advances, seizing the towns of Khan Touman, Karasna and surrounding areas from
non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah Front on 20 December.
Government forces also continued to advance in eastern rural Aleppo towards the

2/13

16-00701

S/2016/60

Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) strongholds of Deir Hafir and Bab. On
29 December, ISIL reportedly started to withdraw from B ab town and surrounding
villages north-east of Aleppo. On 11 December, non-State armed opposition groups
made advances against ISIL, in the northern countryside of Aleppo, along its
remaining stretch of border with Turkey, and seized Hamzat village.
10. On 26 December, the newly established Arab-Kurdish coalition known as the
Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) made advances against ISIL, with support from the
coalition forces led by the United States of America, capturing the Tishreen Dam in
north-east rural Aleppo. Operations at the dam were suspended for several days. In
Aleppo city, non-State armed opposition groups continued to shell civilian parts of
Government-controlled areas. On 9 December, for example, at least 4 civilians were
reportedly killed and more than 50 wounded when the Nile neighbourhood was
shelled.
11. In Ladhaqiyah, in the north-western part of the Syrian Arab Republic,
Government forces, with support from Russian air strikes, continued their offensive
against non-State armed opposition groups. On 18 December, Government forces
recaptured the Nuba hilltop, in Akrad Mountain, and on 28 December, it recaptured
Burj al-Kassab in Rabia subdistrict.
12. In Homs governorate, fighting continued between Government forces and
non-State armed opposition groups. On 4 December, 10 civilians, including three
children, were killed when a rocket reportedly launched by Government forces hit a
residential area in Talbiseh. On 29 December, Government forces recaptured
Maheen town and Hwarin village and regained control of several hilltops and farms
around Qaryatein. On 12 December, ISIL claimed responsibility for a vehicle -borne
improvised explosive device in the Zahra neighbourhood of Homs city, killing at
least 16 civilians and injuring 45 others. On 28 Dece mber, a car bomb, which was
not claimed by any group, exploded in the same neighbourhood, reportedly killing
some 30 civilians and injuring another 190 people.
13. In Hasakah governorate, SDF continued its offensive against ISIL in the
southern part of the governorate, with support from the United States-led coalition
forces and the Kurdish People’s Protection Units, reportedly heavily shelling the
town of Arishah on 14 December. Elsewhere in Hasakah, three tankers filled with
explosives were reportedly detonated by ISIL on 10 December in Tel Tamer, killing
22 civilians. On 30 December, bombs were reportedly detonated by ISIL in two
restaurants in the predominantly Christian neighbourhood of Westa in Qamishli
town, killing at least 16 civilians and injuring 30 others.
14. In Dayr al-Zawr governorate, on 5 December, ISIL reportedly hit the
Government-held neighbourhood of Joura in Dayr al-Zawr city with mortar rounds,
killing four civilians and injuring several others. On 22 December, at least
9 students were reportedly killed and 20 others injured when mortars fired by ISIL
struck a school in the Hrabish area of Dayr al-Zawr city. The following day, ISIL
reportedly captured Jafra town and the Al-Sena’a district of Dayr al-Zawr city.
15. In Dar’a governorate, fighting intensified between Government forces and
non-State armed opposition groups. Five civilians were allegedly killed by heavy
artillery by Government forces on 3 December in Sanamain and six more were
reportedly killed the following day. On 23 Decemb er, an air strike hit a residential
area in the centre of Sheikh Miskine town, reportedly killing eight civilians,

16-00701

3/13

S/2016/60

including five children. Two civilians were reportedly killed two days later, when
the Government launched an aerial offensive in the area.
16. The Russian Federation and the United States-led coalition forces continued
operations against ISIL across the Syrian Arab Republic in December. OHCHR
reported that, during a 24-hour period between15 and 16 December, Russian
authorities confirmed that they had carried out 59 military sorties against
212 targets in the governorates of Aleppo, Hama, Hasakah, Homs, Idlib, Ladhaqiyah
and Raqqah and, between 25 and 30 December, 286 military sorties in Aleppo,
Damascus, Hama, Hasakah, Homs, Idlib, Ladhaqiyah and Raqqah. At the same
time, the United States Central Command confirmed that it had conducted at least
161 strikes against ISIL targets in the governorates of Aleppo, Dayr al -Zawr,
Hasakah and Raqqah in December.
17. OHCHR received a number of reports alleging that there had been civilian
casualties as a result of air strikes. Reports of the origin of the air strikes, however,
could not be adequately ascertained. For example, on 6 December, air strikes
allegedly hit Qahtaniya village and Hettin Orchard village in rural Raqqah, allegedly
killing at least 15 civilians and injuring at least 25 others. On 16 December,
21 civilians were reportedly killed in an air strike in Raqqah city, destroying several
buildings, including a mosque. According to the Syrian Observatory for Human
Rights, Russian air strikes have killed more than 2,300 people and air strikes by the
United States led-coalition have killed 299 people.
18. The final weeks of the reporting period also saw an increase in public
expressions of concern by non-governmental organizations and monitors regarding
the air campaign by the Russian Federation. On 20 December, Human Rights Watch
released a report documenting the use of cluster munitions on at least 20 occasions
since the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the Russian Federation
began their joint air campaign on 30 September. In the report, it is stated that such
weapons are internationally banned and inherently indiscriminate. The Russian
Federation has consistently and strongly rejected this reporting as biased and full of
ungrounded claims and has denied the use of cluster munitions.
19. Civilian displacement continued throughout the Syrian Arab Republic in
December, with over 76,000 people displaced from Aleppo, Dar’a, Idlib, Raq qah
and Rif Dimashq governorates. In Aleppo, for example, clashes between the
non-State armed opposition groups and Government forces displaced approximately
10,000 people from several areas in the southern part of the governorate, including
from Khan Touman, to north of the governorate. In Idlib governorate, intensified air
strikes in northern and western parts of rural Jisr Ash -Shugur displaced
approximately 4,700 persons within the district. An additional 500 people fled to
Ladhaqiyah governorate and 1,750 to Turkey. In December, some 17,000 displaced
persons returned to Tamannah area in south-east Idlib governorate after being
displaced to Ma’arat al-Numan since October 2015. In Dar’a governorate, following
intense aerial bombardment, over 10,000 people were displaced from Sheikh
Miskine to the villages of Nawa, Da’el, Hara, Jasim and other nearby areas.
20. Civilian infrastructure continued to be targeted during the reporting period.
According to OHCHR sources, on 13 December, four schools were damaged in air
strikes in Duma, killing four teachers and eight children. In Dayr al -Zawr, the Sabie
al-Jamia primary school was hit in early December, killing 3 students and four staff
members and injuring 17 students.

4/13

16-00701

S/2016/60

21. There were developments regarding several local agreements during the
reporting period. In the Wa’r neighbourhood of Homs, following an agreement
reached in late November 2015 between a local committee representing the
residents and non-State armed opposition groups and the Government, 300 figh ters
and more than 500 family members, including almost 170 children under the age of
12, were evacuated to Idlib city on 9 December. As part of the agreement, three
inter-agency convoys delivered humanitarian assistance to 75,000 people in need. In
Rif Dimashq, on 22 December, Government forces intensified their ground and
aerial offensives in Muadamiyat al-Sham, where a local agreement is in place,
reportedly killing 5 persons and injuring 12 others. On 26 December, the
Government closed the main road to Muadamiyat al-Sham, preventing the
movement of all civilians to and from the city.
22. As part of the implementation of the so-called Four Towns ceasefire agreement
covering Zabadani, Madaya, Fu’ah and Kafraya and surrounding areas, a United
Nations team, with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the Syrian
Arab Red Crescent, the Lebanese Red Cross and the Humanitarian Relief Foundation,
facilitated a humanitarian evacuation of injured persons and their accompanying
family members, with critical support from the Governments of Turkey and Lebanon.
On 28 December, 338 people from Fu’ah and Kafraya and 125 people from
Zabadani and Madaya were evacuated through Turkey and Lebanon. In accordance
with the terms of the agreement, humanitarian assistance was delivered to Fu’ah,
Kafraya and Madaya on 11 January. Earlier on 20 December, six air strikes, reportedly
attributed to the Russian Federation, hit a number of locations in Idlib city. The air
strikes reportedly killed 95 civilians and injured 170 others. The Four Towns
agreement included Idlib city among the towns that would be subject to a ceasefire.
23. In Dar’a governorate, an agreement was reached between the Nusrah Front
and the Government on 7 December to allow Nusrah Front fighters to leav e Dar’a
for Idlib governorate. A total of 185 fighters were reportedly escorted by
Government forces to Idlib governorate. In Wadi Barada, in Rif Dimashq, an
agreement was reportedly reached between local leaders and the Government on
21 December on restoring the water supply to Damascus city in return for the
Government opening up access to the city and allowing the entry of humanitarian
and medical assistance; a halt to the shelling and bombardment of the area; and the
release of detainees from Wadi Barada. Following the agreement, the Government
opened the road to Wadi Barada on 3 January, and the local leaders have restored a
partial water supply to Damascus, pending the compliance by the Government with
the remaining provisions of the agreement.
24. On 18 December, following the third meeting of the International Syria
Support Group, held in New York, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2254 (2015), in which it requested the Special Envoy of the Secretary General for Syria to convene representatives of the Government and the opposition
to engage in formal negotiations on a political transition process on an urgent basis,
expressed support for a nationwide ceasefire to run in parallel, and requested the
Secretary-General to report to the Council on additional options for confidencebuilding measures. Furthermore, on 22 December, the Council adopted resolution
2258 (2015) renewing the authorization of the United Nations and its implementing
partners to continue cross-border operations through the crossings of Al-Ramtha,
Bab al-Hawa, Bab al-Salam and Yarubiyah for a period of 12 months and renewing
the mandate of the United Nations Monitoring Mechanism for the same period.

16-00701

5/13

S/2016/60

B.

Human rights
25. The scale and severity of abuses and violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law remained grave during the reporting period. OHCHR
continued to receive allegations and to document cases of arbitrary detention, sexual
and gender-based violence, torture and other forms of ill-treatment, and deaths
while in custody in Government detention centres. OHCHR also received reports of
non-State armed opposition groups running parallel “justice systems” in areas under
their effective control, which are not in compliance with international human rights
standards, where civilians and other protected persons were subject to abductions,
cruel and degrading treatment, and executions without due process.
26. During the reporting period, OHCHR received reports on deteriorating
conditions in the women’s section of Adra Central Prison in Damascus, following
unconfirmed reports that nearly 300 additional detainees had been brought to the
section in November and December, leading to severe overcrowding of the facility.
According to OHCHR, the situation was further exacerbated by a lack of available
medical services.
27. In Hasakah governorate, on 9 December, ISIL reportedly released
25 Assyrians, including two children, from their custody. A total of 123 persons
have been released since February 2015, with over 100 Assyrian civilians reportedly
still being held by ISIL.
28. In Qahtaniya village, in Raqqah governorate, on 4 December, ISIL fighters
reportedly beheaded a civilian accused of spying. On 8 December, ISIL fighters
reportedly executed three people in Tabqa town who had been accused of mocking
ISIL. The following day, ISIL abducted a Christian civilian in Tabqa for allegedly
not paying taxes.
29. On 3 December, ISIL released a video purportedly showing the execution of
six residents of Dayr al-Zawr city in Rahba castle, near Mayadeen, who were
accused of collaborating with the Government. The video appears to show children
under 15 years of age carrying out the executions. On the same day, ISIL reportedly
executed a woman in Albo Kamal city in Dayr al-Zawr governorate, who was
accused of blasphemy.
30. According to OHCHR sources, on 3 December, the Kurdish People’s
Protection Units closed roads leading to Hasakah city, preventing displaced Arab
civilians from entering the city, and arresting many of t hem for allegedly being
linked to ISIL. On the same day, Kurdish People’s Protection Unit fighters allegedly
set fire to houses in the predominantly Arab villages of Mabrouka, Abo el -Shakhat,
Raj’an and Raj’iya in Hasakah governorate, reportedly accusing t he inhabitants of
having links to ISIL.
31. On 14 December, Kurdish People’s Protection Unit fighters reportedly forcibly
conscripted a male child in rural Qamishli.

C.

Humanitarian response
32. The humanitarian situation in the Syrian Arab Republic continued to
deteriorate in 2015. The number of people in need of humanitarian assistance
increased from 12.2 million in 2014 to 13.5 million, representing an 11 per cent

6/13

16-00701

S/2016/60

increase in the humanitarian caseload. In 2015, United Nations agen cies assisted
millions of people every month with life-saving assistance. United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) more than doubled the
number of people assisted every month in the second half of the year, compared
with the first half. The number of people receiving food assistance remained largely
constant throughout 2015, with the World Food Programme (WFP) targeting
4.2 million people a month. The World Health Organization (WHO) delivered, on
average, 1.3 million medical treatments every month to people in need. In 2015, the
United Nations and its partners requested a total of $7.4 billion for the
Humanitarian Response Plan and the Regional Refugee and Resilience Plan. A total
of $3.8 billion, or 53 per cent, was received. In 2016, the two appeals requested
$7.7 billion for the response efforts.
People in need
(In millions)

Source: Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat.

33. In December, United Nations humanitarian agencies and partners continued to
reach millions of people in need, through all modalities, from within the Syrian Arab
Republic and across borders, pursuant to resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2 014) and
2258 (2015). WFP delivered food assistance to 3.6 million people. WHO distributed
medicines and supplies for nearly 780,000 treatments and over 50,000 trauma cases.
UNICEF reached 3.9 million people with multisectoral support. UNHCR reached
470,000 people with core relief items. The United Nations Population Fund
(UNFPA) partners delivered reproductive health-care services and services relating
to gender-based violence to 18,000 people. FAO reached 625,000 people with food
and agricultural support. The International Organization for Migration (IOM)
delivered basic relief items for 151,000 people. The United Nations Relief and

16-00701

7/13

S/2016/60

Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) provided support
to more than 280,000 Palestine refugees. Non-governmental organizations also
continued to deliver assistance to people, in line with previous months. The
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic continued to provide basic services to
areas under its control as well as to many areas beyond its control.
34. Cross-border deliveries continued during the reporting period. As at
31 December, the United Nations and its implementing partners had sent
240 shipments — 162 from Turkey and 78 from Jordan — to the Syrian Arab
Republic, under the terms of resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015).
The shipments included food assistance for over 2.5 million people, non -food items
for 1.8 million people, water and sanitation supplies for 2.2 million people, 1 and
medical supplies sufficient for 4.9 million treatments in six governorates. In line
with resolutions 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014) and 2258 (2015), the United Nations
notified the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in advance of each shipment,
including the details of its content, its destination and the number of beneficiaries.
35. The United Nations Monitoring Mechanism continued its operations in Jordan
and Turkey. In December, it monitored 17 United Nations humanitarian shipments
consisting of 476 trucks, confirming the humanitarian nature of each, a nd notifying
the Syrian authorities after each shipment. The Monitoring Mechanism continued to
benefit from excellent cooperation with the Governments of Jordan and Turkey.
Three inter-agency convoys brought humanitarian assistance to 75,000 people in
Wa’r, in Homs city, on 5 and 12 December and 11 January. The Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic did not permit surgical supplies to be included in the first
convoy on 5 December, depriving some 24,480 beneficiaries of assistance. On
11 and 14 January, under the Four Towns agreement, an inter-agency convoy
delivered assistance, including food, medical items and blankets, for 40,000 people
in Madaya, in Rif Dimashq, and 20,000 people in Fu’ah and Kafraya, in Idlib
governorate. On 14 January, WHO received permission for a mobile clinic to enter
Madaya to start treating some of the reported cases of severe malnutrition.
36. United Nations agencies undertook other cross-line deliveries in December.
For example, through local partners, WHO provided nearly 350,000 treatments
across conflict lines, including in Aleppo and Homs governorates. UNICEF and its
partners delivered assistance to Moadamiyet al-Sham, in Rif Dimashq, including
water and sanitation, health and nutrition supplies, benefiting 11,000 people. WFP
and its local partners delivered food to 2,000 people in Akash and Salba, in rural
Hama, and 5,000 people in Tiba, in Rif Dimashq. UNHCR reached the Hol area of
Hasakah governorate with relief items for 3,500 people. FAO provided veterinary
supplies for the livestock of 18,000 people in Raqqa governorate.
Humanitarian access
37. The delivery of humanitarian assistance to many of the 13.5 million people in
need of assistance in the Syrian Arab Republic remained extremely challenging in
many areas owing to active conflict, insecurity and deliberate restrictions by the
parties, including burdensome administrative procedures. In 2015, the United
Nations and its partners reached less than a third of the hard -to-reach locations on
average per month. In all sectors except for health, significantly fewer people in
__________________
1

8/13

The increase includes deliveries of sodium hypochlorite to treat water systems, with a potential
to reach an estimated 800,000 people in the catchment areas.

16-00701

S/2016/60

hard-to-reach areas were reached with assistance in the second half of 2015,
compared with the first half of the year.
38. Access to the 4.5 million people living in hard -to-reach locations remained of
critical concern. Since the beginning of 2015, out of a total of 113 requests
submitted to the Government for inter-agency convoys, 13 have been approved and
completed through 25 inter-agency convoys reaching 620,500 people with
assistance; 15 have been approved, in principle, but have not yet proceeded owing
to lack of final approval by security forces, insecurity and lack of agreement on safe
passage, or are currently under preparation; 3 have been suspended owing to
security conditions; 80 were unanswered within a three-month period; and 2 have
been resubmitted and are pending approval. Compared with previous years, there
was a downward trend in approvals in 2015.
39. In December, United Nations agencies and partners reached 49 of the 147 hardto-reach locations (33 per cent). They reached 45 locations with food assistance for
over 240,000 people, 17 locations with health support for over 386,000 medical
treatments, 11 locations with water, sanitation and hygiene assistance for
370,000 people and 6 locations with relief items for 63,000 people. Over half of the
people in hard-to-reach areas are in ISIL-controlled areas, to which the United
Nations was not able to deliver assistance in December, except for FAO, which,
through local partners, was able to deliver wheat and barley seeds to 5,400 people in
ISIL-controlled areas in Hasakah governorate.
40. Active conflict in several governorates hindered the effective delivery of
humanitarian assistance as well as people’s access to essential services. For
example, in northern rural Hama, insecurity prevented the delivery of food
assistance to Kafr Zeita and Kafr Nabudah subdistricts, which was redirected to
cover the needs of 10,000 people who had been displaced to Idlib governorate.
41. Deliberate interference and restrictions by the parties also continued to prevent
humanitarian delivery. WFP continued to be unable to reach people in need in ISIL controlled areas of the country, given that all deliveries have been suspended owing
to the inability to work independently and to monitor activities. This affects some
720,000 people in almost all of Dayr al-Zawr and Raqqah governorates, parts of
northern rural Aleppo, east rural Homs and pockets of southern rural Hasakah and
north-western rural Hama.
42. The delivery of humanitarian supplies through the Nusaybin/Qamishli crossing
resumed in December after the crossing had been temporarily closed in October
owing to security concerns. Since 12 December, WFP has resumed regular
operations through the crossing and has delivered all planned assistance to over
240,000 people. UNICEF delivered health, water and sanitation and education
supplies for up to 700,000 people.
43. All UNRWA operations in Yarmouk remained suspended in December. The
most recent UNRWA mission to Yarmouk was conducted on 28 March 2015.
UNRWA was not permitted to conduct any missions to Yalda, Babila and Bayt
Saham in December; other humanitarian organizations, however, have reportedly
been allowed to deliver assistance to those areas. A limited range of commercial
goods continues to enter Yalda, Babila and Bayt Saham areas on a daily basis.
44. The administrative procedures currently in place continued to delay or limit
the delivery of assistance by United Nations agencies and their partners. In

16-00701

9/13

S/2016/60

mid-November, revisions to food import regulations requiring products to be
notarized at Syrian embassies in the countries of product origin resulted in
significant delays in the December deliveries. The Government has, however,
granted a three-month grace period for agencies to comply with the procedures, and
imports are now proceeding regularly.
45. As at 31 December, 69 United Nations visa requests (either new visas or
renewals) remained pending, 44 of which were within the 15 working day limit and
25 of which had exceeded the limit. In December, 34 visas were approved. In 2015,
a total of 44 visas were rejected, exclusive of the four United Nations staff members
who were declared personae non gratae in February. This compares with 28 visa
rejections in all of 2014.
46. A total of 16 international non-governmental organizations are authorized to
operate in the Syrian Arab Republic. International non -governmental organizations
continued to face a series of administrative hurdles and restrictions that undermined
their ability to operate. They remain restricted in their ability to partner with
national humanitarian organizations, open sub-offices, conduct missions, join
inter-agency convoys and undertake independent needs assessments. Three visas for
staff of international non-governmental organizations remained pending as at
31 December, with 13 applications having been approved in December.
47. The number of national non-governmental organizations authorized to partner
with United Nations organizations increased from 138 (operating through
221 branches) to 139 (operating through 223 branches) in December. One national
non-governmental organization was added to the list in Rif Dimashq and one new
branch was authorized for a non-governmental organization already on the approved
list. Authorized national non-governmental organizations continue to operate under
complex procedures in partnering with United Nations agencies.
Besieged areas
48. Of the 4.5 million people living in hard-to-reach areas in the Syrian Arab
Republic, some 393,700 remained besieged. This includes approximately 200,000
people in Dayr al-Zawr city who are besieged by ISIL; some 181,200 people who
are besieged by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic in various locations in
eastern Ghutah and in Darayya and Zabadani, in Rif Dimashq; and some 12,500
people who are besieged by non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah
Front in Fu’ah and Kafraya in Idlib governorate. Humanitarian access to people in
besieged locations saw no improvement in 2015, with less than 1 per cent of people
receiving food or non-food items per month, and around 3 per cent health
assistance.
49. The parties to the conflict continued to entirely or heavily restrict access to
besieged areas during the reporting period. In December, a total of 2,661 children in
besieged locations were reached with textbooks and school support. No other
assistance reached the besieged areas in December. The flow of commercial
supplies through official routes remained largely blocked, leading to high prices for
commodities reaching besieged areas through unofficial and irregular supply lines.
Freedom of movement remained heavily restricted, although certain groups, such as
students and members of reconciliation councils, were occasiona lly allowed to leave
from and return to some besieged areas.

10/13

16-00701

S/2016/60

50. In eastern Ghutah, Rif Dimashq, some 176,500 people are besieged in the
following locations: Duma, Harasta, Arbin, Zamalka, Ain Tarma, Hammura, Jisrein,
Kafr Batna, Saqba and Zabadani. In December, UNICEF delivered textbooks and
school supplies to 2,300 children in Harasta.
51. In Zabadani, in Rif Dimashq, prior to the recent evacuation, an estimated
700 people remained besieged by Government forces. On 28 December, the
evacuation of wounded and accompanying family members from Zabadani and
Madaya took place under the Four Towns agreement. In December, UNICEF
delivered textbooks and school supplies to 340 children in Zabadani.
52. In Darayya, in Rif Dimashq, about 4,000 people remain besiege d by
Government forces. No assistance reached the area in December. People in Darayya
have not been assisted by the United Nations since 2012.
53. In Fu’ah and Kafraya, in Idlib governorate, some 12,500 people remain
besieged by non-State armed opposition groups and the Nusrah Front. No assistance
reached the area in December. The evacuation of wounded and accompanying
family members took place on 28 December under the Four Towns agreement. As at
13 January, a joint United Nations, ICRC and Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy had
delivered humanitarian and life-saving assistance for 40,000 people in need in
Madaya and 20,000 people in need in Fu’ah and Kafraya.
54. In the Government-controlled western neighbourhoods of Dayr al-Zawr city,
some 200,000 people are besieged by ISIL. FAO and partners provided treatments
for the livestock of 1,600 people in addition to wheat seeds for 500 people. With the
approvals secured, plans remain for an emergency inter -agency United Nations
airlift to deliver life-saving humanitarian assistance to the area but, to date, clashes
in the vicinity of the military airport have prevented the operation from proceeding.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
55. In December, WHO and its implementing partners delivered medicines and
medical supplies for over 346,000 treatments through cross-line operations in
Aleppo and Homs governorates. The restricted access caused by the constraints
imposed by the parties to the conflict and the worsening security environment
constitutes one of the main hindrances to WHO operations. This affects the patients,
the most vulnerable people, as well as the population’s morbidity and mortality.
Prevention of the delivery of essential medical supplies and equipment, in particular
to hard-to-reach areas, besieged areas and areas controlled by non -State armed
opposition groups, continues to lead to loss of life and lack of access to life -saving
medical assistance. Five WHO requests to the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic to send medicines and medical supplies for 12 locations in five
governorates remain pending, including requests to reach She ikh Miskine in Dar’a,
Shadade in Hasakah and Duma and Harasta in Rif Dimashq.
56. UNICEF delivered health and midwifery kits for over 200,000 p eople in
primary health-care centres, hospitals and mobile clinics in northern governorates
and emergency health kits for 40,000 health consultations in southern governorates.
Water treatment supplies to treat water for a catchment population of 400,000 people
were distributed, including for 70,000 people in hard -to-reach areas.
57. In December, WHO, UNICEF and partners reached over 860,0 00 children with
polio vaccines. The vaccinations were given in Kobane for the first time, benefiting

16-00701

11/13

S/2016/60

17,800 children, and in Raqqah, Dayr al-Zawr, Hasakah, eastern Aleppo, eastern
Hama and eastern Homs. The subnational vaccination campaign conducted in
November 2015, which targeted hard-to-reach areas, reached 208,334 children (35 per
cent of the 597,000 children targeted). The vaccination teams were not able to access
Idlib, Ar-Raqqa and Dayr al-Zawr governorates; Palmyra, Ghantou and Teir Maala,
in Homs; and eastern Ghouta, Madaya and Zabadani, in Rif Dimashq. In Raqqah,
only Tal Abyad was reached, through Hasakah, and 6,554 children were vaccinated.
Some areas in Yarmouk, Jobar, Darayya and Moadamiyet al-Sham were reached.
58. Humanitarian access for health non-governmental organizations providing
medical services to ISIL-controlled areas continues to be extremely limited.
Safety and security of staff and premises
59. On 13 December, mortar attacks in Damascus city caused serious damage to
the apartment of one UNHCR staff member. The staff member was not injured.
60. A total of 34 United Nations staff members, 31 of whom are UNRWA area
staff, 1 from the United Nations Development Programme, 1 from UNICEF and
1 from UNHCR/United Nations Office for Project Services, continue to be detained
or missing. Five UNRWA staff members were released in 2015. The total number of
humanitarian workers killed in the conflict since March 2011 is 81. This includes
17 staff members of the United Nations, 48 staff members and volunteers of the
Syrian Arab Red Cross, 8 volunteers and staff members of the Palestinian Red
Crescent Society and 8 staff members of international non-governmental
organizations. Of the 81, 15 have been killed since 1 January 2015.

III. Observations
61. The total disregard by the parties for human life and dignity remained a
defining feature of the Syrian conflict in 2015. Throughout the year, the Syrian Arab
Republic sank deeper into the conflict, with a devastating impact on the lives and
livelihoods of ordinary Syrians. We saw parents taking impossible decisions for
their families in search of a safer and better future and watched as many of them
embarked on dangerous journeys across the Mediterranean which, for many, became
their last. We witnessed harrowing scenes of severely malnourished people in
Madaya. The use of starvation as a method of war has reached shocking depths of
inhumanity and has become routine and systematic in the Syrian Arab Republic. I
again remind all the parties to the conflict that attacks on civilians, the use of
explosive weapons in civilian areas and other atrocious acts prohibited under
international humanitarian law must stop. The deliberate targeting of civilians and
the use of starvation as a weapon of war are war crimes, and those responsible must
be held accountable. I am also deeply concerned about the alleged incidents of
civilians being killed or injured in recent air strikes and again remind all forces of
their responsibility to protect civilians in accordance with key norms and principles,
such as proportionality, distinction and precautions, that are enshrined in
international humanitarian law. I repeat my call for the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic to be referred to the International Criminal Court.
62. I remain extremely concerned about the increasing humanitarian needs in the
Syrian Arab Republic. In 2015, another 1.3 million people joined the 12.2 million
people already in need of assistance. The number of children in need went up by

12/13

16-00701

S/2016/60

18 per cent, from 5.1 million to 6 million. The number of internally displaced people
reached 6.5 million and, by the end of 2015, over 4.6 million people had been
registered as refugees. United Nations statistics show that since 2011, an average of
50 Syrian families have been displaced every hour of every day. The impact of the
conflict on Syrian children and young people is also very worrisome. Children
continue to be killed, maimed and recruited by parties to the conflict. There are
7.5 million children in the Syrian Arab Republic who are growing up knowing
nothing but conflict, and over two million of them are out of school. This will have
profound implications for years to come if it is not urgently addressed.
63. All parties to the conflict continued to deny access to humanitarian assistance
throughout 2015, notwithstanding their obligations under international humanitarian
law. In particular, I am deeply concerned about the horrific conditions facing the
nearly 400,000 people who remain besieged across the country. The quantity of
assistance reaching the besieged areas is pitiful, and in 2015, access to those areas
shrank even further. The parties to the conflict need to lift the sieges and allow
sustained and unimpeded access to the 4.5 million people living in areas classified
as hard-to-reach. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has the primary
responsibility to protect its civilian population.
64. The many challenges notwithstanding, the United Nations and its partners
managed to reach millions of people in need in 2015. Six million people were
reached monthly, on average, with food assistance, over 8.1 million people were
provided with adequate drinking water, over 4.8 million people received non -food
items, and 1.5 million people were reached with education interventions. However,
much more is needed. Insecurity, fighting and deliberate operational obstructions
continue to constrain the delivery of assistance, and surgical items are still being
removed from convoys. The funding gap also widened. I call upon all donors to
contribute generously at the upcoming “Supporting Syria and the Region: London
2016” pledging conference, which will be held on 4 February. The United Nations
and its partners can do their job only when adequate funding is available.
65. I am encouraged by recent developments on the political front and, in
particular, by the adoption, on 18 December 2015, of Security Council resolution
2254 (2015), which sets out a political path and timeline for ending the Syrian
conflict. In the resolution, the Council reiterated its request that the parties abide by
their obligations and requested the members of the International Syria Support
Group to use their influence with the parties to that end. I expect the States
members of the International Syria Support Group to follow through on those
commitments and push for safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access
throughout the Syrian Arab Republic, in particular to besieged and hard -to-reach
areas, for the release of arbitrarily detained persons, and for the immediate cessation
of any attacks against civilians and civilian objects and indiscriminate use of
weapons. This is a fundamental test of the credibility of the renewed political
process, and I expect this Council and the States members of the International Syria
Support Group to actively support the more detailed confidence-building measures
that I will propose later in January. It is imperative for all parties to exert every
possible effort to support the United Nations in launching the negotiations. Only a
genuine Syrian-led political settlement based on Security Council resolution 2254
(2015) and the Geneva communiqué can stop this tragedy and bring peace to the
Syrian Arab Republic.

16-00701

13/13
