TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

rd
MEETING:

i2 JUNE

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

.. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. , .. . . . , . ,. . .

I

. .. . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . .. . . . . .. . . .. . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
under Security
Council
resolution
(6) Report
of the Secretary-General
. , . . , . . * . , . . . . , . . . * . . . . . . . . . . . . I. . . .
331(1973)
(S/10929)

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1723)

Adoption

of the agenda

S/W.1723

and Corr.1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY-THIRD

MEETING

Held in New York on Tuesday, 12 June 1973, at 3.30 p.m.
President: Mr. Yakov MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

(Iran) and Mr. S. M. Al Saffar (Bahrain) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber,

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.

2. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): The first
speaker on the list for this afternoon’s meeting is the Soviet
Union. I should like to address the Council as the
representative of the SOVIET UNION. I should like first of
all, on behalf of the Soviet delegation, to welcome the
distinguished Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Permanent
Representatives to the United Nations of a number of Arab
and African States, who are taking part in the Security
Council’s examination of the situation in the Middle East.
The fact that the Ministers have come to New York to take
part in this discussion is a clear confirmation of the
constant attention and concern with which world public
opinion, the Arab peoples and the peoples of Africa view
the dangerous situation in the Middle East and Israel’s
aggressive policy.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1723)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(nj Security Council resoIution 331 (1973);
(b] Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929).
The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.

3. Indeed, it would be difficult to exaggerate the significance of the fact that, essentially for the first time since
1967, the Council is considering the situation in the Middle
East as a whole and in all its aspects. The examination of
this item on the initiative of the Arab Republic of Egypt is
evidence of the urgent need for a comprehensive and
detailed discussion of the problem and testifies to the
sincere desire of the Arab States to seek a peaceful political
settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict and the elimination
of the consequences of Israeli aggression within the
framework
and with the co-operation of the United
Nations.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situationin the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under
Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/l 0929)

Security

1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): JII ac.
cordance with the decisions adopted earlier by the
Security Council I intend, with the Council’s consent, to
invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Chad, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Nigeria, Algeria, Morocco, the United Arab
Emirates, Somalia, Guyana, Mauritania, Kuwait, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, Iran and Bahrain to take part,
without the right io vote, in the Council’s examination of
the situation in the Middle East.

4. The course of the discussion and the statements which
have been made show that the Council’s examination of
this urgent problem, which is fraught with serious threats to
the cause of peace, gives the Security Council a real
opportunity to adopt effective measures for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in the Middle East-a conflict
which complicates the international situation and, at a time
when there is a genuine relaxation of international tension,
constitutes a most dangerous hotbed of war threateI.ing
our whole planet.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H. El-Zayyat
[Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel) and Mr. A. H. Sharaf
(Jordan) took places at the Council table; and Mr. S. A.
S-dim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. H. G. Ouangmatching (Chad), Mr. H. Kelani (Syrian Arab Republic),
Mr. E. 0. Ogbu (Nigeria), Mr. A. Boutejlika (Algeria J,
Mr. M. Zentar (Morocco), Mr. A. Al-Pachachi (United Arab
Emirates), Mr. H. Nur Elmi (Somalia), Mr. R. E. Jackson
(Guyana), Mr. M. El Hassen (Mauritania), Mr. A. f:
Bishara (Kuwait), Mr. J. Y. Jamal (Qatar), Mr. 0. Sakkaf
[Saudi Arabia), Mr. E. Ghorra (Lebanon), Mr. F. Hoveyda

5. In his statement on 30 January of this year, Comrade
Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev, General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union,
noted the positive influence of the political settlement in
Viet-Nam on the improvement of the whole international
situation; he stressed that:
“ . * . this example indicates that it is also possible to find
a peaceful and just solution to other conflicts and to
1

eliminate the remaining dangerous hotbeds of war, above
all in the Middle East, since the situation in that area is
fraught with great danger for the cause of peace”.

from using force in its relations with them, and imme.
diately and unconditionally withdraw its troops from the
occupied Arab territories.

6. The examination of this item by the Council and the
participation in it of so many States Members of the United
Nations also show that the members of the Council and the
other participants are unanimous in their concern with the
situation in this area and believe that any perpetuation of
such an abnormal and intolerable situation in the Middle
East may lead to events fraught with extremely dangerous
consequences for the cause of universal peace and security.

12. This is the opinion and the severe international
sentence pronounced against Israel in the name of the
entire world, the United Nations, the States of the socialist
community, all the non-aligned countries expressing the
view of the third world, and, finally, of the whole of Africa
in the form of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
which unites more than 40 sovereign States of that
continent.

7. A similar conclusion as to the danger of the situation in
this area may bc found in the report which the SecretaryGeneral submitted to the Security Council on this item.
The numerous specific facts adduced both in the statements
and in the report provide convincing evidence and clear
confirmation that it is above all Israel which is the main
culprit and bears the entire weight of responsibility for the
continuation of the dangerous situation in the Middle East
and whose fault it is that the sharp and dangerous conflict
in that area has not yet been settled.

13. Simply by enumerating the Security Council resolutions adopted since 1967, a list of which may be found ia
the Secretary-General’s report, it is possible to establish
with the utmost clarity Israel’s responsibility and guilt in
systematically carrying out military operations by land and
air against the Arab countries on false and specially
invented pretexts, in defiance and in violation of Security
Council decisions and General Assembly resolutions de.
manding that Israel cease its aggression and refrain from
appropriating the lands of other States by force and
changing the status of the Arab section of Jerusalem.

8. A large part of the blame also lies with Israel’s
protectors. Israel itself bears responsibility for this with its
policy of aggression and expansionism and its constant
violations of one of the most important and fundamental
principles of contemporary international law, adopted and
approved in numerous United Nations decisions-the principle of the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force-Israel, with its policy of disregarding the numerous
United Nations decisions on non-use of force with regard to
the Arab countries, As a direct consequence of its aggressive
and obstructionist policy Israel arrogantly refuses to return
lands belonging to others or to withdraw its troops from
the occupied Arab territories.
9. In this sense, the Secretary-General’s report can be
regarded and understood only as a serious international
accusation and indictment of Israel as an aggressor and
violator of the Charter and the decisions of the United
Nations on non-use of force in international relations.
10. All this is further confirmed by the fact that, as has
already been pointed out here, since the adoption by the
Security Council, in November 1967, of the well-known
resolution 242 (1967), the Council has considered the
question of Israel’s further acts of aggression against Arab
States no less than 20 times. On each occasion, it has drawn
attention to the situation and warned Israel against continuing its policy of aggression and against using force in its
relations with other States. On more than 10 occasions the
Security Council-the principal organ of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and securityhas directly condemned Israel for acts of aggression and for
the use of force. Even its powerful protectors have been
unable to save Israel from this stern international condemnation.
1I . This is precisely the accusation which the whole world
and the States Members of the United Nations are making
when they sternly condemn lsrael and categorically demand
that it cease its aggression against the Arab States, refrain

14. It is also perfectly clear from the report that all Israel’s
actions are flagrantly contrary to the provisions of resolution 242 (1967). Furthermore, these actions are deliberately designed to distort the meaning of the resolution, to
cause it to be disregarded and in fact to undermine and
sabotage efforts to implement it, despite the fact that the
resolution is recognized by the United Nations and practically all States, including even Israel’s protectors, as the
basis for a political settlement in the Middle East. Israel
hypocritically declares that it, too, recognizes the reso.
lution. Rut, while paying lip-service to the resolution, Israel
in fact distorts and violates it. It is worth while recalling, in
this connexion, that the Council has repeatedly warned the
Israeli Government that if its aggressive actions continue,
the Council will be compelled to consider the question of
the adoption of effective measures to curb the aggressor
and eliminate the dangerous situation in the Middle East.
15. Thus, there can be no doubt as to who is really
responsible for the tension in the Middle East and for the
failure so far to settle the dangerous conflict in that area.
The root of the problem lies in the arrogant and obstructionist line taken by the ruling circles of Israel, which
continues to maintain its hold on the occupied Arab
territories by force.
16. The Government of Israel is flagrantly flouting all the
norms of international law and defying the fundamental
principles of the United Nations Charter. Israel and its
protectors are in fact undermining all the peaceful efforts
of the United Nations to achieve a political settlement ia
the Middle East; they are preventing the establishment of a
just and lasting peace and the creation of a situation in
which all States in the area could exist in conditions where
their national independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity were recognized.
17. It is perfectly clear-and practically all those who have
taken part in consideration of this item are agreed oa

their diplomatic agents and mass communications mediapropaganda designed to justify, cover up and provide a basis
for Israel’s policy of aggression and its use of force against
neighbouring Arab States on the pretext of ensuring
Israel’s security.

this-that the fundamental precondition for peace in the
Middle East is, and must be, the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from all the territories which Israel made victims of
its aggression and has occupied since June 1967, i.e., from
the territories of the independent Arab States Members of
the United Nations. And none of Israel’s verbal exercises in
semantics and English grammar or the endless quoting of
the statements of private individuals can in any way justify
Israel’s policy of international piracy and plundering of
foreign lands or its refusal to return them to their lawful
owners and withdraw its troops.

23. This propaganda in defence of aggression and the
acquisition of the lands of other States arouses the
conscience of the world and calls forth condemnation and
indignation. No one now believes this propaganda. The
Security Council does not believe it-read its decisions
demanding the withdrawal of troops. The United Nations
does not believe it-read the General Assembly resolutions
containing the same demand. The third world does not
believe it-read the decisions on the Middle East of the
Conferences of Non-Aligned Countries held in Lusaka and
Georgetown. Read, too, the historic document on the
International Development Strategy, which was sponsored
by 99 countries and unanimously adopted by the 132
States Members of the United Nations at the twenty-fifth
session of the General Assembly [resolution 2626 (XXV)].
This document stressesthat the successof international
development activities will dependon the achievementof
concrete progressin the solution of a numberof problems,
primarily problemsof generaland complete disarmament
and the elimination of occupation of territories of any
State. I repeat: the elimination of occupationof territories
of any State. A resolutionof the third sessionof the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development,in which
more than 140 countries participated, concerning the
economic effects of the closure of the Suez Canal, lays
particular and decisive emphasison the need for full
implementation of resolution242 (1967) and expressesthe
conviction that the Israeliwithdrawal-I repeat-the Israeli
withdrawal from occupied territories is a requisitefor the
reopeningof the Canal.

18. It is common knowledge that it is precisely these
demands, as well as the provision on the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by war, which are the very
foundation of resolution 242 (1967). The crucial provisions
on the inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by
force and the need for States to renounce the use of force
in international relations have been adopted and embodied
in many other fundamental documents of the United
Nations: in the Declaration on the Strengthening of
International Security, the Declaration on Principles concerning Friendly Relations among States, in a whole series
of Security Council and General Assembly resolutions on
the Middle East and Jerusalem, and in other United Nations
decisions.
19. These provisions have now become one of the cornerstones of United Nations policy and practice. There is no
doubt that peace cannot be established on our planet or in
the Middle East unless States renounce the use of force in
international relations. The rulers of Israel and their
protectors should bear that in mind when they profess their
desire for peace with their Arab neighbours while in fact
opposing the establishment of peace and doing everything
in their power to maintain Israel’s hold on the foreign lands
which it seized.

24. That is the opinion of the whole worId and not simply
of the private individualswhoseopinionsthe representative
of Israel tried to bring in yesterday in connexion with this
decisivequestion of a Middle East settlement.Let me stress
once again: this is the opinion of the whole world and not
of private individuals. The whole of Africa, too, disbelieves
Israel-read the resolutions on the Middle East of the
Assemblyof Headsof State and Government of OAU and,
in particular, the recent resolution of the anniversary
sessionof the Assemblyopposingthe continued occupation
by Israel of part of the territory of Egypt [see S/10943].
All these international documentsstressthe need for the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from the Arab territories
occupied by them in 1967. This is not the opinion-let me
draw attention to this point yet again-of private individuals-no matter how lofty a position they OCCUPY. This
is the voice of the world speakingthrough the United
Nations, the voice of the third world representingthe
majority of Statesin the United Nations; it is the voice of
Africa and the Arab world; it is the voice of the countries
of the socialistworld.

20. Security Council resolution 242 (1967) also contains a
clear and direct request that parties indirectly involved in
the conflict should apply the following principle:
“Termination of all claims or states of belligerency and
respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of every
State in the area and their right to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries free from threats or
acts of force”.
In this connexion, it must be stressed that resolution
242 (1967) speaks of this right as belonging to every State
in the area, and not just to one State which has temporarily
proved stronger than the other States and is trying to
impose its terms on them.
21. Since the foundation of the State of lsrael and
especially since Israel’s aggression in 1967, the whole
policy, conduct and propaganda of Israeli ruling circles and
their protectors testify to the fact that expansion and the
desire for territorial annexations at the expense of neighbouring Arab States have become the basis of Israel’s
foreign policy.

25. Thus, Israelhaslost the trust of the world, It bearsthe
ill-omened brand of the aggressor,the violator of the
Charter and the decisionsof the United Nations and of the
principle of the inadmissibilityof annexation by force and
acquisition of the landsof other States,the violator of the

22. The world is tired of the importunate, aggressive,
demagogic propaganda repeated daily by the Israeli leaders,
3

principle of non-use of force in international relations. And
if the deep trust of the ivhole world and international
public opinion is to be restored, Israel has no alternative
but to withdraw its occupying troops from all the Arab
territories and seek a peaceful political settlement in
accordance with United Nations decisions.
26. If Israel and its leaders were really concerned for the
security of their country and people, who can hardly want
to live forever with the economy and the whole internal life
of the country in a state of monstrous militarization, then
Israel’s leaders would long ago have found a way to achieve
a mutually acceptable settlement with the Arab countries
and would have agreed that it was necessary to withdraw its
troops from the occupied Arab territories. The only reason
why Israel has not yet done this is that it is seeking, not
security based on peace and friendship with its neighbours,
but rather territorial expansion and the annexation of the
territory of other States. The renunciation of expansion
would be a sure guarantee of Israel’s security,
27. Instead of seeking a peaceful political settlement,
Israel is making feverish efforts to acquire and assimilate
the Arab territories which it has seized. Israel is establishing
militarized settlements there, it is wiping Arab towns and
villages from the face of the earth, driving out the Arab
inhabitants and pursuing a policy of Israelization of these
foreign lands in defiance and in violation of United Nations
decisions. In a word, Israel is doing everything possible to
justify the territorial annexations carried,out in 1967 and
to confront the world with a fait accompli.
28. Members of the Security Council have no doubt
studied Mr. Bulloch’s article in the magazine section of 2%
Daily Telegraph of 1 June 1973 concerning the situation in
the Arab territories occupied by Israel, which has been
circulated, at the request of Mr. Abdel Meguid, the representative of Egypt to the United Nations, as a document of
the Security Council [S/10941].
The article contains
extensive factual material which exposes Israel’s policy of
annexation and plunder in the occupied Arab territories,
Israel’s violation of fundamental human rights, the deliberate destruction of the houses and settlements of the
indigenous Arab inhabitants of these territories, the expulsion of the Arab population by force from their birth-places
and their forced deportation.
29. It is not difficult to see in all this a repetition by the
Israeli aggressors of the familiar bloody terrorist tactics of
the aggressors of the Second World War.
30. In contrast, the facts presented in the SecretaryGeneral’s report are convincing evidence of the formally
stated readiness of Egypt, Jordan and the other Arab
countries to carry out all the provisions of resolution
242 (1967) and to comply with the provisions of Ambassador Jarring’s aide-mbmoire, which is based strictly on that
resolution. Egypt has formally declared its readiness to
terminate all claims and states of belligerency and its
willingness to sign a peace agreement with Israel, provided,
of course-and this is quite logical and Iegitimate-that
Israel returns to the Arab countries, including Egypt, their
lawful possessions which have been seized by force. Israel,
however, maintains its notoriously unrealistic and short-

sighted policy of disregarding and scorning the goodwill of
the Arab countries, all the efforts of the United Nations
and the decisions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly.
31. In this connexion, the statement by the Israeli Foreign
Minister, Mr. Eban, reported in me New York Post of 22
May 1973 is characteristically cynical. He provocatively
stated that consideration by the Security Council of the
situation in the Middle East cannot produce a constructive
result, Mr. Eban went so far as publicly to insult the
Security Council-this principal international organ for the
maintenance of universal peace. He called the Council “an
arena for waging conflicts, not for solving them”. This
statement cannot be regarded as anything but an inadmis.
sible and hostile attack by an aggressor and a violator of the
Charter and the decisions of the United Nations against the
principal organ of that Organization-the Security Councilagainst its members and the United Nations as a whole.
32. When the question of the admission of Israel to
membership in the United Nations was under consideration
2.5 years ago, Israel gave its solemn oath to respect the
United Nations Charter and to ensure that its policies
conformed to the lofty and noble principles embodied in
the Charter-to live in peace with other States as good
neighbours. History, however, shows that subsequently
Israel adopted a policy of systematically violating the
United Nations Charter, a policy of the use of force,
seeking to accuse the Arab countries and blame them for its
own faults. The Israeli leaders, as has now become apparent
to everyone, are interested only in the kind of security for
their State which is based on the territorial expansion of
Israel by means of thi annexation and acquisition of the
lands of neighbouring Arab countries. But this is a risky and
dangerouspolicy. History teachesthat there hasnever been
an aggressor
which has won all its wars, and Israel cannot
count on succeedingin refuting this law of history.
33. Many speakershave already drawn attention to the
fact that Israel’s policies are in direct and sharp contradiction to the Charter and the decisions of the United
Nations on the fundamental questions of international
relationsand on the situation in the Middle East. I=srael,as
we all know, has disregardedthe aide-m&moire dated
8 February 1971 of AmbassadorJarring, the Special Representativeof the Secretary-Generalof the United Nations lo
the Middle East, in the hope that everyone would forgef
about the aide-mCmoireand that the author himself would
repudiateit. This aide-m&moirehasgainedwide recognition
and is an important componentin the general complex of
efforts which the United Nations has made and is COIItinuing to make in order to achievea just settlement of the
conflict in the Middle East.
34. AmbassadorJarring’saide-mbmoireis basedstrictly on
resolution 242 (1967), and the Council should give credit
to AmbassadorJarring for his efforts to carry out the lofty
and noble missionentrusted to him. The importance and
usefulnessof Ambassador Jarring’s mission have been
recognizedandconfirmed by the United Nations as a whole
in decisionsof the General Assembly. General Assembly
resolution 2799 (XXVI) recognized and stressedthe need
for, and the importance of, AmbassadorJarring’s mission

and his aide-mbmoire. In that resolution the General
Assembly requested the Secretary-General to take measures
to reactivate the mission of his Special Representative to
the Middle East “in order to promote agreement and assist
efforts to reach a peace agreement as envisaged in the
Special Representative’s
aide-mimoire of 8 February
1971”. Thus, the General Assembly approved Ambassador
Jarring’s aide-mbmoire. In the course of their consultations
on the Middle East in 1971, four of the Powers which are
permanent members of the Security Council confirmed that
the aide-m&moire is fully in accordance with resolution
242 (1967) and acknowledged its importance for a settlement in the Middle East. At that time, the representatives
of the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the
Soviet Union noted with satisfaction the initiative taken on
8 February 1971 by the Secretary-General’s Special Representative; they considered this initiative fully in keeping
with his mandate under resolution 242 (1967). We are all
well aware, too, that Egypt responded positively to
Ambassador Jarring’s aide-mbmoire and expressed its readiness to sign a peace agreement with Israel, provided that
Israel withdrew its troops from the occupied Arab territories. Egypt’s position in this matter was reaffirmed in the
statement in the Council by its Foreign Minister, Mr. ElZayyat at the outset of the Council’s present examination
of the situation in the Middle East [I71 7th meeting/.
Is
any other proof of Egypt’s peaceful intentions needed? Is
any new information needed to confirm the fact that Egypt
is firmly in favour of the implementation of United Nations
decisions on the Middle East?

ments of the United Nations in this connexion”. The
General Assembly also made a special appeal to ail States
not to recognize-I stress-not to recognize any changes and
measures carried out by Israel in the occupied’ Arab
territories, It invited ail States to avoid actions, including
actions in the field of aid to Israel, that could constitute
recognition of that occupation.
38, The USSR fully supported all these United Nations
decisions and voted in favour of them both in the Security
Council and at sessions of the General Assembly, categorically condemning any violent actions undertaken by the
Israeli rulers against the Arab countries or against the Arab
people of Palestine. We demand that the United Nations
decisions on the question of Palestine should also be carried
out and we consider that this question should be resolved
within the framework of a general settlement in the Middle
East.
39. Attempts by Israel or any other State, no matter how
powerful, to settle the Middle East problem and the
question of the future of the Palestinians unilaterally
without implementation of United Nations decisions not
only cannot guarantee a just settlement, but cannot even
help to establish lasting peace in the Middle East.
40. During the Council’s examination of ‘this item, all
speakers have drawn attention to the dangerous nature of
the situation in the Middle East and have stressed the
concern of their States, Governments and peoples to see
that peace is speedily established in this important area.

35. But what is Israel’s position in this matter? It is
sabotaging the aide-memoire and calling on Ambassador
Jarring to repudiate it. To the whole world and to the
United Nations Israel has stated formally in writing that
“Israel will not return to the frontier lines which existed
before 5 June 1967”. Is any further, any weightier proof
needed of the aggressiveness of Israel’s policy and its desire
to bury all the United Nations decisions concerning a
peaceful settlement in the Middle East? It seems to us that
the Council must draw the appropriate, just conclusions,
taking account of Israel’s attitude, which is so openly
obstructionist towards the United Nations and aggressive
and piratical towards the Arab countries.

41, I should like to single out the well-argued and
extremely cogent statement by Mr, El-Zayyat, the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt. What
Mr. El-Zayyat said demonstrates yet again the respect
which Egypt and the other Arab countries have for the
decisions of the United Nations, the Security Council and
the General Assembly.
42. In sharp contrast, the representative of Israel stuck to
his usual story in his numerous statements. Like an old,
worn-out gramophone record, he repeated his stereotyped
phrases in justification of the policy of aggression and
directed unconvincing accusations against the Arab countries. The statement by the representative of Israel concerning recognition of resolution 242 (1967) is truly
hypocritical, for it is not borne out by the daily policy and
actions of the Israeli leaders. It is sufficient to point to the
attitude of Israel and its protectors to the question of the
Arab-Israel frontiers, which is an important aspect of a
settlement of the Middle East conflict. All of us, and
especially those who took part in the four-Power consultations on the Middle East, remember very well that the
representatives of Israel and of their protectors talked and
made formal statements about the possibility of the
withdrawal of Israeli troops from the occupied territories
on condition of only “minor rectifications” to the ArabIsraeli frontiers.
Then a new formula appeared“insubstantiaI alterations” of those frontiers-and now they
are talking about “substantial alterations”, In other words,
Israel is Iaying claim to major increases in its territory at the
expense of neighbouring Arab countries. The appetite of
the annexationist grows with eating.

36. Israel’s rulers and their representatives in the United
Nations pretend to be offended when the Security Council
and the General Assembly condemn Israel and designate it
an aggressor and a violator of United Nations decisions. But
how else can we describe the policy of a State Member of
the United Nations which has seized by force the lands of
other States and refuses to return them to their lawful
owners?
37. Ever since Israel’s aggression against the Arab countries in June 1967, the question of the situation in the
Middle East has constantly held the attention of the
principal organs of the United Nations-the Security Council and General Assembly. In resolution 2949 (XXVIl) the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session emphasized
in particular that the Security Council must “take all
appropriate steps with a view to the full and speedy
implementation of Security Council resolution 242 (1967),
taking into account all the relevant resolutions and docu5

seeking a solution to the Middle East problem. We arc
against attempts by individual States to substitute unilateral
interference and mediation for the machinery of the United
Nations. During the consultations among four permanent
members of the Security Council, we duly issued a warning
that such attempts were bound to fail, Events have proved
us right. Any new attempts to supplant the machinery of
the United Nations will inevitably alert those who are
sincerely concerned to achieve a truly just and lasting
settlement in the Middle East. In the matter of a Middle
East settlement, there is no justification for disregarding
and bypassing the existing machinery of the United
Nations.

43. And in these circumstances the representative of Israel
could find no more persuasive argument than to repeat his
usual wearisome accusations against the Arab countries, a~
if they were to blame for the perpetuation of the tension in
the Middle East, which is so dangerous for the cause of
peace, and as if the Arabs wanted to “destroy Israel”. But
that is not true. What the Arabs want-and this is perfectly
legitimate and justified, and any State or people in their
situation would feel the same-is to eliminate the consequences of Israeli aggression. That is the noble goal to
which the Arab peoples aspire, and the Security Council
supports this aspiration-read the resolutions of the Security Council, the General Assembly and other international
bodies. In this aspiration the Arab countries are backed by
the decisions of the United Nations and the support of the
whole world. It has been repeatedly shown and proved,
both in the past and now, that the blame for the tension in
the Middle East lies entirely with Israel, and that no one in
the world any longer gives credence to Jsrael’s attempts to
inculpate others. The whole world is witness to the fact
that it is only the patience and restraint displayed by the
Arab countries and their constant seeking for a peaceful
political settlement in the Middle East which have contained the dangerous trend towards a new armed conflict in
that area. But Israel and its protectors cannot fail to
understand that the patience of the Arab peoples-and not
only of the Arab peoples-is not unlimited.

46. The Soviet Union is concerned to see a lasting and just
peace established in the Middle East, an area which lies very
near to its frontiers. The USSR has taken and continues to
take a very active part in all efforts to achieve peace in this
area. The Soviet proposals concerning a Middte East
settlement are widely known: they are rightly considered to
be balanced and capable of guaranteeing security and a
peaceful, tranquil life for all the States of the Middle East
area, including Israel, but not for Israel alone-despite the
fact that this is what Israel itself and its few protectors arc
out to achieve. In this matter, the Soviet Union bases its
policy on the need to establish a genuine peace in the
Middle East and not merely a precarious truce which would
be to the advantage of the aggressor. But it is perfectly
natural-and now quite obvious to the whole world-that
ir
is impossible to guarantee such a peace in the Middle East
unless the Israeli troops are withdrawn
from all tllc
occupied Arab territories.

44. In this connexion it is necessary to draw special
attention, over and over again, to the unanimous opinion of
such a representative and authoritative international organization as the Organization of African Unity, which unites
almost one third of the States Members of the United
Nations. The tenth anniversary session of the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of OAU, as I have already
remarked, affirmed yet again that Security Council resolution 242 (1967) is the basis for a Middle East settlement.
It noted with satisfaction that Egypt, for its part, has
spared no effort to reach a just and durable solution of the
Middle East problem in accordance with that resolution.
The OAU Assembly once again strongly condemned Israel’s
obstruction of such a settlement. Expressing the hope that
the Security Council would take every appropriate measure
to implement immediately the relevant United Nations
resolutions, the Heads of State and Government of OAU
called on the Powers granting Israel military, moral and
political support to refrain from so doing. Israel was warned
that the countries of OAU, individually or collectively,
would take the appropriate political and economic measures against Israel. The Israeli leaders and their protectors
cannot fail to take account of this stern warning.

47. The Soviet delegation and all sincere advocates of a
peaceful and just settlement in the Middle East cannot fail
to express their deep satisfaction at the fact that the
Security Council is giving such detailed and thorough
consideration to the situation in the Middle East. There has
long been an urgent need for this. Here, we would like tn
draw attention to one aspect of the problem, which has
been touched on in the statements of certain represcntatives and frequently comes up in Israeli propaganda. This
aspect of the problem has considerable significance. f an1
referring to the role of the Security Council and its
responsibility for the preservation and maintenance uf
international peace and, consequently, the role which the
Council is called upon to play in the matter of a Middle
East settlement. The Council must categorically demand
that Israel respect and carry out the Council’s decisions and
must, in the end, find means of bringing vigorous a114
effective pressure to bear on those who are sabotaginganJ
blocking a settlement and pursuing a bankrupt polic!.
rejected by the peoples of the world, of negotiating “from 3
position of strength”. Some of Israel’s more zealolls
supporters and its official representatives persistentI!
adduce the propagandistic argument that the Security
Council somehow has no right to “impose” its decision IX
decisions on Israel. That argument is false from beginnirlg
to end. It is nothing but an attempt to paralyse the Security
Council’s efforts, to ease the position of the aggressor aIId
to remove him from the scope of the Charter and the
decisions of the United Nations and the Security Counr‘iR.

45. The Soviet Union has consistently advocated and
continues to advocate a peaceful political settlement of the
Middle East crisis. Our policy in this matter remains
unchanged, In advocating the implementation of all the
provisions of resolution 242 (1967) and supporting Ambassador Jarring’s mission and his aide-mimoire, the Soviet
Union is maintaining a position of principle in its Middle
East policy. The essence of this position is to render
comprehensive support and assistance to the Arab States
which are victims of Israeli aggression. At the same time, we
energetically and decisively denounce any attempt to
bypass the Security Council and the United Nations in
P

48. It would be salutary for the advocates of this approach
to reread the provisions of Chapter VII of the United
6

Nations Charter, Security Council decisions adopted in
conformity with the Charter are binding on all Members of
the United Nations. Israel was aware of this when it became
a Member of the United Nations and it solemnly undertook
to fulfil the Charter obligations. That is why the peoples of
the world expect the Security Council and its permanent
members to make a practical and genuine, and not just a
verbal, contribution to a Middle East settlement. Under the
United Nations Charter, the Security Council, as the
principal organ for the maintenance of peace, is able and
entitled to take the most rigorous measures to bring
pressure to bear on an aggressor State and to defend States
which are victims of aggression. The members of the
Security Council, which enjoy the deep trust of the whole
United Nations, must do everything in their power to
ensure that a just and lasting peace triumphs in the Middle
East, for only a just peace, a peace unsullied by plunder and
annexation, can endure.
49. This is what is expected and demanded of the United
Nations by all peoples of the world, the peoples of Africa,
the peoples of the third world and the peoples of the
socialist world, This is the expectation of the whole of
world public opinion, which insistently demands that
urgent measures be taken to establish peace and justice in
the Middle East. But these legitimate aspirations can be
satisfied only if none-1 repeat-none of the permanent
members of the Security Council uses its veto unjustly to
paralyse the efforts of the Security Council and provided
that no permanent member comes to the defence of the
aggressor.
50. As in the past, the Soviet Union is ready to support
any constructive efforts by the United Nations or the
Security Council to achieve a just, durable and lasting peace
in the Middle East. The USSR is ready to resume
consultations among the permanent members of the Security Council and to take part in them if all the other
permanent members of the Security Council are ready to
do likewise. We are ready to continue to co-operate actively
in the mission of Ambassador Jarring, the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative to the Middle East. We
value highly his efforts to carry out the mandate entrusted
to him in accordance with the decision of the Security
Council.
51. By all its policies and all the concrete action it has
taken in connexion with a Middle East settlement the
Soviet Union confirms its desire for a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. The settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, the elimination of the dangerous hotbed of
military tension in that area and the elimination of the
consequences of Israeli aggression are a component part of
the Programme of Peace adopted by the Twenty-fourth
Congress of our Party.
52. The Decree of the Plenum of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, held in April
of this year, concerning the report of Comrade Brezhnev on
the international activities of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union reaffirmed once
more the Soviet State’s policy of supporting the lawful
rights of the Arab peoples in their struggle against Israeli
aggression and seeking a settlement of the Middle East
confIict in conformity with resolution 242 (1967).

53. The Soviet Union, true to its fundamental policy of
support for the just struggle of peoples for freedom,
independence, territorial integrity and inviolability of frontiers, was and remains on the side of the Arab peoples,
which are seeking to eliminate the consequences of Israeli
aggression. The Soviet Government still considers that there
is only one way to bring about detente and a lasting peace
in the Middle East: the Arab lands occupied by Israel in
1967 must be completely liberated and all the peoples of
that area must be guaranteed the opportunity to live in
conditions of peace and security.
54. The Soviet Union is ready to continue to render all
possible support to United Nations efforts to achieve a
settlement of the Middle East problem on the basis of the
implementation of all the provisions of resolution
242 (1967) and other United Nations decisions. This is how
we see our task and this has been, and continues to be, the
goal of the Soviet delegation.
55. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I now invite the next
speaker on the list, the representative of Iran, to take a
piace at the Council table and to make his statement.
56. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran): Mr, President, we are grateful
to you and to the members of the Council for the
opportunity
to appear before this Council. In grave
moments such as this, one is not disposed to go through the
familiar ritual. However, as you are in the Chair, I need not
go to great lengths to express my admiration and deep sense
of respect. Your experience with the United Nations and
your outstanding qualities are too well known to need
elaboration. I can say-and, 1 think, with justification-that
anyone who knows the United Nations knows you.
57. I shall strive to be extremely brief and, 1 hope, to the
point. First of all, I should like to say that we have studied
the report of the Secretary-General, which we find
thorough, objective and enlightening. I wish to congratulate
him on having prepared this remarkable piece of work at
such short notice, and I hope the Council and all parties
concerned will be inspired by the spirit of this document.
58. The position of Iran on the Middle East dispute has
been echoed in various forums both within and outside the
United Nations on numerous occasions. It was last elaborated in the United Nations when I, on behalf of my
Government, took part in the Genera1 Assembly debate of
last year on the question of the Middle East.1 The gist of
that position can be described in two basic propositions.
59. First, Iran is vehemently against acquisition by the use
of force of territories belonging to other States. This is a
general principle of international law, but Iran was quick to
apply it to the Middle East conflict when, as early as June
1967, my Sovereign denounced the acquisition of territories by force as an anachronism. He then said:
“The days of occupation and retention of one country’s
territory by another are over. Undoubtedly arrangements
should be made whereby that part of Arab territory
occupied by Israel during the present hostilities be
returned to them as soon as possible.”
1 See
Session,

Official
Plenary

Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-seventh
Meetings,

2099th

meeting.

generally speaking, in a restrained tone. It is perhaps too
early to speak of the impact these signs are ultimately likely
to produce. But the fact that the Arab Republic of Egypt,
through the authoritative voice of its Foreign Minister, has
announced in this solemn organ of the United Nations its
agreement, as a matter of principle, to talk with Israel
without prior conditions by either side warrants much
credit and significance. This is yet another indication of the
genuine desire for peace which President Sadat has se
manifestly demonstrated on several occasions during the
past years.

I think that that declaration is clear enough to need no
elaboration.
60. The second basic premise is that Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967 remains to
this day the only viable, practicable and realistic framework
for making peace in the Middle East.
61. As recently as 2 June 1973, in the course of a
communique Issued on the termination of a State visit by
my Sovereign to Yugoslavia, the leaders of the two
countries expressed the opinion that

66. In this connexion we take note also of the statemeat
of the representative of Israel on 6 June 1973 in this
Council (ibid./ to the effect that Israel was prepared to
enter into talks without pre-conditions and that it did not
ask Egypt to accept in advance any Israeli views or
positions on any point.

“The attainment of peace in this region must be made
through the implementation of all the provisions of the
United Nations Security Council resolution of 22 Novem.
ber 1967 for the withdrawal of all Israeli forces from
occupied territories, and respect for the legitimate rights
of the Arab peoples, including the Arab people of
Palestine.”

67. As we see it, resolution 242 (1967), accepted by the
Arab Republic of Egypt, Israel and Jordan, has already set
the tone for any future talks which might take place among
the parties concerned, By “emphasizing the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of territory by war” the resolution has
set forth the requirements for peace in the Middle East:
withdrawal of Israeli armed forces from the occupied
territories; termination of all claims or states of belligerency
and the right of all parties to live in peace and within agreed
and recognized boundaries, guaranteeing freedom of navi.
gation through waterways in the area; achievement of a just
settlement of the Palestinian refugee problems; establish.
ment of demilitarized zones.

62. However, we have not come here today to restate our
position. Nor do we think that at this point of time, when
the burden of a rapidly crystallizing impasse in the Middle
East dispute is so heavily felt, the opportunity afforded by
this debate should be wrecked by reopening recriminations
and attempts to win a battle of words. Enough of that has
been said and tried in the past 25 years-not to any avail as
far as peace is concerned but to its detriment and without
in the least lessening the burden of injustice long carried by
the Arab people of Palestine.
63. The reasons prompting us to be heard in this Council
have to do with a mixture of apprehensions and hopes. The
state of stalemate in the Middle East conflict is becoming
increasingly more entrenched and is gradually acquiring an
air of permanence. The freezing of the status quo is no
longer merely a desire on the part of an isolated segment
within one side of the conflict but an ever-growing menace,
This is the single most perturbing element of the Middle
East conflict.

68. This remains the most appropriate framework
for a
solution. There can be little doubt that a sincere application
of that resolution, including withdrawal of Israel from the
territories belonging to Egypt, Jordan and Syria, can and
must lead to an equitable settlement. But if this has
unfortunately not been the case so far, it is due above all,
to Israel’s negative attitude, to say the least, in regard to
such application. The Government of Iran has constantly
held the opinion that the refusal of Israel to commit itself
to withdraw from territories of Egypt, Jordan and Syria is
an obstacle for meaningful dialogue to start. This negative
attitude of Israel seems to us all the more unjustified as the
Government of Egypt has shown courage and goodwill in
responding positively to Ambassador Jarring’s questionnaire.

64. Another reason is that, as has been pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report, since the adoption of
resolution 242 (1967) the Security Council has not considered the problem of the Middle East as a whole. Against
the backdrop of six years of frustrated peace-making
efforts, the Security Council is now confronted with a
crucial test of credibility. This challenge cannot be taken
lightly. Should the Council fail to register some forward
movement now, it will have justified the reasoning of those
who,
in their scepticism about the ability of the United
Nations to cope with the problem of the Middle East,
regard force as the ultimate arbiter of this tragic conflict.

69. Obviously, if meaningful dialogue is desired, some
concrete action now is required to form a climate of
confidence that is pathetically laclcing. And can there be
any ambivalence as to who carries the burden of this
responsibility? We have often heard representatives of
Israel alarmingly recalling the co-called Khartoum reso.
lution of September 1967 epitomizing it rhetorically in the
phrase, “no recognition, no negotiation, no peace with
Israel”.

65. To give voice to these apprehensions perhaps in itself
justifies the taking up of a few minutes of the time of the
Council, but we are compelled by yet another reason. As
we see it, the debate held in this Council in the last few
days has produced signs that perhaps justify a guarded
optimism. The Foreign Minister of Egypt said on 6 June
(1717th meeting] -and he has stuck to his word-that
he
was not seeking to score debating points or win a verbal
victory. The debate has been conducted at a high level and,

70. Much as this recollection dramatizes an intransigence
which is now a relic of the past, it brings into focus a
contrast which is very much relevant to the situation today.
Indeed from what we can learn from Egypt’s reply to
Ambassador Jarring’s questionnaire of February 1971, it
8

has moved to accepting in principle to acknowledge the
sovereignty of Israel and to make peace with Israel. We also
heard, a few days ago, the position of Egypt concerning
talks with Israel. Is it not now the time for the other side to
ease its intransigence and move a step forward to meet the
Egyptian position?

spokesmen yesterday applies equally to his statement. After
all, Morocco only recently sent troops to Syria to support a
Government which openly rejects all peaceful solution of
the conflict in the Middle East and insists on pursuing war
against Israel.

71. We agree with the representative of Israel when he says
that peace is not an abstract concept, that it must be built
and preserved by those who aspire to live in peace together.
But is it not also a truism that peace cannot be built while
the seeds of dissension still remain? Is it not also a truism
that it cannot be achieved by gnawing away lands that
belong to others? Is it not also a truism that claims to
security, no matter how justified and understandable,
cannot be hinged on the insecurity of others?

77. To the representative of Yugoslavia, who spoke this
morning /2722nd meeting], ! could have simply answered
that his Government is hardly entitled to judge the rights
and wrongs of the present situation in the Middle East. By
bowing to President Nasser’s first war step in 1967, the
demand to remove the United Nations Emergency Force
from Sinai and Gaza, and by withdrawing the Yugoslav
contingent from that Force even before the SecretaryGeneral had time to react to Egypt’s demands, Yugoslavia
contributed in no small measure to the deterioration of the
situation culminating in the outbreak of full-scale hostilities.

72. The time has come when a11concerned should, in the
words of the Secretary-General, try:
L‘4 . . to look to the future and to take advantage of
international instrumentalities at their disposal and of the
general and fervent desire of the international community
to open a new and more harmonious chapter in the
history of the Middle East”. [S/10929, pam. 118.j

78. Instead, however, I shall say to Yugoslavia: We are
Mediterranean countries. The Mediterranean shouid bind
together the States on its shores and not divide them. You
spoke of contributions to peace. Why do you not then
contribute? Why do you not bring Israel and the neighbouring Arab States together as part of the Mediterranean
family? You will not be able to do that however-you
will
not be able to help the parties reach agreement-if you take
a totally one-sided attitude as expressed in your statement
today.

The Secretary-General also stated that:
“ . . . the procedures of the Council still offer valuable
possibilities for limiting conflict and also for assisting the
countries of the region to find the way to a solution to
their problems, if they so wish. The Security Council is,
as far as I know, the only forum where all the parties to
the conflict have been able to meet together in the same
room. In the forthcoming debate it is to be hoped that
this advantage may be used for constructive moves
towards a settlement.“(/bid.,
para. 116.1

79. Mr. President, on several occasions you have expressed
unhappiness with the fact that I single out your statements
for reaction. But how could it be otherwise? Here we were
listening to the statement made by you as the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, a
statement longer than most of those delivered in this
debate, a statement of singular interest if only because you
not only expressed your Government’s views but also
claimed to express the views of the Arab States regarding
Israel’s fundamental rights to sovereignty. The trouble is
that the Arab speeches, to which we listened here in this
debate, reflected a different attitude from the one attributed to the Arab States by the Soviet representative on this
very question of Israel’s basic right to independence. I
think that if there were any doubts that debates in the
Security Council can serve no useful purpose because they
inevitably lead to polemics and recrimination, the statement by the Soviet representative has removed them. If
there were need to convince anyone that, as declared by
Israel’s Foreign Minister, debates in the Security Council
cannot contribute to harmony and understanding but
generally widen and deepen the differences, the Soviet
representative’s statement has been a most convincing
factor.

These, in our view, are words of wisdom with which we
cannot agree more.
73. We do have the frame of action in the form of
resolution 242 (1967). Ambassador Jarring-to whose wisdom and dedication I should pay special tribute-is present
here. We have the advantage of the presence of the Foreign
Minister of Egypt and high-level representation of all other
parties directly concerned. The pressure of time and that of
world public opinion weighs heavily on our shoulders; this
is a historical moment to be seized upon. I earnestly hope
that it will not be missed.
74. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I call on
the representative of Israel, who has requested to speak in
exercise of the right of reply.
75. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I wish the United Nations
could have recognized the right of membership of the 12
tribes of Israel as it has the right of membership of the 18
branches of the Arab nation. We would have felt much
happier sitting around this table and leaving it to some
other representatives to speak on behalf of the Jewish
people.

SO. There was nothing new in the speech by the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: the
usual unfounded charges, the old clichCs, the customary
references to one-sided resolutions, proving only one thing,
that Israel is a small people in the family of nations and is
outnumbered by 18 Arab States and their supporters.
Nothing constructive, nothing forward looking.

76. We heard earlier today the representative of Morocco,
and to him I would simply say that my reaction to the Arab
9

Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Mr. Tarasenko, stated
in the Security Council:

81. The Soviet representative, for instance, charged Israel
with propaganda. In this Security Council some time ago,
on 4 March 1949, Ambassador Malik said on that point:

“ . . . an armed struggle is taking place in Palestine as a
result of the unlawful invasion by a number of States of
the territory of Palestine, which does not form part of the
territory of any of the States whose armed forces have
invaded it.” [306th meeting, p. 7.1

“I would like to draw the attention of the President and
of the Council to the fact that some representatives in the
Council, as well as in other organs of the United Nations,
have developed the habit of loudly uttering the word
‘propaganda’ whenever they are short of arguments . , ,“.
/414th meeting, p. 24.1

86. On 30 May 1948, Pruvda had the following
about the situation in the Middle East:

to say

82. The Soviet Ambassador also charged Israel with
having, shall we say, a rather reserved view about automatic
majorities in the Security Council and in the General
Assembly. But he himself, at a meeting in this Security
Council of 22 August 1968 had the following to say about
automatic majorities:

87. On 9 June 1948 New Times stated:

“They have acted illegally, They have violated the
Charter of the United Nations by dragging this question
into the Security Council and by the use of their
automatic majority.” [1443rd meeting, pura. 276. /

“Soviet public opinion decisively condemns the aggression of the Arab States against the State of Israel and
their attempts to interfere with the people of Israel in the
creation of its State.”

83. In my opening statement in this debate I stressed that
there can be no peace without truth. Now, the truth of the
situation in the Middle East is entirely different from the
picture painted here by the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics. This is so regarding his references to the situation in Israeli-administered territories,
for instance. I shall not burden the Council with detailed
analysis of conditions in those areas, I made some comments on that matter on previous occasions. Suffice it to
quote from a report published in various international
media of information on 15 April 1971:

88. The Arab war against Israel to which these pronounce.
ments refer has not ended. It continues till this very day.
The fact that the victim of Arab aggression has succeeded in
repelling and defeating those who sought to destroy it has
not turned the aggressor into a righteous one, in the same
way as the defeat of the Nazis at Stalingrad and the crossing
of the German borders by Soviet armies did not make the
USSR an aggressor. Truth cannot be subject lo the whims
of the moment of one or another Government, including
that of the USSR.

“Mohammad Khalaf, a Minister
Government, put it the other day:

“The operations being conducted by the Arab States
cannot be defined otherwise than as aggression committed without any provocation.”

89. On 2 September 1964 an article appeared in Pravda in
reply to various international demands that the Soviet
Union should relinquish territories it had acquired as a
consequence of the Second World War. The article stated:

in King Hussein’s

” ‘The workers over there have everything to attract
them: unemployment insurance, social security, three
weeks’ vacation, unions. It is absurd to want to make that
proIetariat into the driving force of a Palestine revolution’.”

“A people which has been attacked, has defended itself
and wins the war is bound in sacred duty to establish in
perpetuity a political situation which will ensure the
liquidation of the sources of aggression. It is entitled to
maintain this state of affairs as long as the danger of
aggression does not cease. A nation which has attained
security at the cost of numerous victims will never agree
to the restoration of previous borders. No territories arc
to be returned as long as the danger of aggression still
prevails.”

84. Now, this is the very opposite of what the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics alleged
about the grim conditions of life in Israeli-held territories.
Indeed, I would add that if the citizens of such Arab
countries as Syria and Iraq enjoyed as many social rights
and freedoms of movement, thought and expression as
prevail in the Israeli-administered areas, then the Soviet
Union would find itself supporting progressive governments rather than lending its name and its prestige to feudal
military r6gimes.

90. On more than one occasion I have stressed that there
must be one law equally applicable to all States. Yet Israel
does not go as far as the precepts expressed by Prcrvdo.
What Israel is saying is that, in accordance with resolution
242 (1967), for the first time in Israeli-Arab relations
secure and recognized boundaries should be established by
negotiation and agreement between the parties.

85. There is an equally great gap between the Soviet
statement and the truth about the fundamental nature of
the conflict and its present repercussions. This is evident
even from a study of relevant Soviet pronouncements. The
conflict, we remember, started in 1948, and on 29 May
1948, Mr. Gromyko, today the Foreign Minister of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, spoke of how “the
Arab States organized the invasion of Palestine”. Two days
earlier, on 27 May 1948, the representative of the

91. The only agreements ever concluded and signed by
Israel and the Arab States were achieved through negotiations. At the time, the Security Council played w
important role in bringing about those negotiations. On 10
November 1948 the Acting Mediator, the late Mr. Ralph
Bunche, reported to the Security Council on the situatiotl
10

in the Middle East and suggested that an armistice be
established between Israel and the Arab States [see 379th
meeting/. The delegation of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics proposed (ibid.J that the central provisions of
the resolution based on Mr. Bunche’s report should read:

effective and helpful in securinga genuinesettlement by
peaceful means, , .” [Ibid., pp. 13-l 41.
96. The Ambassadorwent on in words most pertinent to
the present situation under discussionby the Security
Council:

“The Security Council,
“Thus the bitter lessonof eventsin Palestineteachesus
that all the meansso far employed for solving this
problem have proved fruitless. The situation now is such
that probably none of us would be surprised if the
interested parties themselves, impelled by their own
interests, were suddenly to ceaseto heed what wasbeing
imposed on them from outside and entered into direct
negotiations with the object of settling all the outstanding
questions, thus confronting the Security Council and the
Mediator with a fait accompli.

‘I . * .
‘Qz/.!s spun the parties directly involved in the conflict
in Palestine, in order to eliminate this threat to peace,
immediately to begin negotiations, directly or through
the good offices of the Acting United Nations Mediator in
Palestine, . . . [for]
“(b)

The establishment of a formal peace”.

92. At its 381st meeting, on 16 November 1948, the
Security Council adopted resolution 62 (1948) which contained the basic idea of the USSR text, calling, however, for
the establishment of an armistice, The Council called upon

“The USSR delegation feels that those who genuinely
desire a peaceful solution of the Palestinianproblem in
the interests . , . of Palestinewould welcome this turn of
events and would do all in their power to bring it about.”
[ibid., pp. I7-18.1

“the parties directly involved in the conflict in Palestine,
as a further provisional measure under Article 40 of the
Charter, to seek agreement forthwith, by negotiations
conducted either directly or through the Acting Mediator
[on Palestine] “.

97. Then he added:
the USSR delegationconsidersthat the wisestand
most expedient proposal would be to offer the parties
concerned the opportunity to try to settle all outstanding
questions by direct negotiations‘or negotiationswith the
assistanceof the Acting Mediator”, [Ibid., p. 18.J
‘L

.

93. In the course of the debates which preceded the
adoption of that resolution, representatives around the
Council table addressed themselves to the mechanism of
negotiation and its advantages in promoting the cause of
peace, During one of his interventions in the debate the
representativeof Egypt, Mahmoud Fawzi Bey, declared:

.

*

98. Speaking on the draft resolution the representativeof
the United Statesdeclared:

5s* . I I cannot agree with the observationsmade by the
representative of the USSR in connexion with the
principle of negotiations. . .” [377th meeting,para. 4.51.

“The effect of this new resolution, if adoptedby the
Council, would be to suggesta new direction for those
negotiations.“[Ibid., p. 27.j
99, The representativeof Belgiumstatedinter aliu:

94. At the 380th meetingof the Security Council, on 1.5
November 1948, AmbassadorMalik, today the President of
the Security Council, replied:
“As a result of a preliminary exchangeof views, most
members of the Security Council as well as the Acting
Mediator have recently stated [that they were] in favour
of general talks between the two partiesinvolved in the
Palestinian conflict and that these talks might develop
into the next stageon the way to a peacefulsolution to
the situation in Palestine.. . , it wasindeedtime for the
parties in Palestine to begin negotiations directly or
through the Acting Mediator.

“The draft gives very specific indications: by negotiations conducted either directly betweenthe parties or
through the Acting Mediator”. [/bid., p. 20.1
100. The representativeof Canadaobserved:
“I associatemyself with these remarksof the Belgian
representative.” f381st meeting,p, 25.1
101. The Syrian representative,Mr. El-Khomi, explained
at the 381st meeting of the Security Council, on 16
November 1948, why the Arab Statesrejected the method
of negotiations, and I quote from his statement:

“In view of that, it would be impolitic to adopt any
decision on details that might complicatethese bilateral
negotiations. Needlessto say that in the course of such
negotiations any question may be discussed”./38O~+h
meerit?g,pp. 12-13.J
95. At the samemeeting,AmbassadorMalik also declared:
“In our view, it would be preferable to adopt fewer
decisions, but when adoptedthey shouldbe such asto be
11

“Such negotiations as have been called for-and the
Arabs have been invited to enter into direct negotiation
with the Jews-would be possibleonly if there were no
dispute between them regarding the essenceof the
situation in Palestine. Broadly speaking, negotiations
would take place between two Statesin conflict over any
matter such as frontiers or any other things, but
negotiation impliesmutual recognition of the sovereignty
of both States; but in this case,this doesnot exist. We

negotiate with Israel, the Security Council adopted the
resolution which called for negotiations. That was a bold
and decisive move. In the wake of the resolution the Arab
States dropped their objections and entered into the talks
that led to the Armistice Agreements.

should understand the question from the beginning: not
this year, or last year, but for a quarter of a century, or
even for thirty years, since the Balfour Declaration was
made known in November 1917, the Arabs have never
accepted the creation of a Jewish sovereign State in
Palestine; they have never accepted immigration into
Palestine on a large scale.

106. With regard to the Security Council resolution of 16
November 1948, the Acting Mediator, Mr. Ralph Bunche,
stated:

“NOW, the negotiations which are intended, either by
the Security Council or by other parties inviting the
Arabs to enter into negotiations, would entail recognition
by the Arabs of the state of things as it stands, the
consideration of the Jews in Palestine as a State, and that
they should negotiate regarding frontiers, economic
matters, communications, transport, or any other matters
which may arise between two sovereign States. But this is
the focal point of the dispute. The whole dispute in
Palestine hangs on this point: whether or not there is to
be a Jewish State in Palestine.” [381st meeting, p. 9.1

“negotiations, either directly or through a United Nations
intermediary, are to be promptly undertaken”. [Ibid,,
p. 41.1
107. On the next day, 17 November 1948, he sent a letter
[S/1090/ to the Provisional Government of Israel and to
the Governments of Egypt, Iraq, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia,
Syria, Trans-Jordan and Yemen in which he stated bltEr
alia:

102. The Egyptian representative offered the same explanation:

“I wish to reiterate my sincere belief that the interests
of all parties to this dispute would be best served by
direct negotiations undertaken by the parties themselves.
But whether the parties decide that the negotiations
should proceed directly or through a United Nations
intermediary, the services and good offices of myself and
staff are always at their disposal for every possible
assistance in the effort to achieve peace in Palestine.”

“I shall stop here for a moment on this point. In so far
as negotiations are concerned I have already stated more
than once to the Council my point of view and the
determination of my Government not to negotiate with
the Zionists. We do net recognize them as a party. We still
stand by our position which was upheld by the United
Kingdom Government more than once. As 1 have mentioned to the Council before, in London, although we
were all there, we usually used to call them the London
Conferences. The British were negotiating with the Jews
and with the Arabs, but the Jews and the Arabs were not
negotiating through the British. This to some people
might seem a mere technicality, but it touches the very
crux of the whole matter.

108. In his report to the President of the Security Council
dated 6 January 1949 (S/1187],
the Acting Mediator
wrote:
“I have the honour to inform you that the Government
of Egypt and the Provisional Government of Israel have
notified my representatives in Cairo and Tel Aviv,
respectively, of their unconditional acceptance of a
proposal providing for a cease-fire to be immediately
followed by direct negotiations between representatives
of the two Governments under United Nations chair.
manship”.

“If there are negotiations at all, we certainly welcome
the idea that they should be carried out with representatives of the United Nations. We not only encourage
them but we welcome negotiations with representatives
of the United Nations; however we should not be forced
to negotiate with people with whom we do not want to
negotiate and whom we do not recognize as a party.”
[Ibid., p. 21.1

109. In his cablegram [S/120.5/ dated 12 January 1949
also addressed to the President of the Security Council,
Mr. Bunche reported the arrival of the Israeli and Egyptian
delegations in Rhodes. He said:

103. Here was, therefore, the same Arab opposition to
negotiations as today. The Arab delegations at the time
were perhaps somewhat more explicit in indicating the
motivation of their refusal to negotiate, It is precisely the
motivation which, we submit, lurks also behind the present
refusal-unwillingness
to abandon definitely and unequivocally any claims on Israel’s fundamental right to exist as a
sovereign State.

“Both delegations are empowered to negotiate. . , , I
shall hold further meetings with each delegation to.
morrow morning, 13 January, and the first joint meeting
under United Nations chairmanship is fixed for 3.30 p.m.
on the same day.”
110. And in another
January 1949 he states:

104. It is for this reason that readiness to enter into
negotiations is not merely a question of applying the only
method that could bring agreement between the parties,
but a test of the Arab States’ genuine desire for real peace
with Israel.

cablegram (S/1209/

dated

13

“This afternoon, 13 January, the first joint meeting was
held. At this meeting the delegations were introduced. . . .
Meetings will now proceed on the substantive items on
three levels as follows: (1) Preliminary discussions separately with each delegation; (2) Informal
meetings
between heads of delegations and United Nations;
(3) Joint formal meetings of the two delegations, The
conciliatory spirit of both parties and the progress made in

105, The most important development in the 1948 experience was that despite the strong Arab opposition to
12

matters of procedure
successful results.”

continue

to inspire hope for

foundation whatever in law, logic or in international
conduct. There can be no Israeli withdrawal without
agreement between the parties on the line to which
withdrawal would take place. The sequence can only be
negotiation, agreement, withdrawal, and not the other way
around. The refusal to negotiate on the grounds of
occupation is unprecedented in history. Moreover, it is to
be recalled that when in 1948 the Security Council called
upon Israel and the Arab States to negotiate, a situation of
occupation obtained as well. At that time, however, it was
Israeli territory
that was under occupation. Egyptian,
Syrian and Jordanian forces occupied large areas of Israel.
Yet neither Israel nor anyone else considered it even
possible to suggest that the occupation constituted an
obstacle to negotiation. All understood that negotiation
and agreement was the only way to end the occupation. In
fact, it was only after the signature of the Armistice that
the armed forces of Egypt, Jordan and Syria withdrew from
Israeli territory behind the demarcation lines established by
agreenient between the parties.

111, In a telegram [S/122.5/ dated 2.5 January 1949 he
insists:
“ . . . that the proceedings of the negotiations are not to
be released in any way”-1 repeat, the proceedings of the
negotiations are not to be released in any way-“until
the
negotiations are concluded.”
112. Mr. Bunche, as we all know, succeeded in bringing
about the conclusion of four Armistice Agreements
between Israel and Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria.
113. On 3 March 1949, Ambassador Malik commented in
the Council on the Israeli-Egyptian agreement as follows:
“The USSR delegation notes with satisfaction the
successful outcome of the negotiations between Egypt
and the State of Israel, which it regards as a most
favourable development in the Palestine question. Ever
since the Palestine question first arose, the USSR delegation has maintained that direct negotiations between
the two parties were the best way of settling the disputes
which have arisen between the State of Israel and the
Arab States.

118. Egypt’s objections to negotiations now must therefore be considered as mere pretexts. Israel was ready to
conform with international practice and negotiate when its
territory was occupied by Arab States. There is no valid
reason why Egypt should not conform with the general
usage and negotiate with Israel now. The real question is
whether the Security Council will encourage Egypt to do it.
In 1948 the Council rose above the claims and counterclaims of the parties, above the truce and its violations, and
looked to the future and called for negotiations. The
Council faces a similar choice today. It could continue to
remain enmeshed in the sterility of partisan views or it
could elevate itself and call for negotiations. This is the
only constructive contribution the Security Council could
make to the Middle East situation at this juncture.

“Events have justified this stand. Only direct conversations have enabled both sides to bring the negotiations
to a successful close, and thus, to a certain extent, to take
the first step towards the settlement of their disputes.”
/413th meeting, p. 4.1
114. When all four of the Armistice Agreements were
signed, Mr. Bunche reported to the Secretary-General by
letter of 21 July 1949, in which he said, inter aliu:

119. The PRESIDENT (translatiorz from Russian): A
number of delegations have requested to speak in exercise
of the right of reply. However, in view of the fact that in
his statement in exercise of the right of reply the
representative of Israel devoted most attention to me, both
in connexion with my statement today and in connexion
with my statements on the Middle East in the Security
Council in 1948 and 1949, I reserve the right to speak first
in exercise of the right of reply, as the representative of the
SOVIET UNION, and then 1 shall give the other delegations
on my list an opportunity to do likewise.

“The negotiations leading to these agreements were, in
each case, tortudus and difficult. But they demonstrate
that once the parties could be brought together, they
could, with United Nations assistance, be led to reasonable and honourable agreement.” /S/1357, part 1,
para. 5.1
115. That was the only Security Council experience with
the Middle East situation in 2.5 years which bore fruit. The
1948 Council call for negotiations between the parties
produced the only step towards peace that Israel and the
Arab States ever took together. It was not a big step. It did
not bring about the final peaceful settlement which the
Arab States undertook to reach with Israel. Yet it was a
significant step in the right direction.

120. The representative of Israel produces a great number
of quotations. 1 imagine that many representatives in the
United Nations may be envious of him. Judging from the
quotations he produced yesterday and today, he apparently
has a huge army at work gathering quotations. They say
that he has a large number of people gathering quotations
not only in the Israeli Mission but also in the editorial
offices of certain American newspapers. He is lucky. But his
quotations miss the mark. They missed the mark yesterday
because he quoted the personal opinions of private individuals. Despite the lofty positions which these individuals
may occupy-although,
it is true, he did not quote only
highly placed persons, but any journalist who came to
hand-the opinion of one individual is unconvincing. But
the opinion of 140 States in the United Nations Conference

116. If Egypt and the other Arab States really desire to
attain genuine peace with Israel, there can be no reason, no
reason whatever, that would justify their refusal to enter
negotiations with Israel without pre-conditions as they did
in response to the 1948 Security Council resolution.
117. Egypt’s Minister for Foreign Affairs tried in the
present debate to explain his Government’s rejection of
negotiations by alleging that Israeli occupation constitutes
an impediment, indeed, a prior condition, This claim has no
13

adopt a resolution on talks, similar to the 1948 resolution,
pointing out that Israel commits itself, and gives a solemn
undertaking and promise, to withdraw all its troops from
Arab territories. If the representative of Israel will make a
formal statement to that effect on behalf of the Israeli
Government at a meeting of the Security Council, I think
that the members of the Council will consider the matter
and, possibly, will adopt an appropriate resolution. I shall
wait and see. If he is authorized to make such a statement,
then let him state that Israel is in favour of talks and that it
undertakes, giving a solemn pledge at a meeting of the
Security Council, to agree to withdraw all its troops from
all the occupied Arab territories. I think that it would then
be possible to find a basis for agreement.

on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the opinion of 132
States in the General Assembly, the opinion of 99 States of
the third world, which submitted a proposal to UNCTAD
demanding the withdrawal of troops and the ending of
Israel’s occupation of Arab territory-this
is on a world
scale, It is not a quotation from a private individual; it is
the opinion of the whole world.
121. The statements quoted by the representative of Israel
were countered with quotations from recent resolutions of
the anniversary session of OAU. This is not quoting private
individuals, this is the voice of the whole of Africa. And
even though Israel disregards it, no quotations culled either
from newspapers or from the records of the Security
Council can justify or cover up Israel’s aggressive policy or
the injustice of the demands it makes here that the Council
should sanction this aggression and recognize Israel’s right
to hold the foreign territories which it has seized. I can
officially assure Israel that it will never obtain that from the
Security Council, no matter how many quotations it
produces.

126. These are the contemporary realities, and no quotations from 1948, 1949 or subsequent years can either cover
up or justify Israel’s aggression and its disregard and
violation of the Charter and the decisions of the United
Nations. These are the realities, these the facts.
127. Mr. Tekoah mentioned the history of the Second
World War. Mr. Tekoah, read Article 107 of the Charter.
Article 107 of the Charter states:

122. The representative of Israel is using methods which a
Russian proverb describes as mixing eggs with boots and
offering the result as a tasty dish. But he has not succeeded
with these methods so far and he will not do so now. The
situation in 1948 was one thing, the present situation is
another. In 1948 there were no Israeli troops occupying the
east bank of the Suez Canal; in 1948 there were no Security
Council decisions accusing and condemning Israel for its
aggression against the Arab countries; in 1948 and 1949
there was no resolution 242 (1967). There was no United
Nations machinery, in the form of a Special Representative
of the Secretary-General authorized by the Security
Council to take steps to promote a peaceful political
settlement in the Middle East without annexation or
plunder. Israel’s acts of aggression had not been considered
on more than 20 occasions in the Security Council. At that
time the 10 Security Council resolutions condemning Israel
for its aggression and failure to comply with United Nations
decisions did not exist. None of this existed at that time.

“Nothing in the present Charter shall invalidate or
preclude action, in relation to any State which during the
Second World War has been an enemy of any signatory to
the present Charter, taken or authorized as a result of
that war by the Governments having responsibility for
such action.”
128. And your quotation from Pravda concerning frontier
changes after the Second World War was based on this
provision of the Charter. Israel has nothing like that. There
are, and will be, no decisions of the United Nations or of
any other international organization justifying Israel’s
aggression and annexation of the territories of other States.
Do not expect any such decisions. You will not obtain
them from the Security Council. You will not obtain them
from UNCTAD, because UNCTAD has defined its position
by condemning Israel’s aggression and demanding the
withdrawal of its troops. You will not obtain them from
OAU. More than 40 African States in OAU voted to
condemn Israel’s aggression and demand the withdrawal of
Israeli troops. You will not obtain the approval of the
countries of the socialist community. You will not obtain
the approval of the third world. Where, then, will you
obtain approval? From your protectors’? Your policy will
gain no strength from that source; on the contrary, you are
isolated throughout the world; no one will justify your
aggression and still less the annexation of the territories of
other States. The whole world demands the withdrawal of
Israeli troops from the occupied territories. Therefore, do
not hide behind quotations from the late President Johnson
or American journalists or quotations from the records of
the Security Council of 1948. That will not help. The only
circumstance to which I wish to draw attention is this. By
repeating all this, the representative of Israel is trying to
distract the Security Council from consideration of the
substance of the item. But he will not succeed. So far
everyone who has spoken, apart from one biased represen.
tative, has demanded the withdrawal of troops and the
liberation of the territories as a fundamental condition of a

123. But according to the laws of dialectics-and MarxistLeninist philosophy is based on dialectics-the realities have
changed. The development of international relations over
the past two or three years shows that even the most
hard-nosed proponents of the “cold war” and apostles of
the policy of solving international problems “from a
position of strength” have come to the conclusion that this
policy is bankrupt and that it is better to pursue a policy
which takes account of contemporary realities. The only
State which has not yet come to that conclusion is Israel, It
continues to live by the legends of 4,000 years ago and by
the situation as it was in 1948 and it tries to draw a parallel.
124. The only useful thing which the representative of
Israel did was to remind us, by quoting my statement, that
I was in favour of effective measures at that time. Yes, I
was in favour of effective measures then, and I am now. But
as to which effective measures-read the statement I made
today more carefully.
12.5. He mentioned the Council resolution on the riced for
talks. Well, what of it; the Council, if it wishes, can now
14

settlement in the Middle East. You, Mr, Tekoah, should
take account of this opinion and of the opinion of the
United Nations expressedthrough the General Assembly
and the Security Council; you shouldalsotake account of
the voice of the third world speakingthrough UNCTAD,
the voice of Africa in the resolutionsadoptedby OAU, and
the voice of the third world in the resolutionsadopted at
Lusaka and Georgetown. That is the voice of the world.
Except for a few individuals, no one in the world supports
you. This is the contemporary reality that you must reckon
with. You have no choice. If you want to distract the
Security Council with your quotations, you will not
succeed.The Councilwill continue to considerthe situation
in the Middle East; we shall considerIsraeliaggressionand
we shall consider how to solve this problem without
abandoning the condition of the withdrawal of Israeli
troops from the occupiedterritories.

1947-as the first step towards further annexation and
expansion, as indeed is shown by what happenedto the
armistice lines in other wars and in other annexationsand
in other occupations. There are many mapsthat can be
shown about this. I think we even had one of those maps
placedat the disposalof the Councila long time ago.As for
the second resolution-that of November 1967-Israel
accepts it provided it is going to be the pretext also for
more annexations and occupations. In order to get the
secondresolution to read asIsraelwants,the Councilheard
yesterday the explanation given by the State of Israel in
regard to that resolution. Thus, we are now officialIy
confronted here by the distortions and the twisted explanations registeredby the Governmentof Israel before the
Security Council. There are distortions even in the
wording-they say “the establishmentof frontiers”, but
that does not appear in the text. These distortions we
deplore. These twisted explanationswe totally reject. We
have already shown how we understand this same resolution, basing our understandingon its preamble,on the
Charter, ,on the declarationsof the United Nationsand on
other resolutionsof the United Nations.

129. As PRESIDENT of the Security Council, I call on the
representative of Egypt to speakin exerciseof the right of
reply.
130. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): The Israelirepresentatives
have always madeus understandthat they wish the United
Nations to have nothing to do with the present war
situation in our area, that they insist today on what they
insisted upon in November 1967-that is, that the victor sit
with his victim and dictate the terms of surrender, or of
peace, asthey may call it. Today I suspectthere is a little
change in tactics, becausenow they speakabout Ralph
Bunche and they speakabout 1947 and they speak about
the possibilitiesof getting the United Nationsinvolved in a
peaceeffort,
131. First, in regard to Ralph Bunche, it was my good
luck-perhaps not suchgood luck for the Israelis-that I was
able to speak to that man at length about the 1967
aggression.I am not going to quote personswho are not
with us. I am only going to make a very short reference to
him. They speakabout Bunche and about the agreements
that came out of his work. What happened to those
agreements?Where are the Armistice Agreements? What
happened to them in 1956, when the Prime Minister of
Israel declared them dead and buried, when the Prime
Minister of Israel in the Knesset officially annexed the
peninsula of Sinai? What happenedto those agreements
and what happened to the other agreement, that of
Lausanne? In the third progressreport of the United
Nations Conciliation Con,mission,dated 21 June 1949,z
the story of the Israelis’renunciation of their signatureon
the Conciliation Commission’s
Lausanneagreementis given,
but I do not want to quote it now. Where are those
agreements?
132. Mr. President,you askedfor a statement;I am asking
for one: Let the Israeli delegationsay now that it respects
and wants usto respectthoseAgreements,Then we will see
what we will say. We may agree.If I understandthe Israeli
representative well-and I think I do-Israel accepts, of all
the United Nations resolutions, only two: General Assembly resolution of 1947 on partition [I81 (I.)/ and the
Security
Council resolution of November 1967
(242 f1967)j. But it acceptsthe first resolution-that of
2 Ibid.,

Fourth

Session,

vol. II, documentA/927.

Ad

Hoc

Political

Committee,

133. We have a hoard of quotations which I do not wish
to read out now, but I wish them to be madepart of the
verbatim records of the Security Council. These are
statementsby membersof the Council in 1967 explaining
their votes: the representative of India, the representative
of Ethiopia, the representativeof Nigeria,the representative
of France, the representativeof Bulgaria,the representative
of the Soviet Union, the representativeof Argentina, the
representative of Japan and, if we do not distort their
statementsor take them out of context, the representative
of Brazil and the representativeof the United Kingdom;
and, last but certainly not least, there are the explanations
given by the President of the Council for the month of
November 1967, the representativeof Mali. I have these
quotations, I do not have any intention of reading them
out, but, with your permission,Mr. President,I wish them
to be madepart of the verbatim recordsfor the benefit of
the Council members.3
134. The Israeli authorities now declarepublicly in this
Council that these understandingsare unacceptable to
them. As a matter of fact that is how they have frozen the
missionof AmbassadorJarringuntil today anddecreedhim
to be out of a mandate. What do we do then? What is the
natural, simple and obvious step we should take? We
obviously come to this Council. We obviously ask the
Council what it did mean.Weare not faced with a text in a
book whose author is long dead. We are not faced with a
text of a mysticai poem which the poet wishesto remain
provocative and mysterious. We have a resolution by the
highest Council in the world, dealingwith suchunmystical
matters as matters of peaceand war, a Council which is
permanently in session and permanently available. Its
resolutionsare and should be precisetexts, built on precise
principles of the Charter, easily translatable and easily
transmittable to all parties. We not only ask, aswe are
entitled to ask, “What did you mean by your November
1967 resolution? ” We ask,aswe areentitfed to ask, “What
do you meannow? ”
3The quotationsreferredto by the Foreign Minister of @YPt
were issued on 13 June 1973, as document S/10948.

Awwx,

15

135. I am gratified that the representative of the United
Kingdom, the original author of the 1967 resolution, has
spoken in such clear terms about at least two main points
of that resolution. We appeal to the members of the
Council to give us such clear declarations. We like to know
where we are.
136. The purpose of the present intervention, the purpose
of my calling on the Council, the purpose of my coming
here, is to find out whether or not we understand the
United Nations Charter well, whether or not we understand
the Council well, when we say that this Council must affirm
again, first, the principle of non-acquisition of territories by
war, and of course the negation of any action against this
principle; second, the principle of the territorial integrity of
States and the collective responsibility of all Member States
to preserve that territorial integrity; third, the principle of
self-determination acclaimed by all United Nations Members and its application to all the nations of the world.

certainly aware that such a process would end in the
occupied, defeated countries accepting the dictation of the
occupier and the victor. And as I have said before, for this
there is no need for the Council’s efforts, there is no need
for General Assembly efforts, there is no need for the effort
of the United States of America, or the efforts of the USSR
or France or the United Kingdom or India or Indo-China.
If, God forbid, we should do that, we would not want the
help of anyone in this very simple act of surrender. If, on
the other hand, we resist-and we will-then
the negotiations would be only the entrance to a situation where the
parties would have to face each other, on our part
defending our destiny.
142. The situation which warrants my presence here and
the presence of the Foreign Ministers of Africa and the
Arab countries, the situation which warrants the time that
the Council has given to this examination of it, the
situation which warrants the voyage of Ambassador Jarring
from Moscow to here, is indeed grave. We have summarizcd
our position.

137. Let me put before the Council and before the
representative of the United Kingdom an example of how
serious and grave are the explanations given on behalf of
the Israeli authorities last night. The representative of Israel
was speaking about an interim arrangement, and I think
that he said that this could be useful if linked with a
commitment that resolution 242 (1967) would be implemented in all its parts. What resolution 242 (1967)? The
one about whose interpretation by the representative of
Israel we have now been informed? The one that gives
Israel a part of Egypt and a part of Syria and a part of
Jordan? The one that says: Yes, by war you can change
international borders? The one that wishes all the nation of
Palestinians away by not wanting to see them exist, and by
saying only that there are some refugees and that some
philanthropic help can perhaps be provided for them? If
this is the link, where are we?

143. We have come to the Council in search of hope.
Closing all doors to hope is an Israeli policy, is the Israeli
policy. Israel has sought to close every door, to kill ever);
hope, and to marshal the forces of despair to stifle our
resistance to their occupation. Our policy is to counteract
that. We solicit your help. We solicit gratefully the help of
all nations and their national councils and international
gatherings. We abstain as long as we humanly can from
taking any steps, even steps legally accorded to every natiorr
for self-defence under the Charter, until it has been proven
that no other course at‘al! is open to us. When there is no
hope, when the Israeli policy succeeds in killing every hope,
I beg you to know that there remain two doors, nut one,
and the door of surrender we will never take,
144. Again we have come to this Council to win a battle
against despair.

138. Also-and I must speak very frankly-any
task
entrusted or to be entrusted by this Council to our
distinguished Secretary-General or to his representative, or
to anyone, would surely reach the same deadlock if we
were to leave the terms of reference as vague as to
warrant-although
they never did-the explanations given
by the Israeli representative last night.

145. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I call
on the representative of Jordan to speak in exercise of rhc
right of reply.
146. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): The representative of Israel
has resorted again to a flight from a constructive look at the
future to a sterile look at the past. But this is not only
sterile, it is also self-defeating.

139. We do not have another six years of our lives in
Egypt to give away. The Council should leave no shadow of
doubt about what it means in application of the principles
enshrined in the Charter.

147. The Arab position can be understood better only in
its historic context. It can only be understood against lhc
backgroundof the Palestinianholocaust of 1947-1948 and
the successive
wavesof Israel’sexpansion at the expense uf
its neighboursfrom 1948 until this moment. Nor does the
sterileflight to the past add credibility to Israel’sanalysis of
the concept of negotiations between the Arabs and the
Israelisas advanced by it in the context of our present
debate.

140. Regarding those who spoke about negotiations, in
thanking my colleague from Iran I wish to tell him that the
preconditions put by the Israelis are the occupation and
their statement to Ambassador Jarring that they will never
withdraw to the lines from which they attacked. My
statement should be read in ftdl. We stand by it. We are
ready for any talks within the framework of the United
Nations, as I said in my statement, when these pre-conditions are removed.

148. The Foreign Minister of Egypt made references tt~
the agreementsmadebetween the Arabs and the Israelis in
1949. It was the Israeli representative who raised the
question and referred to the negotiations which led ttb
them. Well, it is good of him to mention them. The

141. Those who speak about negotiations or about negotiating processes on the basis of resolution 242 (1967), with
the present interpretations and explanations of Israel, are
16

Armistice Agreements which were negotiated by the Arabs
and the Israelis under the auspices of the United Nations
were unilaterally abrogated by Israel when the political and
territorial advantage accruing from them was achieved.

the occupying Power. They cannot be isolated from the
policies of settlement in those territories. They cannot be
isolated from the transfer of population. They cannot be
isolated from the physical and demographic dissolution of
the structure of the most prominent area of Arab existence
under occupation, namely, Jerusalem.

149. The Protocol of Lausanne of 12 May 1949, which
again was referred to by the representative of Israel, was
something that was arrived at by a negotiation between the
Arabs and the Israelis under the auspices of the United
Nations and was unilaterally detracted from by Israel
because it redefined the borders to be established for Israel
in accordance with the partition resolution of 29 November
1947. It was upon the basis of that agreement-the Protocol
of Lausanne-that Israel was awarded its seat in the United
Nations and it was shortly afterwards that the Foreign
Minister of Israel came to the hall of the General Assembly
and said, “The clock cannot be turned back. Having
achieved the agreement and the signature of the Arabs, we
will not return to the borders which we ourselves signed
and accepted”.

155. Some months ago, the Israeli Government opened a
campaign to encourage Israeli businessmen and industrialists to invest in permanent industrial projects in the
occupied Arab territories. Subsidies and tax exemptions are
provided for such investments.

150. So, if there is any lesson to be drawn from the Israeli
reference to the past, it is a lesson that erodes the
credibility of the Israeli insistence on negotiations with the
Arabs outside the context of the United Nations and gives
added credibility to the Arab position which says that the
problem of the Middle East ought to be discussed within
the framework of the United Nations, its Charter and its
resolutions, and within the objective operation of a parallel
application of the obligation to peace and the obligation to
total withdrawal.

156. The sources of energy in the West Bank are gradually
tied up with the sources of energy in Israel, including the
electric network. The purpose of this policy is clear: to
render the future of industry in the West Bank wholly
dependent on Israeli policies and control. Israel’s trade
relationship with the West Bank has been manipulated
through a variety of measures to increase the volume of the
Israeli exports to the West Bank. Even in 1970, Israel’s
exports to the West Bank amounted to more than five times
its imports.

154. In this context, Israel’s economic policy, pursued
gradually but consistently, is to swallow the occupied
territories. How can we refer to the agricultural sector
without referring to the Israeli agricultural military settlements established in the fertile occupied areas? Over half a
million dunams have been confiscated. Industrial activity is
also directed to the needs of the Israeli market.

15 1. However, I shall not dwell too much on that aspect. I
shall refer briefly to two aspects which, I think, are
remarkable, in the statement of the Israeli representative.
The first was a comment by the Israeli representative on
your statement, Mr. President, in which you criticized the
situation of the occupied territories. The Israeli representative, marshalling the traditional arguments, gave the
wrong impression of prosperous occupied territories. I need
not reiterate that the very essential principle for judgement
on any aspect of the Israeli occupation is the rejection of
the occupation.

157. And if there are many Arabs under occupation
working in Israeli industry, it is a natural thing. Even during
the Second World War, when the continent of Europe fell
victim to occupation, more than 15 million Europeans were
employed or conscripted to work in the service of Nazi
occupation. Some were conscripted to work even in
warplants to produce ammunition which could only have
prolonged the occupation and their own agony.
15X. So I go back to the overriding factor. The occupation
cannot justify itself by alleged or real economic benefits in
the occupied territories. That was one point I wanted to
make as a brief comment on the Israeli statement.

152. The modern world has advanced beyond the anachronistic and immoral argument for alien domination on
the basis of alleged economic benefit for the people under
it. Colonialism is dying. Its arguments are dead. The
struggle of people for freedom and national liberation has
been reflected in a speedy process of decolonization in
which the United Natiolls helped. At least the argument for
colonialism, racial discrimination and unlawful occupation
has been rejected in this body, particularly when the
argument invokes alleged material benefit for the oppressed
people, Yet the Israeli representative engages in this cynical
line of argument. The level of progress before the Israeli
occupation is treated as non-existent. Natural progress must
be attributed to the efforts of the occupying Power. One
Arab writer, living under the occupation, commented with
painful sarcasm: “My daughter’s age was one year when the
occupation came, She is nearly seven years old now thanks
to the Israeli efforts”.

159. The other point relates to the remarkable and
often-repeated reference in the statements of the Israeli
representatives to so-called one-sided positions. Any third
‘party is bound at one stage or another of his development
and knowledge of the area to develop a one-sided position.
What you can ask of an impartial observer viewing a
problem is to start out open-minded. But you cannot deny
him the right and duty to become increasingly one sided in
the sense of supporting and finding legitimacy and soundness in the position of the aggrieved party. That process is
not unnatural. It is very human. It is also the record and
history of the Arab-Israeli problem.
160. Need I mention the names of impartial people-some
of whom perhaps initially sympathised with Israel-who
descended upon the area and became sympathetic to a
different camp? Need I mention Count Bernadotte of
Sweden? Need I mention General Carl Von Horn, who was

1.53. The Israeli economic measures in the occupied
territories cannot be isolated from the over-all policies of
1’7

revealed in the Security Council debate which do not
accord with the processof Arab co-ordination. That was
followed by an explanation that that official commentary
was directed to the problem created by the suggestions
madeherethat Jordan shouldin fact be dismemberedanda
new entity establishedon part of its territory.

in charge of the armistice, or Commander Hutchison, a
Canadian? Need I mention intellectuals such as Rabbi
Elmer Berger, or Arnold Toynbee, or statesmensuch as
Senator Fulbright, or President de Gaulle, or Governor
Scranton?
161. Wecannot continue this processof denying everyone
who considersthe Arab-Israeliproblem the right to develop
his sympathies,moral position andmoral commitment with
a developingawarenessof the realities and the facts of the
situationand the problem.
162. I shall not in this context mentjon the namesof
people at present engagedin the peace-makingeffort, in
order not to prejudice their positions.But, again,we cannot
accept this continued attack against impartial observers,
peoplewho represent the United Nations or who represent
international objective sources,who develop this kind of
position and this kind of feeling.

169. Mr. President, you referred to Article 107 of the
Charterof the United Nations to explain the acquisitionof
territory by the Soviet Union asresult of war and to suggest
that the Pravda article quoted by me referred to those
acquisitions.I shouldlike first of all to draw your attention
to the fact that Article 107 refersto a State which “during
the SecondWorld War hasbeen an enemy of any signatory
to the . . . Charter”-an enemy State.

170. Nothing that is saidhere suggeststhat the territorial
changesand acquisition of territory by the Soviet Union
from enemy States is to be considered illegal under
international law or the Charter of the United Nations.
163. It is the duty of this Council once it hasheard a case Moreover, the Article refers to action which should not be
from a totally open-mindedposition to move to a one-sided invalidatedor precludedin relation to enemy States, action
in the past and action in the future by no meansonly and
position. And by “one-sided” we mean a position of firm
not necessarilyterritorial questions.
support for the aggrievedparty, the party presentinga valid
caseof grievanceand having a senseof injustice.
171. But what is even more important, there were
164. Finally, the Israeli representative stated that the territorial changesafter the Second World War which did
Security Council debate doesnot serve a useful purpose. not affect enemy States-for instance,Poland, for instance,
Our being here and the fact that our nations are Members Czechoslovakia.There were territorial changes on the
of this Organization attest to the fact that we do not think
Soviet-Polishborder and on the Czechoslovak-Sovietborder
the United Nations obsolete;we do not think the Security
which brought about acquisition of territory through
Council obsolete; nor do we think the debates and agreement.There is nothing at all in the Charter that would
deliberations of the Security Council obsolete. Only one makesuchacquisitionthrotigh agreementappearillegal.
aspect of the deliberations of the Security Council is
obsolete. And that is when a constructive dialogue-a
172. You spoke, Mr. President, in your capacity as the
sincere and determined attempt in a positive spirit to
representativeof the USSR, of changesin the situation and
achieve solutions to problems-isthwarted by the creation
that one should have regard for them. Yes, Israel is
of a polemical atmosphere, That is when the Security
perfectly awareof the changeof attitude that hasoccurred
Council debatesbecomeobsolete.
on the part of the Soviet Union asfar asthe Middle East
situation is concerned, but those changesof policy and
165. It is the duty of all of us-including, perhaps, the attitude cannot modify the realities of the situation and
representative of Israel-to turn the atmosphereof the
historic facts, and that is what I spoke about when I gave
Council from one of a war of words, to usethe expression the examplesof 1948 and the descriptionsof the developof the Foreign Minister of Egypt, to one of a constructive mentsin 1948in the wordsof Soviet representatives.
resolution of problems. We have come here in that spirit,
andwe hope everyone will match it.
173. The war which started then is still on. As I pointed
out yesterday, we went through a period of truce. We had
166. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I call truce lines during that period. This was followed by a
on the representative of Israel to speakin exerciseof the
period of armistice. We had armistice lines during that
right of reply.
period. And now we are in a situation of cease-fire,andwe
have cease-firelines. All these are and have been military
167. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): Mr, President, it is out of
provisionallines.The war is still on.
respect for you and the views you have expressedthat I
have askedto speakin order to react to someof the points
174. For the first time in the history of the Israeli-Arab
madeby you.
conflict an attempt is being madeto attain peace. For the
first time in the history of the Arab war againstIsrael which
168. Before I do so, however, I shouldjust like to express hasbeen pursued since 1948 an attempt is being madeto
a certain degree of amazementthat the representativeof
establishsecure,recognized,agreedState boundarieswhich
Jordan found it necessaryto come immediately to the
neverexisted before.
support of the Foreign Minister of Egypt. I addressedmy
previous intervention to him, to Egypt, and not to
175. Now the variations of Soviet policy in respect of a
Ambassador Sharaf or his country. I am particularly
particular region of the world cannot affect the truth, they
surprisedbecausetoday, for instance, the governmental cannot affect the situation, they cannot affect the realities
radio of Jordan in Amman declared that signsare being of the situation. Those that started the war in 1948 as
18

aggressors cannot suddenly become the victims of aggression simply because Israel has succeeded in repulsing and
defeating them. In fact, what we are facing is a somewhat
bizarre spectacle.

interpret a resolution sponsored by them. That is the
normal procedure here.
181. This is what Mr. Vyshinsky
the Security Council:

176. What is the essence of the Egyptian complaint here
before the Security Council in 1973? Egypt tried to
prevent Israel’s birth as an independent sovereign nation in
194%tried to prevent that by force. It failed. It tried to
shatter Israel by force after the proclamation of our
independence. It failed again. It tried to undermine us by
blockade and by terror warfare throughout all the years.
Terror warfare is not a new phenomenon. It goes back all
the way to the 1950s. Then it tried to mount the final
strike at Israel’s existence in 1967. We remember the
situation very clearly. No one concealed the facts at the
time, no one concealed the Egyptian intentions. They failed
again in 1967. Then they tried to force us to bow to their
diktat by the war of attrition in violation of the Security
Council cease-fire, a war which continued for a year and a
half, from 1969 to August 1970, when the United States
saved the area from over-all conflagration by initiating the
restoration of the cease-fire. Now Egypt comes before the
Security Council to plead for sympathy for these failures. It
demands support to remedy the consequences of these
failures. That is the essence of the Egyptian appearance
here.

said on 29 March 1954 in

“ 3 . . international

disputes must be settled otherwise
than by imposing a decision on either party in contravention of all its arguments. /66&h meeting, pars. 49.1
“. ..
“What is the proper method for this? The method is
that of direct negotiation between the interested parties.
On one side we have the representative of Israel and on
the other the representative of Egypt; they are sitting
opposite one another. Let them sit down together at one
table and try to settle the questions which the Security
Council cannot settle now, I am deeply convinced that
they can find a better solution.” [Ibid., para. 96.1
182. Now, Mr. President, if you really wish to contribute
constructively to the situation, here is your opportunity,
Simply follow the advice given you by Foreign Minister
Vyshinsky:
bring about meetings between the representatives of Egypt and Israel. We are ready for it right here,
right now.

f77. For 25 years Egypt has remained at war with Israel,
seeking openly to annihilate the State, spreading violence
and bloodshed, resorting to the barbaric method of terrorist
attacks against innocent civilians. But once Israel in
self-defence seizes the aggressor’s arm, Egypt cries to it to
let go, laments its situation, as the Foreign Minister of
Egypt did a while ago, and protests its innocence. That is
the spectacle we have been witnessing during the last few
days and especially today. Nothing could be more ludicrous
than an aggressor pretending to be a victim of violence
when his aggression is defeated.

183. I should like to make two brief observations regarding the statement we heard from Egypt’s Foreign
Minister. First of all, as a reaction to the analysis of the
developments in the last 25 years, as a reaction to my
pointing out that the only time the Security Council
brought about an effective, constructive development in
the Israeli-Arab conflict was when it called for negotiations
between the parties in 1948, Mr. El-Zayyat responded with
a question: What happened to the Armistice Agreements
that resulted from those negotiations?
184. Now we know exactly what happened to those
Armistice Agreements. The Security Council protocols and
the protocols of the United Nations Truce Supervision
Organization in the Middle East are replete with answers to
that question. The reports of the Secretary-General at the
time, Mr, Dag Hammarskjijld, describe very clearly what
happened to the Armistice Agreements and describe how
despite the focal obligation undertaken in those Armistice
Agreements by the Arab Governments to proceed immediately to final peace, to an over-all peace settlement, they
refused to move in that direction; so much so that
Mr. Hammarskjiild informed the Security Council at the
time that he was completely helpless to call upon the Arab
Governments to conform with article 1, the central provision of the Armistice Agreements, which obliged the
parties to conclude a permanent peace.

178, What would have been the reaction of the world had
a Hitler complained of aggression and expansionism by the
Allies when their forces crossed the German frontiers?
What would have been the reaction had Germany demanded then that before anything else could take place,
third parties should obtain the withdrawal of the American,
Soviet, British and French forces to the old borders of the
Reich? That is the historic parallel, that is what we have
been subjected to in the last few days.
179. These are the facts and no modifications of Soviet
policy can affect them. You spoke, Mr, President, of the
situation being different in 1948 from that in 1973 and
that is why you felt it was appropriate at that time to 41
for negotiations between the parties. Let me quote to you
your own Foreign Minister’s statement six years later-not
in 1948, not at the time when the Egyptian and other Arab
forces invaded Israel, but in 1954. This is not a quotation
from a journalist and I do not remember having made any.
We do pay attention to statements made by Foreign
Ministers, official statements on behalf of Governments.

185. What happened to the Armistice Agreements? We
know that before there was time for the ink of the
signatures on them to dry, Egypt was already sending the
terror squads from Gaza and from Sinai to murder Israeli
children and women, declaring that now that total confrontation between the regular armies was impossible this
would be the way to undermine and destroy the Jewish
State.

180. We do attach importance to statements made in the
Security Council by representatives on the Council who
19

186. That is what happened tb the Armistice Agreements.
And if the Foreign Minister of Egypt comes before the
Security Council in 1973 and supposes that members
around this table are not in a position to turn back and
examine the documents on that situation he must be
assuming a great degree of ignorance and gullibility on the
part of the representatives present in this chamber.
187. My second observation refers to his statement that
Israel’s aim is to close the door. Israel’s aim is to open and
to keep open the only door that might bring about peace in
the Middle East-the door of negotiations without any prior
conditions. That is the only way, and we are the ones who
are saying “Here it is, it is open, aletus enter through it; let
us get started on the road of dialogue leading to agreement”. Is this surrender? Is this humiliation?
188. I shall end by quoting from the statement made by
the Foreign Minister of Israel addressed to the President of
Egypt, a statement broadcast in Arabic on 7 May 1973.
Mr. Eban said:
“Negotiation is not dictation, not degradation and it is
not capitulation. It is an expression of the honourable
free will of the two sides. Negotiation is not the
bargaining of rights, but a joint search for a path and an
attempt to find a just and honourable solution, just and
honourable without exception.”
189. That is what we suggest. We tried it in 1948. We
made a step-not a big one, as I said, but a significant
one-the only constructive step in the direction of harmony
and understanding. It failed not because of Israel,

Israel, and you as its representative, afe completely and
hopelessly on the defensive, and no quotations will save
you or justify Israel’s aggression, its disregard of United
Nations and Security Council decisions and its stubborn
unwillingness to agree to a peaceful settlement of the
Israeli-Arab conflict on the basis, primarily, of the with.
drawal of Israeli troops from the occupied territories and
the restitution of the plundered lands to their lawful
owners. Without that, of course, there can be no serious
talk of a settlement. You have avoided answering the
question put by Mr. El-Zayyat, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Egypt and the question which I put-does Israel
recognize the principle of non-acquisition of territory by
force, by means of war? That is Mr. El-Zayyat’s question.
And is Israel ready to state formally, at a meeting of the
Security Council, that it will undertake to withdraw its
troops from the occupied Arab territories? You also passed
over this question in silence and referred to your statement,
I have read your statement-there
is nothing in it, it
contains no answer to this question.
193. You like to make comparisons with the Second
World War and draw parallels with Hitler. Such comparisons
are not to your advantage. Therefore, it would be better for
you not to introduce them.
194. Can you, the representative of Israel, conceive, for
example, of the possibility of talks between the Soviet
Union and Hitler-between
the Soviet Government and
Hitler-when Hitler’s troops were at the walls of Moscow?
Well, that is a parallel-think about it if you like parallels so
much.
195. One more comment, my last. You propound the
“theory of the prosperity of slaves” in the occupied
territories, which are groaning under the heel of the
occupying forces. Now this is where a parallel may be
drawn with Hitler. Hitler, who annexed and enslaved the
countries of Europe and tried to destroy the Soviet Union
and enslave the Soviet peoples, promised all of them his
“new order”. The whole world knows this. But the peoples
of Europe and of the Soviet Union did not believe him, and
they were not mistaken. Is that not so? In my view, this is
an elementary truth.

190. Today, 25 years later, we are once again inviting
Egypt and other Arab Governments to join us in building
peace, because the only way to build peace in our area is to
do it together.
191. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): As the
representative of the SOVIET UNION, I find it necessary to
make a few comments on the second statement of the
representative of Israel.
192. On many occasions already we have taken part with
him in consideration of the question of the Middle East,
and it is time he understood that the Security Council is
not here to discuss the policy of the Soviet Union, but
Israel’s aggression against the Arab States. This is an
elementary truth, and we should not confuse the two
matters. You will prove nothing, Mr. Tekoah, by references
to the USSR, nor will you justify your country’s aggression.
In seeking to justify that aggression you can take whatever
quotations you like from any sources, books, newspapers or
records. But that is the weakness, not the strength of your
position. By referring to the statement of the late
Mr. Vyshinsky, you are aclcnowledging my argument that
contemporary realities do not resemble the realities of
1948. But in order to demonstrate the truth of your
position you quote Mr, Vyshinsky’s words, which were also
uttered some 20 years ago. But the situation of 20 years
ago was different from that of today, Thus, you are
exposing still further the weakness of your position and
arguments. Only one conclusion can be drawn from this:

196. Thus, it would be better for you not to draw
parallels. The imperialists and colonialists propounded the
“theory” that they were bringing benefits to the oppressed
colonial peoples, but the peoples of Africa and other parts
of the world, groaning under the heel of the colonialists,
did not believe this “theory”, and they were not mistaken,
they were proved right. And we are happy to have in the
United Nations an enormous number of Member States
which have overthrown the imperialists and colonialists and
attained independence, which have proclaimed their freedom and independence and became sovereign States,
enjoying equal rights with all other countries, taking part in
international life and international relations as Members of
the United Nations and partners in its work.
197. The colonial peoples did not believe the promises of
the imperialists and colonialists, and they were not mistaken. And if we are to make an analogy between these two
important historical events, then the peoples of the Arab
20

East do not believe you and your “theory of the prosperity” of the peoples enslaved by the occupying forces.
And no one will believe your assertion that the Arabs who
are subjected to Israeli occupation are happy or that they
are prospering. The Arabs will not believe it, and no one in

the world will believe it. Thus, you should stop propagating
that “theory” for the purposes of justifying your country’s
annexations and the enslavement of other peoples.
The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.

21

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Unite I Nations
publicntions
throughout
the world. Consult
Section. New York or Geneva.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICATIONS

muy bc obtained
from bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write to: LJnited Nations,
Sales

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidns e&in cn venta en librerfas
y cae.as distribuidoras en todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijese
a: Naciones
Unidas, Secci6n de Ventas. Nuovn York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

2.00 (or equivalent

in other currencies)

73-82001-June

197%2,200
