VI.

195

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Welcoming the spirit of co-operation and the progress achieved in
the field of crime prevention and the treatment of offenders during the
Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the
Treatment of Offenders,

I.

Declares the following:
I. The success of criminal justice systems and strategies for
crime prevention, especially in the light of the growth of new and sophisticated forms of crime and the difficulties encountered in the administration of criminal justice, depends above all on the progress
achieved throughout the world in improving social conditions and
enhancing the quality of life; it is thus essential to review traditional
crime prevention strategies based exclusively on legal criteria.

2. Crime prevention and criminal justice should be considered
in the context of economic development, political systems, social
and cultural values and social change, as well as in the context of the
new international economic order.
3. It is a matter of great importance and pnonty that
programmes for crime prevention and the treatment of offenders
should be based on the social, cultural, political and economic circumstances of each country, in a climate of freedom and respect for
human rights, that Member States should develop an effective capacity for the formulation and planning of criminal policy, and that
all crime-prevention policies should be co-ordinated with strategies
for social, economic, political and cultural development.
4. There is a need to promote scientific research, taking into account the particular circumstances and priorities of each country or
region.
5. Member States should ensure that those responsible for the
functioning of the criminal justice system at all levels should be
properly qualified for their tasks and should perform them in a
manner which is independent of personal or group interest.
6. Criminal policy and the administration of justice should be
based on principles that will guarantee the equality of everyone
before the law without any discrimination, as well as the effective
right of defence and the existence of judicial organs that are equal to
the task of providing speedy and fair justice and of ensuring greater
security and protection of the rights and freedoms of all people.
7. Continuous efforts should be made to seek new approaches
and to develop better techniques for crime prevention and the treatment of offenders, and to that end criminal law should be developed in such a way as to play an effective and important role in
creating stable social conditions free from oppression and manipulation.
8. The family, school and work have a vital part to play in encouraging the development of social policy and of positive attitudes
that will assist in preventing crime, and these factors should be
taken into consideration in national planning and in the development of criminal policy and crime prevention programmes.
9. Having regard to the vital role played by the United Nations
in encouraging international co-operation and the development of
norms and guidelines in the field of criminal policy, it is important
that the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council
should ensure that appropriate measures are taken to strengthen, as
necessary, the activities of the competent United Nations organs
concerned with crime prevention and the treatment of offenders, especially activities at the regional and subregional levels, taking into
account the specific needs of each region, including the establishment of institutes for research, training and technical assistance in
those regions which lack such bodies, and the strengthening of existing institutes, and, further to give effect to the conclusions of the
Sixth United Nations Congress, including those relating to new perspectives for international co-operation in crime prevention, and to
ensure that all United Nations organs co-operate effectively with the
Committee on Crime Prevention and Control in pursuance of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly.
2. Invites the General Assembly, in the light of the importance attached to the terms of the present Declaration by the States participating in the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders to take appropriate action at
the earliest opportunity in accordance with the Declaration.

35 / 172.

Arbitrary or summary executions

The General Assembly,
Having regard to the provisions bearing on capital
punishment in the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights,9 2 particularly its articles 6, 14 and 15,
Recalling its resolution 2393 (XXIII) of 26 November
1968, in which it invited Governments of Member
States, inter a/ia, to ensure the most careful legal procedures and the greatest possible safeguards for the accused in capital cases in countries where the death
penalty obtains,
Alarmed at the incidence in different parts of the
world of summary executions as well as of arbitrary executions,
Concerned at the occurrence of executions which are
widely regarded as being politically motivated,
1. Urges Member States concerned:
(a) To respect as a minimum standard the content of
the provisions of articles 6, 14 and 15 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and,
where necessary, to review: their legal rules and practices
so as to guarantee the most careful legal procedures and
the greatest possible safeguards for the accused in
capital cases;
(b) To examine the possibility of making automatic
the appeal procedure, where it exists, in cases of death
sentences, as well as the consideration of an amnesty,
pardon or commutation in these cases;
(c) To provide that no death sentence shall be
carried out until the procedures of appeal and pardon
have been terminated and, in any case, not until a reasonable time after the passing of the sentence in the
court in the first instance;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to use his best endeavours in cases where the minimum standard of legal
safeguards referred to in paragraph I above appears not
to be respected;
3. Further requests the Secretary-General to seek
from Member States, specialized agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and concerned nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council views and observations
concerning the problem of arbitrary executions and
summary executions, and to report to the Committee on
Crime Prevention and Control at its seventh session.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
35 / 173.

Expression of appreciation to the Government
and people of Venezuela on the occasion of the
Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders

The General Assembly,
Taking into account the significance and the results of
the Sixth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of
Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, held at Caracas
from 25 August to 5 September 1980,
Expresses its deep appreciation to the Government
and people of Venezuela for acting as host to the Sixth
United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime
and the Treatment of Offenders.
96th plenary meeting
15 December 1980
"' Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
