S/PRST/2004/13

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 April 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4960th meeting of the Security Council, held on 30 April 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Security Council
resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)”,
the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf of the
Council:
“The Security Council notes that the presentation of the Kosovo
Standards Implementation Plan (KSIP) on 31 March 2004 in Pristina, Kosovo
(Serbia and Montenegro), is a step forward in the standards process. The
Council reiterates that the KSIP should serve as a basis for the assessment of
progress of the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government (PISG) in meeting
the standards. The Council in this respect urges strongly the PISG to
demonstrate their full and unconditional commitment to a multi-ethnic
Kosovo, in particular with respect to the protection and promotion of rights of
members of the minority communities as well as of human rights, equal
security, freedom of movement and sustainable returns for all inhabitants of
Kosovo. The Council reiterates further that the progress by the PISG in
meeting the standards, which should be reflected throughout Kosovo, will be
assessed periodically and that the advancement towards a process to determine
future status of Kosovo in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) will depend
on the positive outcome of a comprehensive review.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the “Standards before
Status” policy, that was devised for Kosovo, and endorsed by this Council in
application of its resolution 1244 (1999). It recalls in this context the
document “Standards for Kosovo”, presented on 10 December 2003 and
subsequently supported by the Council in the statement of its President of 12
December 2003, which outlined the standards that are to be achieved in order
to reach the goal of establishing in Kosovo a multi-ethnic, stable and
democratic society.
“The Security Council stresses that it is essential, as indicated in the
KSIP, to review and revise in a timely manner two key Sections of the
document, namely on “sustainable returns and the rights of communities and
their members” and on “freedom of movement”. The Council calls on the
PISG to take urgent steps on these two standards in order to rebuild and reach
out to the Serb and other communities who suffered most in the large-scale
04-33336 (E) 300404

*0433336*

S/PRST/2004/13

inter-ethnic violence of 17-20 March 2004 that resulted in many dead and
wounded and the destruction of personal property and Serbian Orthodox
churches and monasteries in Kosovo.
“The Security Council, strongly condemning those events, emphasizes
that no party can be allowed to profit or to advance a political agenda through
violent measures. It calls on the PISG and all political leaders to take
responsibility in the current situation and to ensure that such acts and threats
of violence are not repeated. The Council underscores that immediate actions
should be taken aimed at the establishment of and public respect for the rule of
law, including prosecution of perpetrators, effective collection of illegal
weapons and combating organized crime. The Council urges the PISG to take
concrete steps to fulfil their commitment to rebuild multi-ethnicity and
reconciliation throughout Kosovo, as promised in the Open Letter of
Institutional and Political Leaders of 2 April 2004. The Council asserts further
that in addition there must be rapid steps taken by the PISG to fulfil their
commitment to rebuild or provide appropriate compensation for damaged or
destroyed property and to rebuild holy sites and to facilitate the return of those
displaced from their homes.
“When assessing the progress made by the PISG, the Security Council
would pay particular attention to the adoption and the implementation of laws
and regulations, policies and attitudes of the PISG, amongst others, in the
following areas: the fight against discrimination, corruption and economic
crimes, propagation of hate by the media as well as the support for multiethnicity and reconciliation, genuine devolution, orderly and sustainable
returns, effective functioning of the Assembly and of the political parties,
disciplinary procedures for the civil service, building up of a professional,
politically neutral and multi-ethnic administration, at central and local levels,
with a view to provide public services to every community on an equal
footing, efficient strategy for the return of refugees and internally displaced
persons in safe conditions, a constructive engagement with UNMIK, and full
participation in the Direct Dialogue with Belgrade.
“The Security Council underlines the importance that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, within his authority as set out in
resolution 1244 (1999), inter alia, in the context of the review mechanism,
continue to consult closely with interested parties, in particular the Contact
Group. The Council reaffirms its intention to continue to consider the regular
reports of the Secretary-General, including an assessment from the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, as to the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government’s progress towards meeting the standards. The Council takes
note that the Contact Group intends to make a substantive contribution to the
regular reviews and to submit its assessments to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General in his next report
to the Council to include a comprehensive assessment of the violence of 17-20
March 2004.
“The Security Council requests also the Secretary-General to present
recommendations on possible new institutional arrangements respectful of the
objective of building a democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo to allow more

2

S/PRST/2004/13

effective local government through devolution of central non-reserved
responsibilities to local authorities and communities in Kosovo, taking into
account relevant studies and recommendations of interested parties and
international organizations. How that local government is organized is a matter
for further discussion between interested parties in Kosovo.
“The Security Council welcomes the strong measures by the international
presence in Kosovo aimed at enhancing the security and protection of all
communities, as well as their religious, historical and cultural sites, with the
goal of ensuring lasting stability in Kosovo. It calls in this respect for the full
cooperation of the PISG and all concerned.
“The Security Council will continue to follow the matter closely.”

3
