General Assembly-Twenty-first Se111ion

72

the phosphate industry to the Nauruan pe~ple and take
immediate steps, irrespective of the cost mv<;>lv~d, towards restoring the island of Nauru for habita bon by
the N auruan people as a sovereign nation.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2227 (XXI). Question of Papua and the Trust
Territory of New Guinea
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Trusteeship
Council covering the period from 1 July 1965 to 26
July 1%6,19
Having considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situa~ion with regard ~o. the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Grantmg of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples ~elating to the Territory of Papua and the Trust Terntory
of N ew Guinea, 20
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations and General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV)
of 14 December 1960,
Recalling further its resolution 2112 (XX) of 21
December 1%5,
N oting with grave concern the discriminatory practices in the Territories,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Papua and New Guinea to self-determination and independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
2. Deplores the failure of the administering Power
to implement General Assembly resolution 2112 (XX);
3. Calls upon the administering Power to implement
fully resolution 1514 (XV) and to inform the Trusteeship• Council at its thirty-fourth session and the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples of
the action taken in this regard ;
4. Calls upon the administering Power to implement the following measures :
(a) Removal of all discriminatory electoral qualifications;
( b) Abolition of all discriminatory practices in the
economic, social, health and educational fields ;

(e) Holding of elections on the basis of universal
adult suffrage with a view to transferring power to the
people of the Territories;
( d) Fixing oí an early date for independence;

5. Further calls upan the administering Power to
refrain from utilizing the Territories for military activities incompatible with the Charter of the United
Nations;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
present resolution to the administering Power.

1500th plenary meeting,
20 Deceinber 1966.
Twenty-first Session, Supplement No. 4 (A/6304).
Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
itero 23 (A/6300/Rev.1), chapter XIX.

2228 (XXI). Question of French Somaliland
The General Assembly,
Having cansidered the question of French Somaliland (Djibouti),
Recalling' its resolution 1514 oí 14 Decemher 1960
containing the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
H aving cansidered the chapter oí the report oí the
Special Committee on the Situa_tion with regard _to the
Implementation oí the Declaration on the Grantmg oí
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to French Somaliland (Djib01=1ti), 21
Nating the decision taken by the Assembly oí Heads
of State and Govemment of the Organization of African Unity at its third ordinary session, held at Addis
Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966,
Having nated the recent political developments in
the Territory and the subsequent announcement ~ade
by the administering Power that a referendum wtll be
held in the Territory before July 1967 to enahle the
people to decide their political future,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people oí
French Somaliland (Djibouti) to self-determination
and independence in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV);
2. Calls upan the administering Power to ensure
that the right of self-determination shall be freely expressed and exercised by the indigenous inhabitants oí
the Territory on the basis of universal adult suffrage
and with full respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
3. Urges the administering Power to create a proper
political climate for a referendum to be conducted on
an entirely free and democratic basis;
4. Requests the administering Power, in consultation
with the Secretary-General, to make appropriate arrangements for a United Nations presence before, and
supervision during, the holding of the referendum;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
text of the present resolution to the administering
Power and to report on its implementation to the Special Committee on the Sitttation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples;
6. Decides to retain the question of French Somaliland (Djibouti) on its agenda.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.
2229 (XXI). Question of Ifni and Spanish Sabara
The General Assembly,
Having e.xamined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territories of Ifni and Spanish Sahara, 22
H aving taken note of the oral and written statements
of the petitioners from Spanish Sabara,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Imlependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,

19 Jbid.,

20 /bid.,

21 Jbid., chapter XII.
22 Jbid., chapter X.

Re110lutiom adopted on the reporta of the Fourth Committee

Reca/,ling further the resolution adopted on 16 October 1964 by the Special Committee,28
Reafjirming its resolution 2072 (XX) of 16 December 1965,
N oting that the Spanish Government, as the administering Power, has not as yet applied the provisions of
the Declaration,
H aving regard to the decision taken by the Assembly
of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its third ordinary session, held_ at
Addis Ababa from 5 to 9 November 1966, concermng
the Territories under Spanish administration,
N oting the decision of the administering Power to
apply in full the provisions of General Assembly resolution 2072 (XX),24
N oting further the statement of the administering
Power on 7 December 1966 relating to Spanish Sabara,
in particular with regard to the sending of a special
United Nations mission to the Territory, the return of
exiles and the free exercise by the indigenous population of its right to self-determination,211
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Ifni and Spanish Sabara to self-determination in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV);
2. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to the Territories of Ifni and Spanish Sabara, and endorses the resolution adopted by the Special Committee
on 16 November 1966,26
3. Requests the administering Power to take immediately the necessary steps to accelerate the decolonization of Ifni and to determine with the Government of
Morocco, bearing in mind the aspirations of the indigenous population, procedures for the transfer of
powers in accordance with the provisions of General
Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) ;
4. Invites the administering Power to determine at
the earliest possible date, in conformity with the aspirations of the indigenous people of Spanish Sabara and
in consultation with the Governments of Mauritania
and Morocco and any other interested party, the procedures for the holding of a referendum under United
Nations auspices with a view to enabling the indigenous
population of the Territory to exercise freely its right
to self-determination and, to this end :
(a) To create a favourable climate for the referendum to be conducted on an entirely free, democratic
and impartial basis, by permitting, inter al,ia, the retum of exiles to the Territory;
( b) To take all the necessary steps to ensure that
only the indigenous people of the Territory participate
in the referendum ;
(e) To refrain from any action likely to delay the
process of the decolonization of Spanish Sabara;
( d) To provide all the necessary facilities to a
United Nations mission so that it may be able to par28 /bid., Nineteeñth Session, Annexes, annex No. 8 (part 1)
(A/5800/Rev.l), chapter IX, para. 112.
H /bid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6300/Rev.l), chapter X, annex.
25 Jbid., Twenty-first Session, Fourth Committee. 1660th
meeting, paras. 1-4.
26 Jbid., Twenty-first Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda
item 23 (A/6300/Rev.1), chapter X, para. 243.

73

ticipate actively in the organization and holding of the
referendum ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the administering Power and the Special Committee, to appoint immediately a special mission to be
sent to Spanish Sahara for the purpose of recommending practical steps for the full implementation of the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, and in
particular for determining the extent of United Nations
participation in the preparation and supervision of the
referendum and submitting a report to -him as soon as
possible for transmission to the Special Committee ;
6. Requests the Special Committee to continue its
consideration of the situation in the Territories of Ifni
and Spanish Sabara and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its twenty-second session.
1500th plenary meeting,
20 December 1966.

2230 (XXI). Question of Equatorial Guinea
The General, Assembly,
Having considered the question of Equatorial Guinea,
Having heard the statement of the petitioner,
H aving a/,so heard the statement of the representative of the administering Power,
H aving considered the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to Equatorial Guinea, 27
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960 containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and
its resolution 2.067 (XX) of 16 December 1965,
RecaUing the Basic Law of 1963 which recognized
Fernando Póo and Río Muni as one entity thereafter
to be called Equatorial Guinea, and the declaration by
the administering Power of its intention to grant independence to Equatorial Gui11ea as a single entity,
Taking into account the declarations of the administering Power that it would accede to the desires of the
people of the Territory for independence whenever they
so requested,
N oting the desire of the overwhelming majority of
the people consulted that the Territory should become
independent not later than July 1968,
Having noted the statement of the representative
of the administering Power that a constitutional conference will be convened early in 1967,
Recognizing the need for further measures to promote the economic, social and educational advancement
of the people of the Territory,
l. Approves the chapter of the report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Dedaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating
to Equatorial Guinea, and endorses the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein ;28
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Equatorial Guinea to self-determination and independence in accordance with the Declaration on the Grant27 /bid., chapter IX.
28 /bid., diapter IX, annex, paras. 286-310.
