S/PV.8944

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

8944

th meeting
Monday, 10 January 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Juul. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Norway)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Souza Monteiro
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2021/1091)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-22630 (E)
*2222630*

S/PV.8944

Peace consolidation in West Africa

the continued attention of the Council to threats posed
by crime, drugs, corruption and terrorism to peace and
security in West Africa, the Sahel and beyond.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (S/2021/1091)
The President: In accordance with rule 39
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I
invite the following briefers to participate in this
meeting: Mr. Khatir Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel; Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime; and
Ms. Cécile Thiombiano Yougbaré, lawyer and public
policy analyst with Médecins du Monde, on behalf of
the People’s Coalition for the Sahel.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of members of the
Council to document S/2021/1091, which contains the
report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
Before we begin with our speakers list
today — recalling the Security Council’s latest
note by the President (S/2017/507) on its working
methods — I wish to encourage all speakers, both
members and non-members of the Council, to deliver
their statements in five minutes or less. Note 507 also
encourages briefers to be succinct and focus on key
issues. In that spirit, briefers are further encouraged
to limit their initial remarks to seven to 10 minutes.
Everyone is also encouraged to wear a mask at all
times, including while delivering remarks.
I now give the floor to Ms. Waly.
Ms. Waly: It is an honour to join members of the
Security Council at this briefing. The United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) is proud to
support the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (UNOWAS) and regional efforts for peace, and
I welcome this opportunity to brief the Council on our
work in that regard. I thank the presidency of Norway
for inviting me to speak today. I am also grateful for
2/21

10/01/2022

I had the privilege of briefing the Council at the
high-level open debate on maritime security (see
S/2021/722), held under the presidency of India in
August 2021. As the Council has repeatedly recognized,
piracy and armed robbery at sea, together with other
forms of transnational organized crime, are posing a
threat to international security and the global economy.
The Gulf of Guinea region continues to be a priority
concern. Incidents in the Gulf account for the majority
of kidnappings of seafarers for ransom around the world.
According to a UNODC study conducted last year, those
kidnappings are being carried out by pirate groups that
are gaining in sophistication and increasingly able
to conduct attacks against international vessels in
deeper waters.
As noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/1091), the overall number of incidents in the
Gulf of Guinea decreased last year thanks to national
anti-piracy efforts, including the adoption by many
States of relevant legislation and maritime strategies.
Nonetheless, progress has stalled in operationalizing
the Gulf of Guinea maritime security architecture,
and the repercussions of piracy and maritime
insecurity on regional peace, stability and development
remain profound.
A new study by Stable Seas conducted in partnership
with UNODC and funded by Norway estimates that
piracy and armed robbery at sea are costing the Gulf
of Guinea States a total of approximately $1.94 billion
annually. Port fees and import tariffs lost due to
decreased shipping activity are estimated at $1.4 billion
a year. Those billions of dollars represent lost potential
and funds that could otherwise be invested in licit
economies and developing coastal communities — funds
that are needed now more than ever in the continuing
coronavirus disease crisis in the region.
More broadly, across West Africa and the Sahel,
we see that organized crime facilitated by corruption is
perpetuating instability, violence and poverty. The lack
of opportunities and frustration are driving more youth
to piracy and crime and leaving them more receptive
to radicalization narratives. Desperate conditions
render more people vulnerable to human trafficking
and migrant smuggling, and more women and girls at
greater risk of exploitation and sexual violence.
22-22630

10/01/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

According to the 2020 UNODC Global Report on
Trafficking in Persons, about 59 per cent of detected
trafficking victims in West and Central Africa are
children, and 27 per cent are women. Member States in
the region have also sounded the alarm about a marked
increase in drug trafficking and related insecurity in
recent years. The increase in the non-medical use of
pharmaceutical opioids and in drug-use disorders are
harming health and public safety in West Africa, as
the region continues to be heavily affected by illegal
tramadol imports. At the same time, West Africa has
emerged as a manufacturer of methamphetamine,
mainly destined for markets in East and South-East
Asia. The greater security threats are posed by cocaine
trafficking, with West Africa serving as a major transit
area for onward shipments to Western and Central
Europe, as well as cannabis resin trafficking.
Individual drug seizure data suggests cocaine
trafficking through countries including Benin, Côte
d’Ivoire, Nigeria and Senegal has increased over the
past two years. Very large cocaine seizures are being
registered in West Africa since 2019. The seizure of 214
kilograms of cocaine reported in the Niger at the start
of this year illustrates the size of the problem. The Sahel
is also a major route for cannabis resin trafficking, with
the reported involvement of individuals affiliated with
Sahelian armed groups. The value of those illicit flows
exceeds the national budgets of some transit countries,
which is highly destabilizing in the context of the
complex security situation.
Moreover, drug trafficking, as well as illicit trade
in firearms and other goods, is contributing to terrorist
financing and operations. Terrorist groups are reported
to be engaged in small arms trafficking; the taxing and
protection of illicit drug shipments passing through
areas under their control; kidnapping for ransom; cattle
rustling; and illegal gold mining.
It is clear that maritime insecurity, illicit flows and
the linkages between transnational organized crime
and terrorism all represent major obstacles to achieving
peace, security and development in West Africa and
the Sahel. Alongside efforts to provide humanitarian
and emergency assistance — and to prevent conflict
and promote dialogue, including among local
communities — we must encourage political will
and increased international support to strengthen
comprehensive and cooperative crime responses. Such
effective responses must build on international legal

S/PV. 8944

and institutional frameworks, regional partnerships
and national capabilities.
UNODC has been supporting the countries of the
region to advance such action, including through our
Global Maritime Crime Programme and the Strategic
Vision for Africa 2030, which we launched last year.
To confront crime at sea, we are assisting in the
review of legislation and regulatory frameworks in 16
coastal countries in West and Central Africa. We have
also trained almost 2,000 judges, prosecutors and law
enforcement officers. UNODC technical assistance
activities supported Togo and Nigeria in achieving
the first-ever successful prosecutions of piracy in the
region last year — a landmark step towards achieving
maritime security in West Africa.
We are also promoting more effective regional
cooperation, including through work with the Economic
Community of West African States Commission.
Moreover, UNODC is supporting Governments in the
Gulf of Guinea and across West Africa to strengthen
criminal justice capacities and cooperation through
the United Nations Conventions against Transnational
Organized Crime and Corruption, as well as global
counter-terrorism instruments.
This year, UNODC will develop a new regional
programme to provide integrated support across
UNODC mandate areas. The programme will be
guided by our Strategic Vision for Africa 2030, which
reinforces the role of women and youth and prioritizes
innovation and prevention. We will also continue to
strengthen our partnerships with regional organizations
and our collaboration with the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel, including as co-leader
of the peace and security pillar of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and as co-Chair of the
UNODC Sahel Programme Steering Committee.
A peaceful West Africa and Sahel region can be
attained only if the international community comes
together with Member States in the region to support
local and cross-border efforts to address interconnected
drug, crime, corruption and terrorism threats. We
cannot allow pirates, criminals and terrorists to take
advantage of poverty and instability or gain impunity
by exploiting vulnerabilities.
UNODC remains fully engaged with our partners
in advancing holistic crime prevention as part of
broader peacebuilding and development interventions

22-226303/21

S/PV.8944

Peace consolidation in West Africa

that promote responsive State institutions, improve
accountability and provide opportunities for education
and work, including for youth and women. Together, we
can strive for justice as an essential building block for
the sustainable prosperity and security that the people
of West Africa and the Sahel deserve.
The President: I thank Ms. Waly for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Thiombiano Yougbaré.
Ms. Thiombiano Yougbaré (spoke in French):
I thank the Security Council, and the Norwegian
presidency in particular, for the invitation extended to
the People’s Coalition for the Sahel and the opportunity
to speak about the impact of the crisis in the Sahel.
I speak here today as a citizen of Burkina Faso, a
country unfortunately at the heart of an unprecedented
escalation of violence, and also as a member of the
association Médecins du Monde. The People’s Coalition
for the Sahel was born out of the realization that the
strategy pursued since 2013 to try to bring about an end
to the violence has not led to stability in our region. On
the contrary, the Sahel sinks a little deeper into crisis,
the first victims of which are its populations.
More than 800 civilians were killed in Mali,
Burkina Faso and the Niger in 2021 in attacks attributed
to non-State armed groups. Other civilians have died
in abuses attributed to defence and security forces.
Violence is also fuelled by the proliferation of selfdefence groups. Populations are exhausted, and the
consequences are disastrous. It is estimated that, by
2022, 8 million people in Burkina Faso will be directly
affected by the closure or reduction of basic social
services, while 1.5 million people have already fled
their homes in search of safety.

10/01/2022

saw a 16-year-old girl who was raped when her village
was attacked by armed men and had suffered without
adequate medical and psychological care. We have
seen so many cases of depression, suicidal ideation and
insomnia that our colleagues have stopped counting
them, but those are typical signs of post-traumatic
stress disorder. The majority of those patients are
women and girls.
As a humanitarian health-care association, we are
particularly concerned about the attacks on health care.
In 2020 alone, 25 health-care workers were killed in
Burkina Faso and six were kidnapped or injured. What
worries me above all is that, after the fear and disarray
among the communities, I am also seeing an increase
in anger directed at the national authorities and the
countries with a military presence in the region, such
as France. So I asked myself: how did we get here?
The reason is that our priorities were out of order. The
security response as it has been conducted has not
sufficiently taken into account people’s needs, and it
did not rely sufficiently on the expertise and experience
of civil society.
To ensure that those voices are heard, we have come
together with 55 other diverse organizations to establish
the People’s Coalition for the Sahel. Our organizations
are mainly from Mali, Burkina Faso and the Niger,
but there are also regional groups and international
non-governmental organizations. What unites us is the
realization that the entire security strategy has failed
and that we must radically change our approach. And
we must do so immediately.

As a humanitarian, I observe on a daily basis the
devastating effects of a lack of access to health care;
food insecurity, which will be four times higher in
2021 than in 2020; no access to schooling for 500,000
children; and, above all, the explosion of violence
against women and girls.

What is this new approach that we want and that
we are calling on the Council to implement? It is based
on what we call the “four citizen pillars”. We presented
them last April in the report entitled The Sahel: What
Needs to Change. The entire international community,
beginning with the members of the Security Council,
must seize the opportunity and act. That is why I am
speaking directly to the Security Council today with
the following recommendations.

Fifty-three per cent of internally displaced persons
are women. Three out of four of them say that they are
survivors of violence. Our medical teams are seeing
an upsurge in the number of rapes when they go out
with mobile clinics. We saw one woman, who had
been displaced three times due to violence, arrive at
our medical teams mute, without control of her limbs,
extremely malnourished and unable to stop crying. We

First of all, the Sahelian States and the international
community must put civilians at the heart of their
response to the crisis. That is the first citizen pillar.
Political decisions and military operations must
prioritize the protection of civilians. To that end,
Sahelian and international defence and security
forces must demonstrate greater transparency and
accountability in conducting their military operations.

4/21

22-22630

10/01/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Secondly, the international community must
ensure the implementation of a truly holistic approach
that addresses the root causes of the crisis. That is the
second citizen pillar, which is based on the shared
observation today that the counter-terrorist response
alone is doomed to failure if our priorities are not
taken into account. To that end, Council members,
such as France, will have to allow Sahelian societies
to decide what they want. Sahelian societies must be
able to decide whether they want to make the dialogue
between the parties an essential part of the resolution
to the current crisis.
Thirdly, the humanitarian emergency must be
addressed. That is the third citizen pillar. It is essential
to ensure that the funding is commensurate with the
needs, and that humanitarian access never be impeded.
That is particularly crucial for women and girls, as we
know that 60 per cent of maternal mortality in the context
of a crisis is avoidable. The Minimum Initial Service
Package for Reproductive Health must be funded and
implemented for effective access to comprehensive
health services. I would also like to remind everyone
of the importance of respecting and ensuring respect
for international humanitarian law and the principles
of impartiality, neutrality and independence for aid
workers. Those principles are not just concepts; they
save lives.
Finally, we must fight impunity — the fourth
citizen pillar — because impunity fuels the cycle of
violence and encourages recruitment by armed groups,
as Council members know. As long as it prevails, it
will be impossible to restore trust between people and
Governments, and that trust is crucial to resolving the
crises in the Sahel.
As a national of Burkina Faso, it is chilling to
observe this escalation of violence, which is turning
my country into an area that is mired in crises and
continually grieving. And I hope that Council members
also find it chilling, because they understand the
facts, realities and experiences of the people in the
countries of the Sahel and they can do something and
can act. It is time to act. We therefore ask that future
communications from the Security Council reflect that
reality, and emphasize that the fight against terrorism
must not be at the expense of the protection of civilians.
The people of the Sahel need the Security Council to
heed the voices of Sahelian civil society and put them
at the heart of its response to the crisis.

S/PV. 8944

The President: I thank Ms. Thiombiano Yougbaré
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Annadif.
Mr. Annadif (spoke in French): Madam President,
allow me first of all to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January. At the same time, I would like to take advantage
of this opportunity to congratulate the new members
of the Council, namely, Albania, Brazil, Gabon, Ghana
and the United Arab Emirates, as well as to welcome
the Executive Director of the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime to today’s meeting.
It is a pleasure and an honour for me to present
the latest report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in West Africa and the Sahel (S/2021/1091)
to the Security Council today. Since our meeting last
July (see S/PV.8814), the subregion has experienced
developments that require the attention of the Council.
It is certain that West Africa and the Sahel continue to
make progress in many areas. However, the subregion
is struggling with a generalized insecurity, which risks
reversing hard-won advances.
Last November, I had the privilege of chairing a
session of the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission
in charge of the implementation of the International
Court of Justice ruling on the border dispute between
the two countries, after a seven-year hiatus. This was
an opportunity to take stock of the progress made since
the Commission was created 19 years ago.
As of today, the two countries have agreed on nearly
2,050 kilometres of the estimated 2,100-kilometre
border, leaving very few points of disagreement. The
construction of boundary pillars, physical symbols
of the demarcation, has also continued despite the
prevailing insecurity. To date, 1,673 boundary pillars
have been built, which represents more than 60 per cent
of the project.
Those achievements are examples of successful
conflict resolution, demonstrating in concrete terms
how the peaceful resolution of border disputes can
build trust and bilateral cooperation between two
neighbouring countries. We commend Nigeria and
Cameroon and proudly acknowledge that our common
determination has brought us closer to fulfilling
our mandate.

22-226305/21

S/PV.8944

Peace consolidation in West Africa

On 4 December, together with five former African
Heads of State leading election observation missions, I
witnessed first-hand the enthusiasm and discipline with
which a record 89 per cent of Gambian voters cast their
ballots freely in the presidential elections, overseen by
an electoral commission that built trust with political
parties, candidates and voters, making the elections
a resounding success. A few weeks earlier, in an
exemplary presidential election in Cabo Verde, Cabo
Verdeans chose an opposition candidate who pledged to
cooperate constructively with the Government majority
in Parliament.
Despite all the justified concerns about the current
turbulence in democratic governance, these examples
confirm the appeal of democracy as the most reliable
vehicle for shaping the future of communities within
a republic. The forthcoming local elections in Senegal
in some 10 days are of great interest, as mayors will be
elected by direct universal suffrage for the first time,
as a result of the consensual amendment of the electoral
code after a broad political dialogue.
Dialogue is also productive in the Niger, where
the opposition and the majority continue to discuss
issues, thereby contributing to political calm in a very
volatile context. In Guinea-Bissau, in coordination
with the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), we are in constant contact with
the political actors in order to facilitate agreement on
much-needed reforms. In Sierra Leone and elsewhere,
I am engaged with stakeholders in order to help them
bridge differences and move forward on issues of
national interest.
While there is reason to celebrate this political
progress, the security environment has also become
more concerning. In Burkina Faso, incessant attacks
by terrorist groups have led to growing public
disenchantment with the State’s difficulty in reversing
the deadly trend and have undermined the country’s
legendary consensus. Large-scale attacks on military
and civilian targets continued in Mali, Burkina Faso
and the Niger.
In Nigeria, increased criminality and farmerherder conflicts diverted attention from the extremist
violence in the north-east, which has not subsided.
Other incidents, albeit small, in northern Côte d’Ivoire,
Benin and Togo demonstrate that the much-publicized
threat of terrorist acts moving from the Sahel towards
the coastal countries of the Gulf of Guinea is a reality.
6/21

10/01/2022

One of the major consequences of these security
developments is that our region is experiencing a
multifaceted humanitarian crisis, characterized
by rising food prices, increased poverty due to the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and crop
losses due to drought. More than 38 million people are
at risk of food shortages by the next lean season, an
increase of 23 per cent compared to last year. Growing
insecurity has led to massive population displacement
and abandonment of agricultural land by millions of
displaced people. By November 2021, there were more
than 8 million refugees, internally displaced persons,
returnees and stateless people in West Africa, and
4.1 million in the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel) countries. The result is that millions of children
are growing up in difficult conditions, traumatized,
malnourished, poorly cared for and uneducated. I urge
the international community to recognize the urgency
of this situation, which undermines the future of the
populations and whose consequences could be felt well
beyond the subregion.
We welcome the latest joint operations between
Burkina Faso and the Niger, on the one hand, and
among Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Togo and Benin, on the
other, as well as the work of the Multinational Joint
Task Force in the Lake Chad basin and of the Joint Force
of the G-5 Sahel. We also commend the courage and
determination of the uniformed men and women facing
this complex situation, characterized by an asymmetric
war that has not yet revealed all its secrets and whose
main victims are the civilian populations, who must be
part of the solution.
Discussion platforms such as the Lake Chad
Basin Governors’ Forum for Regional Cooperation
on Stabilization, Peacebuilding and Sustainable
Development and the Governors’ Forum of the
Liptako-Gourma border regions have proven effective
in bringing together directly affected stakeholders at
Government, civil society and community levels in
order to exchange views and find solutions to their
specific needs.
Four weeks ago in Dakar, the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) organized
a conference of traditional and religious leaders
from across the region, including women elders from
Liptako-Gourma and north-eastern Nigeria. During
two days of exchanges, in-depth discussions examined
how best to leverage their influence at local, national
and regional levels in order to enhance the contribution
22-22630

10/01/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

of communities to the resolution of these crises, which
hamper their development.
The operationalization of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel continues in
collaboration with Mr. Abdoulaye Mar Dieye, Special
Coordinator for Development in the Sahel, and his
Office. Emphasis is now being placed on the centrality
of the Strategy and its Support Plan as a common
chapter of the United Nations system to guide the
various strategic frameworks.
In that regard, the Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinators of the United Nations system should
commit to making the Strategy a guiding strategic
platform for United Nations cooperation frameworks
and humanitarian response programmes in the
Sahel, integrating the Nexus Plus approach into all
their interventions.
Efforts to align Strategy with national and regional
policies in the Sahel will be pursued in close collaboration
with our partners in the G-5 Sahel, the Liptako-Gourma
Authority and the Lake Chad Basin Commission, while
making greater use of prospective analyses.
Furthermore, in order to strengthen coherence
and coordination, UNOWAS is supporting efforts
to revitalize the Ministerial Coordination Platform
of the Sahel Strategy to improve participation by
Member States, regional institutions and civil society
organizations. In addition, the 2022-2023 road map of
the Strategy, which is in the process of being finalized,
should encompass actions adapting our interventions in
the Sahel in the post-COVID-19 era.

S/PV. 8944

relating to the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security
in order to arrive at constitutional modifications that
address term limits and other governance matters.
The United Nations-initiated social cohesion
projects to facilitate peaceful and inclusive transitions
in Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea and the Niger
are in keeping with that goal. The projects are geared
towards promoting reconciliation processes at the
national and community levels, based on points of view
and strengthening local infrastructure to foster peace,
human rights and coexistence.
Another example of the initiatives that UNOWAS
intends to pursue with resolve in 2022 is our
collaboration with regional partners to facilitate the
establishment of a forum of Ministers of Justice and
judicial experts in West Africa as the appropriate
mechanism to address the perennial challenges that
have so far undermined the rule of law and respect
for human rights in the region. Once it is put in place
and operational, the regional ministerial platform
should contribute significantly to garnering the needed
political will to, inter alia, strengthen the capacity of
judicial systems.

A few weeks ago, in collaboration with
UNODC — whose participation here I commend —
UNOWAS brought together the defence attachés and
ambassadors based in Dakar to further explore the
operational links between the crime hotbeds in the
Sahel and the Gulf of Guinea coast.

Nowhere is the need for a long-term approach
more evident than with regard to climate change. Let
me commend the leadership of the Secretary-General
concerning what is an issue of the utmost importance.
At UNOWAS, we have established a regional
inter-agency working group that has produced a joint
analysis in response to the recommendations of the
Executive Office of the Secretary-General. In addition,
in a few weeks’ time, together with the Government
of Ireland, we will hold a major conference to launch
concrete initiatives, with the participation of experts
and institutions actively engaged in this increasingly
crucial area.

The resurgence of coups d’état, particularly in West
Africa, is frequently due to political practices that are
completely out of step with the aspirations of the people.
In that context, ECOWAS is to be commended for its
active engagement in the crises in Mali and Guinea.
UNOWAS firmly supports those efforts to enable a
return to constitutional order as soon as possible. We
also welcome the decision by the ECOWAS Heads of
State to revise Protocol A/SP1/12/01 on Democracy
and Good Governance Supplementary to the Protocol

As part of our new vision for UNOWAS, I intend to
work much more closely with the United Nations system
country teams in the 16 countries covered by UNOWAS
to align our respective actions with the key priorities
on which the United Nations interests are centred.
Together by applying our comparative advantages,
while at the same time being guided by the same goal,
we must act to strengthen the virtuous circle of good
governance, security, peace and development. In that
regard, I commend the vital work of the Peacebuilding

22-226307/21

S/PV.8944

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Commission, which is effectively helping many
countries in post-conflict situations in the subregion.
We must be even more determined in the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and the youth, peace and security agenda.
Although more than 50 per cent of voters in the
subregion are women, their meaningful presence in
decision-making bodies has been slow to materialize,
while, however, it must be acknowledged that several
countries have adopted anti-discrimination legislation
for elected positions, including through quota and
parity laws.
In the same regard, most countries in the
region currently have national action plans for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). However,
members will agree with me that, 21 years after the
Council’s adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), greater
political will, reflected among other things in the
financing of those action plans from national budgets,
is needed more than ever.
The President: I thank Mr. Annadif for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): It is my honour to deliver
this statement behalf of the three African members of
the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Kenya and
my own country, Ghana.
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Annadif Khatir
Mahamat Saleh, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel, for
his briefing to the Council. I welcome his continuing
commitment to utilize the good offices of the SecretaryGeneral in helping to consolidate peace and stability in
West Africa and the Sahel region.
We also welcome the participation in this meeting
of Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, as well as
Ms. Cécile Thiombiano Yougbaré, who spoke on behalf
of the People’s Coalition for the Sahel, and commend
them for their unique perspectives.
While welcoming the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in West Africa and the Sahel
(S/2021/1091), we want to underscore the importance
of preventive diplomacy in the mandate of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) and believe that enhanced preventive
8/21

10/01/2022

diplomacy engagement in the region would help
achieve even broader outcomes. In that context, we
acknowledge the progress made since the previous
report to the Council (S/2021/612) in the consolidation
of democracy in Cabo Verde and the Gambia through
the recent successful holding of their periodic general
elections. We nonetheless note the persisting political,
security and humanitarian challenges in some parts of
West Africa and the Sahel and welcome the conciliatory
gestures by the Presidents of Benin and Côte d’Ivoire,
which contributed to the lowering of political tensions
in those two countries. We also welcome the ongoing
dialogue in Burkina Faso, Senegal and Togo aimed at
building consensus on political and security matters.
In considering the report of the Secretary-General
before us, there are three issues of concern that the
members of the A3 want to highlight.
The first issue that is of paramount concern is the
rollback of the democratic values and constitutional
culture of West Africa and the Sahel through the
unconstitutional change of Governments that first
occurred in Mali, twice, and then in Guinea. The
political situation in Mali and Guinea are contrary to the
governance architecture of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), as expressed in the
Protocol on Democracy and Good Governance, and
constitutes a sources of division and instability in those
two countries, with implications for the entire region.
The prevailing situation does not reflect the political
aspirations of the people in those two countries.
Indeed, the people of West Africa and the Sahel, from
their now distant history of coup d’états, have come to
a clear conclusion that these unacceptable assaults on
democratic governance have not served them well.
We therefore welcome the determination of the
Authority of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS
to ensure an expedited transition to constitutional rule
in those countries and to further reinforce democratic
values and constitutional culture in West Africa and the
Sahel. We are concerned by the delays in the transition
processes in Mali and by the absence of a road map
for an election and the failure to set up a National
Transition Council in Guinea, which would enable the
peoples of those two countries to determine who their
leaders should be. In this regard, we call on the Council
to extend its full support for the measures announced at
the just-ended extraordinary meeting of the Authority
of Heads of State and Government of ECOWAS held in
Accra, Ghana, on Sunday 9 January 2022.
22-22630

10/01/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

In the case of Mali, the Authority of ECOWAS finds
unacceptable the proposal by the authorities in Mali to
extend the transition to five years and has therefore
applied new and additional diplomatic, economic and
financial measures in conformity with Community
protocols. These measures include closure of land
and air borders between ECOWAS member countries
and Mali; suspension of all commercial and financial
transactions between ECOWAS member States and
Mali, with the exception of essential listed products;
freezing of assets of the Republic of Mali in ECOWAS
Central Banks; freezing of assets of the Malian State
and all State enterprises and parastatal institutions in
commercial banks; and suspension of Mali from all
financial assistance from and transactions with all
ECOWAS financial institutions. As difficult as it is
for the Authority of ECOWAS to impose them, these
sanctions have been deemed necessary to facilitate the
process of a return of constitutional order in Mali.
On Guinea, the A3 considers the word of the
Guinean junta, in the face of a lack of transition road
map, not to provide any assurance of a commitment to
restoring constitutional order. We therefore call on the
Guinean authorities to work with ECOWAS to establish
the National Transition Council, which is a prerequisite
for the development of a transition road map. We
welcome the decision of ECOWAS to field a mission
to Conakry to discuss the transition process with the
transition authorities.
Secondly, the deteriorating security situation in
the region, characterized by the recurrence of terrorist
attacks in a number of countries there, including
in Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria, and
the expansion of attacks in the coastal countries,
is worrying. We therefore reiterate the Security
Council’s call for the Secretary-General to leverage
existing United Nations initiatives and mechanisms
for integrated and cross-pillar actions, with a view to
initiating projects specifically dedicated to stemming
intercommunal violence, in close coordination with the
African Union (AU), including its Mission for Mali and
the Sahel.
In anticipation of the Libya elections, we support the
AU’s call for cooperation between key stakeholders in
the development and implementation of the withdrawal
plan for foreign forces, in order to ensure that their
withdrawal does not adversely impact the stability in
the region. We welcome the decision by the Authority
to immediately activate the ECOWAS Standby Force,

S/PV. 8944

to be prepared for any eventuality, on account of the
challenges of the transition in Mali.
We remain concerned by the projected nexus
between maritime criminal networks and land-based
terrorist groups in the region. We therefore encourage
urgent support for the full operationalization of the
entire ECOWAS maritime security architecture. In
this regard, we welcome the discussions that are being
initiated in the Council on maritime piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, which we believe will help strengthen
multilateral efforts in addressing the menace in the
region. We count on the support and cooperation of
Council members in this process.
We urge for real action to be taken in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration that is designed to
be responsive to the recruits of groups with extremist
ideologies. It is required to address the threat posed by
both signatory groups and non-signatory armed groups.
We also call on all actors in the region, and globally,
to take concerted action to undermine the criminal
economies that incentivize and enable illegal armed
groups to operate effectively. Taking deliberate, and
aggressive actions against transnational crime is key to
the stabilization of the region.
We reiterate our support for the inclusion of
climate-induced security threats in the UNOWAS
mandate and believe that it will complement efforts
aimed at implementing commitments in such regional
initiatives as the recently adopted ECOWAS declaration
on climate change and the other 15 initiatives and
actions being undertaken in the region to strengthen
climate governance. We believe that this will serve as a
preventative mechanism to address potential conflicts,
while reducing the risk of conflict relapse for countries
in fragile situations. We also recognize the upcoming
regional conference on climate change, peace and
security in West Africa and the Sahel, to be held in the
first quarter of 2022, which we believe will push the
process forward in addressing the issue in the region.
Thirdly, we are concerned by the humanitarian
impact of the conflict situation in the region, including
such factors as terrorism, armed banditry, farmer/
herder clashes and natural disasters. The heightened
impact of the coronavirus disease pandemic on the
socioeconomic conditions of the peoples in the region
poses additional challenges to the stability of the region.
We therefore urge vaccine equity and justice and note
the funding support the ECOWAS Commission requires

22-226309/21

S/PV.8944

Peace consolidation in West Africa

from the international community and donor partners
to strengthen humanitarian interventions focusing on
building community resilience and recovery.
While welcoming investment in military
capabilities and in such areas as border management
and intelligence-sharing to help in early detection to
better manage the instability in the region, we hold the
view that these investments are only rudimentary in the
fight against terrorism and the myriad challenges in the
region. New and additional investment is required in
the region to address the root causes of the persisting
challenges, particularly in addressing governance and
development deficits, with a prioritization of women
and youth in decision-making processes. In this regard,
we call for support for comprehensive approaches by
States of the region and international partners, including
through the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel and the priority investment plan of the Group of
Five for the Sahel, all of which will help improve the
situation in West Africa and the Sahel.
Finally, we also call for support for the draft
presidential statement on UNOWAS that will soon be
initiated in the Council.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to start
by thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Annadif for his truly comprehensive and frank
assessment of developments over the past six months
and for stewarding the vital work of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) in
what are clearly very challenging times. I also want to
thank both Ms. Waly and Ms. Thiombiano Yougbaré
for their powerful accounts of what are the considerable
challenges faced regionally on the ground at present.
Despite the recent progress and welcome
developments in Cabo Verde and the Gambia in
particular, the fact is that the security and stability
situation in the region remains out of reach for too
many. It is not hard to come by inspirational actions
and examples. Indeed, the perseverance of the citizens
and civil society organizations of West Africa in such
challenging circumstances is a clear sign of their overall
commitment to progress. However, such progress can be
achieved only through strong and inclusive democratic
governance, effective State institutions, the promotion
and protection of human rights and adherence to the
principles of transparency and accountability.
Political will is fundamental to progress. In that
regard, I want to say that Ireland fully supports the
10/21

10/01/2022

conclusions concerning Mali that were reached at
yesterday’s Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) summit. As we meet, we know that
the situation in Mali is frankly at a critical juncture, and
we also know that Mali itself and its situation are critical
to security and progress more broadly in the region.
Ireland unequivocally supports ECOWAS actions and
welcomes its leadership related to recent events, which
places citizens at the heart of its decisions.
Ireland condemns the litany of horrific attacks
against civilians and peacekeepers that have typified
this reporting period, and we remain concerned about
the continued pattern of violence in the region. The
consequences of such violence are manifold and,
as we know, impact disproportionately those who
are vulnerable — often, women and girls. We are
also concerned about the increasing socioeconomic
inequality compounded by the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the severe humanitarian situation,
particularly in relation to rising levels of food
insecurity, displacement and reduced access to essential
health services.
Ongoing challenges around humanitarian access
are hampering the delivery of much-needed assistance
to the most vulnerable at a really critical time. We
therefore call for unimpeded humanitarian access for
all who need it. We heard Mr. Annadif’s very strong
message just now on the scale of humanitarian need
right across the region.
We are also concerned by the continued incidents
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, as Ms. Waly has
highlighted this morning. We encourage progress on
the operationalization of the interregional maritime
security architecture.
We know that the humanitarian situation and,
indeed, the security threats that we observe cannot be
addressed properly without an understanding of their
causes. I want to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for articulating the links
between climate and security just now, which we know
are critical in that regard. It is vital that the Council’s
efforts and the work of the Mission not be constrained
by ignoring that reality.
The passage to a more prosperous future for the
people of West Africa and the Sahel, and for women
and young people in particular, can be achieved only
when we acknowledge the impact of climate change
and infuse that knowledge throughout our efforts.
22-22630

10/01/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Those who are most vulnerable are relying on us to
do so, and we welcome what Mr. Annadif said in that
regard this morning.
We also know that we need to prioritize and
harness the power and potential of women and young
people in the region. Women should be fully integrated
into democratic decision-making at all levels. We are
concerned with ensuring that women find their place
in the room and at the table. I was very encouraged
by the Special Representative’s determination and
message in that regard, too. We also wish to emphasize
the importance of upholding the human rights of
members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex community.
A resurgent region requires an educated, secure
and enabled citizenry. We call again for the protection
of the most vulnerable and for their empowerment
through full engagement in peacebuilding, political
processes and civic engagement, including the right to
peaceful assembly.
We know all too well the complex nature of the
region’s challenges. They are unique and fraught, though
not insurmountable. A complex situation does not
necessarily require a complex solution. The pathways
forward are clear and I wish to once again express
Ireland’s belief that only an integrated and holistic
approach to tackling the root causes of insecurity can
lead to durable solutions. Joint cooperation across the
region, intercommunal dialogue and human rightscentred approaches are key in addressing long-term
security issues, conflict prevention and reconciliation.
We strongly support the continued efforts of UNOWAS
in that regard, as well as the leadership role that regional
organizations such as ECOWAS are playing.
Finally, Ireland looks forward to the important
negotiations on a presidential statement that will
commence shortly and which we are delighted to
co-chair alongside our Ghanaian colleagues. We hope
that, once again, the Council will unite not only in its
vision for the region but also in its unwavering support
for the continued work of the mission, which remains of
immense importance.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Special Representative Annadif, as
well as the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), Ms. Waly, for
the information provided. I would also like to thank
Ms. Thiombiano Yougbaré for her remarks on behalf of

S/PV. 8944

the People’s Coalition for the Sahel and assure her that
her heartfelt words were received loud and clear.
(spoke in English)
Allow me to make three brief points.
First, Albania would like to recognize the positive
developments since the last United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) discussion (see
S/PV.8814). Together with regional organizations — first
and foremost the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) — UNOWAS continues to play
a crucial role in promoting peace and stability in the
region. The presidential elections held in October in
Cabo Verde and in The Gambia in December were
positive steps. We encourage UNOWAS to support
the countries of the region so as to best prepare for the
upcoming elections and strengthen the security situation
on the ground. We commend the democratic progress
made in the Niger and its Government’s commitment
to addressing the deteriorating situation and increasing
access to education, particularly for girls.
Unfortunately, in the rest of the Sahel the situation
is grim. We have seen the closure of thousands of
schools, leaving more than 13 million children without
access to education — once again, especially girls. It is
a trend that needs be reversed without delay. Now more
than ever, we must invest in women as central figures of
local communities and drivers of positive and unifying
narratives within societies. We commend the Special
Representative for his focus on resolution 1325 (2000).
We praise the UNOWAS training delivered to
women and young people on political participation,
but we must see genuine political will and commitment
on the part of local Governments. We concur with
the Secretary-General’s deep concerns regarding
unconstitutional extensions of mandates and coups
d’états in the region, risking democratic backsliding.
We call on stakeholders in Mali and Guinea to ensure a
transition of power to elected civilians and a return to
constitutional order in a timely manner. The decisions
taken yesterday by ECOWAS on the junta in Mali are
yet another testament to the acute need to stay firm and
to increase pressure on the military establishment to
reverse its course.
Secondly, the security situation in the Sahel region
remains extremely concerning. Despite all efforts, we
have seen a severe and dangerous expansion of terrorism
and an increasing number of terrorist attacks. The threat

22-2263011/21

S/PV.8944

Peace consolidation in West Africa

10/01/2022

from violent extremist groups clearly indicates the need
to intensify the international community’s engagement
in and support for regional responses. We condemn in
the strongest terms the recent attacks that led to the
death of peacekeepers and defenceless civilians.

for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) in support
of West African States. I would also like to thank
Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly and Ms. Cécile Thiombiano
Yougbaré for their important remarks on the challenges
faced in the field of security in the region.

The security situation in the Sahel bears an impact
on the whole region, the entire continent and far beyond,
given its geographic position connecting sub-Saharan
Africa to the Mediterranean basin.

Brazil welcomes the resumption of activities and
progress made within the Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed
Commission regarding demarcation and also the
peaceful and orderly electoral processes held in Cabo
Verde and The Gambia, since inclusivity and sustained
peace greatly derive from democratic practices. In
addition, we would like to commend the Gambian
authorities for the outstanding work carried out by the
Truth, Reconciliation and Reparations Commission.
We hope their accomplishments can be a source
of inspiration.

While we stress the positive examples of African
ownership, more work lies ahead. We are facing a
serious and rapidly evolving threat heightened by large
and porous borders, the extensive traditional crossborder movement of people, a lack of full institutional
capacities, and the confluence of criminal and terrorist
activities and organizations, including extensive drug
trafficking, as Ms. Waly mentioned. We cannot and
must not let our guard down.
Similarly, as also mentioned by Ms. Waly, the Gulf
of Guinea remains a persistently challenging area in
terms of piracy and armed robbery beyond the coast.
Albania welcomes further discussions and supports
regional efforts in that respect.
We strongly believe that peace and security
issues must be addressed through a multidimensional
and inclusive approach that spans the development,
political, security, justice and human rights dimensions.
I echo the words of my Irish colleague in saying that
stability cannot be achieved or sustained without such
a comprehensive approach.
Thirdly, the effects of climate change on peace
are all the more apparent in the Sahel region, with
climate change depriving people of their livelihoods
and, in turn, exacerbating intercommunal violence and
instability. We must recognize the challenges of climate
change and the threat it poses to peace and security and
take the necessary steps.
Let me conclude by reiterating that Albania
stands ready to support UNOWAS and the Special
Representative in strengthening its efforts toward
democratic consolidation and consensus throughout
West Africa and the Sahel region.
Mr. De Souza Monteiro (Brazil): I wish to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report on
the latest developments in the region (S/2021/1091), as
well as Special Representative Annadif for the insights
and measures undertaken by the United Nations Office
12/21

While some positive developments have taken place
in the countries covered by UNOWAS, plenty of work
remains to be done at the political, humanitarian and
security levels. In that regard, we endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s remarks related to Guinea Bissau about the
need to implement the institutional reforms outlined in
the 2016 Conakry Agreement on the Implementation of
the Economic Community of West African States Road
Map for the Resolution of the Political Crisis in GuineaBissau. Brazil also encourages the Bissau-Guinean
authorities to complete a consensus-based constitutional
reform and reiterates its commitment to fully supporting
the country’s political stabilization process through the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission Guinea-Bissau
configuration, which we have the honour to chair. We
are looking forward to continuing a fruitful dialogue
with Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Annadif and national actors on this matter.
The humanitarian situation in the Economic
Community of West African States area is of great
concern to us, and Brazil has been working closely
with its African partners to multiply South-South
cooperation agreements in order to address challenges
in the health and food security fields.
Security in the Western African region is a critical
issue both on land and at sea. Brazil welcomes the
efforts of UNOWAS to implement the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel. In the face of the
threat of the expansion of terrorist groups from the
Sahel to coastal States in West Africa, we commend
the countries in the subregion for their commitment to
cross-border cooperation and information-sharing and
22-22630

10/01/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

encourage UNOWAS to support them. Moreover, Brazil
has been paying increased attention to the international
security implications of piracy and armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea, which remains the world’s piracy
hotspot, even though the data available for 2021 shows
a reduction in the rates of such crimes in the region.
As the States of the Gulf of Guinea bear the primary
responsibility to counter piracy and armed robbery in
the region, modalities for regional cooperation and naval
capacity-building are key in addressing this complex
challenge. I would like to recognize, in particular, the
fundamental importance of the Yaoundé Architecture
for Maritime Safety and Security in promoting regional
coordination to counter piracy and armed robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea. The Yaoundé Architecture
brings together key regional organizations, such as
the Economic Community of Central African States,
the Economic Community of West African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission. Additional support
for countries and regional organizations in the Gulf of
Guinea could help strengthen their ongoing counterpiracy efforts.
It is important to recognize that piracy and
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea have been
causing financial hardship for the whole region
through disruptions to shipping and international
trade, loss of Government revenues, impacts on the
security of seafarers and fishers, and inefficiencies in
transportation. The costs of piracy also shift resources
that might otherwise be used for the development and
security of the region, including in addressing other
transnational organized crimes.
The international community must acknowledge
the complexity of piracy and deal with its various
aspects in a comprehensive and integrated manner,
starting with its root causes, usually associated with the
lack of economic opportunities and extreme poverty.
In this context, the Peacebuilding Commission could
provide important inputs to consolidate peace in and
around the Gulf of Guinea and integrate strategies to
address the root causes of piracy on land.
As a member of the zone of peace and cooperation
of the South Atlantic, Brazil stands ready to engage
actively in the Security Council to strengthen the
ongoing regional counter-piracy efforts in the Gulf
of Guinea, including through a new resolution on
this matter.

S/PV. 8944

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative Annadif and Executive Director
of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Waly
for their briefings. I also listened attentively to the
statement made by Ms. Cécile Thiombiano Yougbaré.
Since last year, the countries of West Africa and
the Sahel have worked actively to fight against the
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, maintain
political stability and restore economic development.
Special Representative Annadif is actively fulfilling
his mandate and has played an active role in closely
cooperating with West African countries and
subregional organizations.
In the current situation, the region continues to face
many difficulties and challenges. The international
community should increase its support in the
following areas.
First, the international community should step up
its support for the continued maintenance of stability.
Late last year, Cabo Verde and The Gambia successfully
held their general elections. Côte d’Ivoire, Benin,
Burkina Faso, Senegal and Togo promoted political
dialogue and reconciliation, giving new impetus
to maintaining overall stability and development.
Mali and Guinea are in a critical period of political
transition. The international community should support
the relevant countries in resolving their differences
through dialogue; promote political transition, peaceful
reconciliation and preparations for general elections in
the light of their national conditions and within their
constitutional frameworks; and strive to maintain
stability and eliminate the root causes of conflict.
There has been an increase in protests in Liberia and
the public security situation is grim. The international
community should pay greater attention to that and
guard against any threats. China will continue to
support the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union in their mediation efforts
and assist regional countries in seeking development
partners, in line with their own national conditions.
Secondly, the international community should
increase its support for uniting against terrorism.
Terrorist forces are rampant in Mali, Burkina Faso,
the Niger, Nigeria and other countries, and are
gradually spreading to the southern coastal areas
of the Gulf of Guinea. They are conducting crossborder activities and frequently carry out attacks,
causing heavy casualties and threatening security and

22-2263013/21

S/PV.8944

Peace consolidation in West Africa

stability. The international community should support
regional countries in strengthening counter-terrorism
capacity-building and provide more support by funding
equipment and logistical supplies through multilateral
and bilateral channels.
It is necessary to ensure respect for the countries
concerned in implementing their foreign security
cooperation according to their own needs and to
strengthen the coordination of counter-terrorism
operations and information-sharing to strive for
synergy. Through measures such as deradicalization,
we should eliminate the root causes of conflict, carry
out vocational education and training and community
correction, address youth education and employment,
and prevent youth and even children from being
recruited by terrorist forces.
Thirdly, the international community should
step up its support for the strengthening of maritime
security cooperation in the Gulf of Guinea. In recent
years, the problem of maritime security in the Gulf of
Guinea has become more prominent and piracy more
frequent, which seriously threatens the security and
stability of coastal countries and the livelihood of the
people there, impacting international shipping and
trade and the regional economy. On the basis of respect
for the sovereignty and leadership of coastal countries,
it is necessary to help regional countries strengthen
their anti-piracy capacity-building, carry out training
of maritime security forces and improve joint law
enforcement surveillance and other operational
capabilities. The United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel and other relevant United Nations agencies
should support the building of regional anti-piracy
mechanisms to ensure their comprehensive, effective
and sustainable operation. We can learn from the
existing successful experiences and explore measures
to step up the fight against piracy on the basis of full
consultation with coastal countries.

10/01/2022

The rapid spread of the Omicron variant highlights the
imbalance in vaccine distribution.
It is necessary to continue to support countries
of the region to fight against the pandemic, increase
assistance, give early access to safe, affordable vaccines,
promote exemptions to vaccine manufacturers’ exercise
of intellectual property rights, and support local vaccine
production. China will comprehensively implement
the outcome of the eighth ministerial meeting of the
Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, increase vaccine
assistance to Africa and make greater contributions to
fighting the pandemic in the region.
A few days ago, State Councilor and Foreign
Minister of China, Mr. Wang Yi, visited Africa,
continuing the tradition of 32 years of Africa being the
Chinese Foreign Minister’s first foreign visit of the year.
In this new year, China will work with the international
community and make greater contributions to the
stability, development and prosperity of the countries
in the region.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Annadif, Ms. Waly and Ms. Thiombiano Yougbaré
for their briefings.
I would like to address three points — first, the
worsening security situation in the Sahel, which is
threatening all of West Africa. The terrorist threat is
now affecting coastal countries, with, for the first time,
three attacks against defence and security forces in
Benin. Violence against civilians continues in Burkina
Faso, Mali and the Niger. We express our condolences to
the families of the victims and to the countries affected.

China has taken note that Norway and Ghana have
put forward a draft resolution on maritime security in
the Gulf of Guinea. We will constructively participate in
the relevant consultations and contribute to supporting
regional maritime security cooperation.

This situation requires a response. We must equip
the countries of the region to fight terrorism. The
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel must
be supported in a predictable and sustainable manner.
We remain convinced that a United Nations support
office is the best mechanism to achieve this end. We
also encourage cooperation between coastal countries
and the countries of the Sahel. The Accra Initiative is
promising. We welcome the joint military operation
carried out in this framework in November by Côte
d’Ivoire, Burkina Faso, Ghana and Togo.

Fourthly, the international community should
increase its support to ensure access to vaccines for
countries in\\of the region. Recently, there has been
a surge in coronavirus disease cases in West African
countries. The situation does not allow for optimism.

France will continue its security support to the
Sahel countries, in coordination with its European
partners, several of which are participating in Task
Force Takuba. This is a long-term commitment,
whose objectives have been jointly defined with the

14/21

22-22630

10/01/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV. 8944

Sahel countries and clearly set forth. In contrast, we
condemn the ongoing deployment on Malian territory
of Wagner Group mercenaries, who are well known for
threatening civilians, looting resources and violating
international law and the sovereignty of States. This
can only contribute to the further destabilization of
the Sahel.

to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. But I would like to
reiterate our full support for the efforts of ECOWAS,
which met yesterday and adopted new sanctions against
the transitional authorities in Mali, who have once
again failed to comply with the demands of ECOWAS
and with their own commitments.

Beyond the Sahel, France is concerned about
maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea. We support
regional initiatives to fight piracy within the framework
of the Yaoundé Architecture. We are conducting
maritime exercises with several African countries and
participating in the European Union’s coordinated
maritime presences concept, which strengthens the
effectiveness of European efforts in the area and
supports coastal countries.

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank Special Representative Annadif, Executive
Director Waly and Ms. Thiombiano Yougbaré for their
briefings and for their work.

My
second
point
concerns
development
programmes, which must go hand in hand with security
responses. We support the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel, but the strategy must not be limited
to holding meetings or workshops. On the contrary, it
must implement concrete and operational programmes.
It is also imperative that the States of the Sahel work to
restore trust with their populations and improve their
governance. We must also take into account the effects
of climate change and its consequences for security and
conflict prevention.
My last point concerns the political situation.
We welcome the holding of presidential elections in
Cabo Verde on 17 October 17 and in the Gambia on
4 December. With regard to Guinea, France notes that
the transitional authorities have given the first signs
of progress, in the appointment of a civilian prime
minister and the formation of an inclusive transitional
Government. Like the European Union, France, in
collaboration with its partners, is ready to support the
transition process. But we remain vigilant and await the
rapid publication of the transition road map requested
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the establishment of the National
Transition Council.
In contrast, France remains gravely concerned by
the failure of the transitional authorities in Mali to
respect their commitments to returning to constitutional
order in accordance with the timetable set out in the
Transition Charter and endorsed by the Security
Council. The Council will have the opportunity to return
to this issue tomorrow during the meeting devoted

Let me start on the topic of politics by welcoming
the peaceful election in the Gambia in December. This
was an example of West African democracy in action.
However, the United Kingdom remains concerned by
ongoing transition challenges, including in Mali and
Guinea. We encourage the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) to continue
its good-offices role in support of the upcoming local
elections in Senegal, Sierra Leone and the Gambia, as
well as in the preparations for the Nigerian elections
in 2023.
We will have the opportunity to discuss Mali in
more detail tomorrow, but the United Kingdom shares
the concerns set out by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) this weekend, by
Ghana on behalf of the three African members of the
Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and Kenya — and
by others, at the proposal of the Malian transitional
authorities to postpone elections by up to five years. We
will continue working with ECOWAS, UNOWAS, the
Security Council and the international community to
hold the transitional authorities to their commitments.
More importantly, on security, the United Kingdom
remains concerned by the deteriorating situation across
the Sahel. The prevalence of conflict and violent attacks
in the tri-border region between Burkina Faso, Mali and
the Niger is having a tangible impact on security across
the West Africa region — most recently the deadly
attack in northern Benin. This conflict is driving an
alarmingly high level of humanitarian need and severe
food insecurity, compounded by the continued impacts
of the coronavirus disease. And, as others in the Council
have said, climate change is also a driver of insecurity in
this region. With these interconnected challenges facing
this region, we welcome the continued implementation
of the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel

22-2263015/21

S/PV.8944

Peace consolidation in West Africa

and the close engagement of UNOWAS with the region
and with regional bodies.
With regard to the Lake Chad basin, ongoing
conflict involving extremist groups in north-eastern
Nigeria and the wider Basin region also remains deeply
concerning. The United Kingdom remains committed
to working alongside regional and international actors
to support better cross-border efforts to respond to the
conflict and tackle the ongoing terrorist threat.
In closing, it is clear that a holistic and integrated
approach is needed to address the interconnected
challenges in the region. In this regard, the United
Kingdom supports wider United Nations integration
and coherence in the region, including greater
alignment between the work of UNOWAS and the
United Nations country teams. National security
efforts need to be joined up with the efforts being
made by wider development partners, United Nations
agencies and the Peacebuilding Commission to help
tackle the root causes and drivers of conflict and to
help build social cohesion, good governance and open,
inclusive societies.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Khatir
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, for his
valuable briefing. The United Arab Emirates affirms
its support for his good offices in the region. We also
thank Ms. Ghada Fathi Waly, Executive Director of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for her
briefing. We have also listened carefully to Ms. Cécile
Thiombiano Yougbaré from the People’s Coalition for
the Sahel.
West Africa and the Sahel have recently witnessed
several positive developments, which must be built upon,
including progress made in various political processes.
We thank the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) for its efforts in that regard.
Nevertheless, the region still suffers from a number
of difficult and complicated challenges that require
a comprehensive and concerted approach. National,
regional and international efforts notwithstanding,
more work remains to be done to promote unity of
vision in order to set the region on the path to recovery,
security and stability.
Having said that, I would like to focus on the
following issues.
16/21

10/01/2022

First, the deteriorating fragile security situation
in West Africa and the Sahel represents a source
of concern for the international community. In that
context, we must continue our efforts to combat
terrorist groups in those areas, especially Da’esh and
Boko Haram, as they take advantage of the political
vacuum and the deteriorating social and economic
conditions that provide an environment conducive to
their terrorist activities.
Meanwhile, we must pay special attention to the
growing link between organized crime and terrorism.
In that regard, we commend the efforts made by the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel), supported by my country, to combat terrorism
and organized crime in the region.
The persistent acts of piracy and armed robbery
in the Gulf of Guinea threaten international
navigation, security and the sustainable development
of neighbouring countries. In that connection, we
support strengthened cooperation at the international,
regional and subregional levels in order to counter
maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, including by
enhancing States’ capabilities in the region.
Security and stability both require UNOWAS to
continue strengthening and coordinating regional and
international efforts to address cross-border challenges
in the region. In addition to adopting a regional
approach, it is of paramount importance to understand
the country-specific contexts, as that would help build
countries’ capabilities to better meet the challenges
they are facing.
Secondly, my country stresses the importance
of providing urgently needed humanitarian aid to
countries in West Africa and the Sahel, and attaches
particular importance to the problem of food insecurity
currently affecting 20 million people in the region.
We must work towards the provision of vaccines and
the medical equipment necessary to confront the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
The United Arab Emirates, for its part, continues
to provide development and humanitarian assistance to
the countries of the Sahel, amounting to approximately
$240 million from 2016 to 2020. My country has also
provided more than 69 tons of medical aid to help
mitigate the impact of the pandemic.
Thirdly, climate change is one of the most important
challenges facing West Africa and the Sahel, especially
22-22630

10/01/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

given its impact on the security and humanitarian
situation there. This issue should therefore be adequately
addressed in our discussion. Integrated strategies
and programmes should be developed to address this
phenomenon and its repercussions on West Africa and
the Sahel. That will eventually contribute to ensuring
food and water security for the region’s population.
Lastly, with regard to the efforts of UNOWAS to
support women’s participation in political and security
processes in the region, we welcome the adoption of
national plans by most countries of the region in order
to achieve those goals. We look forward to seeing
greater effort in that connection.
Similarly, initiatives to empower young people
in the region must continue. The recent annual West
African and Sahel Youth Forum emphasized the
important role of young men and women in building
peaceful societies.
In conclusion, we reiterate our support for UNOWAS
and its implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel. We also commend the tireless
efforts made by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States to address the challenges in the region.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank the three briefers for
their presentations.
In the complex context that characterizes the
region of West Africa and the Sahel, I will limit this
intervention to two issues that I believe are central.
First, Mexico welcomes the successful elections in
Cabo Verde and the Gambia, as well as the progress
of political dialogue initiatives in Burkina Faso, Côte
d’Ivoire and Sierra Leone, to mention just a few. We
also welcome the preparation of elections in Senegal.
Those developments demonstrate that political dialogue
and democratic governance are key to resolving the
complex problems affecting the region. However, we are
deeply concerned about the recent threats to democracy
and the rule of law in Guinea and Mali. Mexico backs
the decisions of the Economic Community of West
African States and underscores the responsibility that,
ultimately, falls to the Security Council if regional
efforts come to naught.
Through its good offices and preventive diplomacy,
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the

S/PV. 8944

Sahel (UNOWAS) plays a critical role in supporting the
institution-building process in the region, which should
go hand in hand with military cooperation initiatives.
Indeed, without the necessary reforms in
governance and economic development and without
strengthening State and constitutional order, violence
fuelled by extremist groups, organized crime, selfdefence militias and intercommunal rivalries will
continue to undermine security efforts. We therefore
need more sweeping and far-reaching reforms.
Secondly, we insist on the need to move towards a
strategy that curbs illegal arms trafficking, specifically
with regard to small arms and light weapons. The
weapons entering and circulating illegally in the region
increase the lethality of conflicts, represent a constant
threat to the human rights of the population and are,
unfortunately, behind the vast majority of attacks
against civilians.
In accordance with resolution 2616 (2021), adopted
in December, Mexico believes that UNOWAS can
contribute to harmonizing current efforts in each
country and to coordinating a regional vision to
effectively combat illicit arms trafficking, inter alia by
attacking its financing model and its sources of supply.
We hope that the presidential statement on this issue will
include that suggestion and will be reflected in what
we expect UNOWAS to do in the coming months. As
was said earlier, that means a more operational mandate
that is less focused on solely holding conferences and
organizing workshops.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): My thanks
go to Special Representative Annadif and Executive
Director Waly for their briefings. I also especially
thank Ms. Thiombiano Yougbaré for her compelling
and powerful presentation. The recommendations that
she and the People’s Coalition for the Sahel made last
year and that she underscored today certainly will
influence the United States Government’s approach to
the challenges we face in the Sahel. I therefore thank
her for that.
The United States reiterates our appreciation for
the continued efforts of the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) to advance
the Security Council’s aim of a stable and secure
Sahel region, which UNOWAS does by working to
deepen democratic processes, bolster the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and

22-2263017/21

S/PV.8944

Peace consolidation in West Africa

other subregional institutions and engage Governments
and civil society actors.
Like other speakers today, the United States also
welcomes more civil society participation in the political
life of the Sahel region. The United States therefore
continues to encourage civic engagement in the many
upcoming elections across the region, consistent with
necessary public health precautions. We join others
in welcoming last year’s free, fair and transparent
election processes that took place in Cabo Verde and
The Gambia. The United States applauds the people
of both those countries for making their voices heard
through the ballot box as both countries move towards
peaceful, democratic consolidation. Like others, we are
deeply concerned about the lack of progress in Mali.
We urge the Malian transitional authorities to return
to democracy in a timely fashion. We note the decision
taken by ECOWAS yesterday with regard to additional
sanctions, which we are reviewing, and look forward to
further discussion in the Security Council this week.
We condemn the September 2021 coup in Guinea
and urge the transition Government there to rapidly
hold elections and return the country to constitutional,
civilian-led democracy.
The United States joins others in being gravely
concerned about the terrorist violence against civilians
and security forces that is occurring across the Sahel
and expanding into coastal West Africa. That includes
instability exacerbated by ongoing conflicts and the
increased flow of arms and mercenary groups that
threaten the peace and stability of the region. We
support the efforts of the region to counter terrorism
and promote stability through holistic strategies that
address the underlying drivers of conflict.
Governments undermine their own effectiveness
and credibility when State officials, particularly the
security forces that are charged with protecting their
own populations, engage in human rights violations.
We urge all parties to armed conflict to grant greater
access for humanitarian aid organizations and to respect
the applicable international law obligations, including
those under international humanitarian law.
The United States continues to support the
ECOWAS Conflict Prevention Framework and regional
initiatives in various Sahel countries to strengthen
peace and security infrastructure that can prevent
violence at the national and community levels. The
inclusion of civil society organizations promotes the
18/21

10/01/2022

development of community-led solutions to counter
attacks and violence proactively. UNOWAS work with
Governments in West Africa and the Sahel region to
develop a civilian-led joint project to address local
conflicts is critical, we believe, to the stability of
the region.
We applaud the partnership among UNOWAS, the
Regional Office for West and Central Africa of the
International Organization for Migration, the Regional
Collaboration Centre of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change and the United Nations
Environment Programme to launch a regional working
group to address the adverse effects of climate change
on security and development in West Africa.
Finally, the United States also continues to work
with the Global Coalition to Defeat Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIS), which remains engaged in
West Africa and the Sahel. The Coalition welcomed
Burkina Faso as its eighty-fourth member in late
2021. The Coalition also announced the formation
of the Africa Focus Group last month, which seeks
to enhance African Coalition members’ civilian-led
counter-terrorism capabilities, which can counter ISISaffiliated and other transnational terrorist groups. The
Africa Focus Group has an initial prioritization on
border security, battlefield evidence protection and
biometric enrolment of terrorist suspects.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Mahamat Annadif, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS) for his briefing. Russia welcomes his
efforts to help the countries of West Africa, the Sahel
and the Lake Chad basin overcome current difficulties.
There is no question that the results of UNOWAS work
are highly commendable.
We share the concerns about the dangerous
challenges facing many countries in West Africa,
especially those in the Sahel. Terrorist activities,
interethnic and intercommunal conflicts, organized
crime and drug trafficking continue unabated in
the region. Throughout the second half of 2021, we
received tragic reports of the loss of life in deadly
terrorist attacks and clashes with militants. We express
our support for all those people who are engaged in the
difficult fight against terrorism in the region.
The humanitarian situation remains extremely
challenging. The number of internally displaced
22-22630

10/01/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

persons and people in need of food aid has grown
dramatically. Many schools and medical facilities have
been closed. All of that calls for the countries of the
region, especially in the Sahel, to redouble their efforts
to restore effective State control and governance.
With regard to the situation in Mali, we believe
that the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation, the eradication of terrorism and the
improvement of the socioeconomic situation depend on
internal political stability. Further political upheavals
could lead the country into a dead end. Let us give the
respect due our Malian colleagues and support their
understandable efforts to establish order within their
own country and rely on the partners they deem most
appropriate to that end. Any double standard used to
evaluate the situation or attempt to act on unverified
information — of which, unfortunately, we heard
today — is completely unacceptable and unworthy of
any self-respecting State.
The obligations of the transitional authorities in
Mali to restore constitutional order must be fulfilled
while keeping the realities on the ground in mind. Of
course, we would like to see the elections held on time.
We understand, however, the difficulties faced by the
Malian authorities in preparing for the elections. We
agree that, without the return of State control to many
parts of the country, it will be difficult to consider the
results of the elections as credible. That would lead
directly to further political destabilization, as happened
in Mali after last year’s elections.
Returning to the subject of UNOWAS, we are
convinced that the Office faces a range of extensive
and complex tasks: helping resolve regional crises,
participating in political mediation, providing assistance
in strengthening State institutions, implementing the
United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and
carrying out coordination functions with other United
Nations entities on the ground. The effectiveness of the
Office will depend directly on how well it cooperates
with other regional organizations, such as the African
Union, ECOWAS, the Group of Five for the Sahel
and the Lake Chad Basin Commission. UNOWAS
cooperation with the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa is required on certain issues,
including combating piracy, the Lake Chad basin and
the demarcation of the Cameroonian-Nigerian border.
After the closure of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau in 2020, the

S/PV. 8944

monitoring of events in that country fell under the
purview of UNOWAS. In that context, we believe
that maintaining Security Council sanctions against
Guinea-Bissau under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, which provides for such sanctions
only where there is a threat to international peace and
security, makes no sense whatsoever. We call for those
sanctions to be removed.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): At the outset, I thank Special
Representative Annadif for briefing us on the latest
developments in the West Africa region. I also thank
Ms. Waly, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, and Ms. Thiombiano
Yougbaré of Médecins du Monde for their insights.
The countries of the region have remained
steadfast in pursuing democratic traditions, despite a
few aberrations. That positive trend is evident in the
successful and peaceful elections in Cabo Verde and
The Gambia held in October and December respectively.
We congratulate the people of The Gambia and Cabo
Verde for reposing faith in democratic values. India
also extends felicitations to the elected leaders. We
need to recognize and unequivocally support countries
pursuing the democratic path.
However, democracy has witnessed a setback in
Guinea with the coup d’état in September. Despite
the efforts made by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), there has been no
progress towards the restoration of democratic order.
In Mali, the implementation of the 18-month transition
that was agreed initially by the Malian authorities
remains uncertain.
In the current scenario, the role of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
in preventive diplomacy, political mediation and
facilitation has become even more important. The
mission should remain focused on its mandate, work
closely with national stakeholders and regional and
subregional organizations, particularly ECOWAS,
and continue assisting them in their efforts to address
those challenges.
The security challenges in the Sahel have become
alarming and the reasons are evident from the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2021/1091). Terrorist and extremist
armed groups in the Liptako-Gourma region of Mali, the
Niger and Burkina Faso continue to demonstrate their
capacity to mount large-scale coordinated attacks on
civilians as well as security forces, leading to fatalities

22-2263019/21

S/PV.8944

Peace consolidation in West Africa

10/01/2022

and also driving displacement. The Lake Chad basin
has been targeted primarily by terrorist groups such as
Boko Haram and Islamic State West Africa Province.

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Norway.

The nexus among terrorists, criminals, drug
traffickers and pirates continue to fuel instability and
violence in those regions. Terrorist groups affiliated
with Al-Qaida and Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant continue to instrumentalize the religious and
ethnic dimensions of the farmer-herder conflicts to
their advantage.

We thank Special Representative Annadif for his
work as Head of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) on everything from
elections to women and peace and security and for
staying ahead of the curve on climate and security. We
also share his concern about unconstitutional extensions
of presidential mandates and coups d’état in the region
and welcome his efforts to strengthen protocols on
democracy and good governance.

While countries in the region have been confronting
that challenge individually and collectively through
mechanisms such as the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the Multinational
Joint Task Force, in order to be more effective those
mechanisms urgently need financial resources and
logistical support. We therefore support the call of the
Secretary-General to ensure predictable and sustainable
funding to regional security initiatives such as the G-5
Sahel Joint Force.
Acts of piracy and robbery at sea in the Gulf of
Guinea, despite a decrease in the frequency of such
incidents, remain a serious threat to seafarers. Several
Indian sailors have also been victims of piracy and
kidnappings. There is an urgent need to increase
surveillance to ensure maritime security in the area
through increased international collaboration.
Despite the challenges posed by the coronavirus
disease pandemic, the countries of the region are
showing positive economic growth. In that regard,
the implementation of the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel assumes significance. While
implementing the Strategy, we believe that UNOWAS
needs to focus on utilizing African capacities, products
and services.
India attaches high importance to its relations with
the West Africa region. Thus far, India has provided soft
loans amounting to more than $3.5 billion for projects
in West Africa and Sahel. Under the ambit of the IndiaUnited Nations Development Partnership Fund, we are
also providing $9 million for livelihood projects in nine
West African countries. India has also established a
robust security partnership with countries in the region.
India remains committed to supporting countries in
West Africa, including through capacity-building and
the strengthening of democratic institutions.
20/21

I thank the briefers for their insights.

We are pleased to see increased cooperation
between UNOWAS and other key players, such as the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and
the critically important Economic Community of West
African States, as we saw yesterday. In a situation where
we see terrorism and other security and humanitarian
challenges spreading across borders, cooperation is
the master key to solutions. In that respect, we repeat
our call for United Nations support to the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) Joint Force as a crossborder solution that must be in full compliance with
international law, including international human rights
law. We commend the G-5 Sahel for its plan of action
on gender equality.
Secondly, as Executive Director Waly and others
have said, maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea
persists as a menace to the region and to seafarers who
pass through. Almost all kidnappings at sea happen
in the Gulf of Guinea. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral in that Member States should collaborate
urgently to address that issue.
Especially as we approach the 10-year anniversary
of the Yaoundé Declaration of the Heads of State
and Government of Central and West African States
on Maritime Safety and Security in their Common
Maritime Domain, it is appropriate to assess what is
working and what can be improved. Therefore, and as
our three African Security Council colleagues have
already mentioned, we ask for members’ cooperation
towards the first Security Council resolution on the
topic in 10 years.
Thirdly, as civil society so often does,
Ms. Thiombiano Yougbaré and the People’s Coalition
for the Sahel have reminded us why we should think
holistically. It is also clear that the protection of
22-22630

10/01/2022

Peace consolidation in West Africa

civilians should be at the heart of all our efforts. What
the People’s Coalition for the Sahel appropriately call
the four people’s pillars, are fundamental to ensuring
sustainable development and peace in people’s lives.
In conclusion, 2022 should be a year for action.
Stopping the disastrous spiral of the closures of schools
would be a good place to start. Through resolution
2601 (2021), the Security Council has sent a clear

S/PV. 8944

message that safe access to education provides a vital
contribution to the achievement of international peace
and security.
I resume my functions as President of the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at noon.

22-2263021/21
