S/PV.8188

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8188th meeting

Saturday, 24 February 2018, noon
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Hickey
Mrs. Haley

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-05017 (E)
*1805017*

S/PV.8188

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 2.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2018/146, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, France,
Kuwait, the Netherlands, Peru, Poland, Sweden, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.
I now give the floor to members of the Council who
wish to make statements before the voting.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Sweden and Kuwait earlier
this week put forward a draft resolution to respond
to the desperate calls of the United Nations and the
humanitarian community in Syria for a cessation of
hostilities for an initial period of 30 days, in order to
allow for much-needed humanitarian relief. We have
been working intensely with all Council members to
operationalize the concrete requests of the United
Nations, the humanitarian community and, above, all
the civilian population on the ground. We have done our
utmost to accommodate Council members’ concerns. It
is now time for the Council to unanimously shoulder
its responsibility and show that meaningful action
is possible.
The key components in our draft resolution are a
nationwide cessation of hostilities for at least 30 days,
weekly United Nations humanitarian aid convoys to
all areas in need, and immediate emergency medical
evacuations. The United Nations convoys and evacuation
teams are ready to go. The draft resolution also calls
for the immediate lifting of sieges of populated areas,
including eastern Ghouta. It reiterates its demand,
reminding in particular the Syrian authorities that all
parties have an obligation to act in accordance with
international law to protect civilians and hospitals and
other medical facilities.
2/14

24/02/2018

The draft makes an exception for military
operations directed against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Qaida, the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist groups designated by the Security Council.
This in no way relieves the parties to the conflict in Syria
from upholding their obligations under international
law at all times, including the principles of distinction,
proportionality and precaution.
The draft resolution is not a comprehensive peace
deal on Syria; its aim is purely humanitarian. There
are already ceasefire agreements in force for the areas
where fighting has escalated the most. They need to
be complied with. There are existing monitoring
mechanisms that can be utilized. The role of the Council
is to push the parties to the conflict to comply with the
proposed cessation of hostilities in order to urgently
enable needed alleviation of suffering for the people of
Syria. If the draft resolution is adopted today, it can
de-escalate violence, save lives, alleviate suffering and
break the deadlock on humanitarian access and sieges.
Since the first call for a cessation of hostilities, the
situation has gotten dramatically worse, particularly in
eastern Ghouta, as we have heard from the SecretaryGeneral and from Under-Secretary-General Mark
Lowcock. After seven years of war, the situation for
innocent civilians in Syria has never been worse. But
we have an opportunity to turn things around today to
avert the disaster unfolding before our eyes.
The draft resolution before the Council represents
a resolute and very urgent attempt for the Council to
take decisive and meaningful action. Today, we count
on each and every member to do the right thing.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
before it. I shall put the draft resolution to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Côte
d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, France,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
Russian Federation, Sweden, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2401 (2018).
18-05017

24/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Kuwait.
I associate myself with the statement just made by
the Permanent Representative of Sweden on our behalf.
The unanimous adoption today of resolution 2401
(2018), following lengthy and intensive negotiations,
demonstrates that the penholders, Kuwait and Sweden,
are keen to ensure unanimity on this important
humanitarian resolution. The resolution renews hope in
the Security Council’s ability to be unified and speak
in one voice, sending a clear and explicit message
that it rejects any violations of the Charter of the
United Nations.
I wish to thank all Member States that voted
in favour of the resolution, which includes key and
specific demands in response to the appeals of the
international community, the most important of which
are as follows. First, it demands that all parties cease
fire without delay throughout Syria for a minimum of
30 days. Secondly, it allows the United Nations and its
partners to immediately undertake medical evacuations
safely and unconditionally. Thirdly, it requires all
parties to ensure the unimpeded and safe access of all
humanitarian and medical workers. Fourthly, it calls on
all parties to lift the siege of populated areas, including
eastern Ghouta.
We are totally convinced that, while the resolution
may not end the humanitarian suffering in Syria at
once, it is a positive message that the Council today is
solidary and united to end this humanitarian suffering
and hostilities right away. The biggest task now is to
ensure the implementation of the provisions of the
resolution in order to save civilian lives in Syria and
deliver their humanitarian needs immediately.
The Security Council still has a great deal to do
so as to end this tragic crisis in Syria, which is about
to complete its seventh year. The resolution that we
have adopted today is only an interim solution, as a
political solution in Syria is the only way to achieve
a comprehensive settlement of the crisis and meet
the aspirations of the brotherly Syrian people, in
accordance with relevant Security Council resolutions,
especially resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
The State of Kuwait stresses the importance of
reaching an agreement among Council members to
prevent any attempt to obstruct a draft resolution

S/PV. 8188

aimed at stopping flagrant violations of human rights.
Kuwait supports the code of conduct proposed by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, whereby Council members would pledge not to
obstruct draft resolutions that address crimes against
humanity, genocide and war crimes. We also support
the Mexican-French initiative calling on restraint in
the use of the veto in the event of serious violations
of human rights, based on our commitments to abide
by the four Geneva Conventions and their Protocols,
international humanitarian law and the outcomes of the
2016 World Humanitarian Summit.
We call for engagement on general humanitarian
issues, such as the delivery of humanitarian aid, the
evacuation of the sick and injured, and humanitarian
truce, as procedural issues. In order to prevent the
recurrence of such tragedies and the great suffering of
humankind, the veto must not be used in such instances.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the other members of the Council
that wish to make statements.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I want to
thank the penholders, Sweden and Kuwait, for their
work, their sacrifice and their time in the negotiations.
As we look at the negotiations, I think it is also important
that we bring the Council some of the voices of the
Syrian people in eastern Ghouta, who have suffered so
much while waiting for the Security Council to act.
A doctor treating patients in a makeshift hospital
described the conditions she is facing: “We are mental
and emotional wrecks. There is nothing more we can
do. We are bled dry.” In a haunting video, the doctor
walks into a room with a crying mother as she says,
“I am waiting for my son to die. At least he will
be free of pain. I was just making bread for him
when the roof fell in. He is going straight to heaven.
At least in heaven there is food.”
Another message we received yesterday which I
think was relayed to Council members in the closed
consultations, but which I think it is important to repeat
again — was an emergency call from a doctor in eastern
Ghouta, who said:
“We have a horrible situation here. We are
being targeted with all kinds of weapons, non-stop.
We lack everything: water, food, medical supplies,

18-050173/14

S/PV.8188

The situation in the Middle East

24/02/2018

shelter. This is a disaster. Everyone is just waiting
to die.”

but they know us. And we all failed them this week. I
guess there is unity in that.

Today, the Security Council finally took a step
towards addressing these devastating levels of human
suffering in Syria. The United States wants nothing
more than to see the ceasefire in resolution 2401 (2018)
implemented immediately across the country. It is
critical that the Al-Assad regime and its allies comply
with our demand to stop the assault on eastern Ghouta
and immediately allow food and medicine to reach
everyone who needs it. All of us on the Council must
do our part to press the Al-Assad regime as hard as we
can to comply.

Today, Russia has belatedly decided to join the
international consensus and accept the need to call for
a ceasefire, but only after trying every possible way
to avoid it. The resolution marks a moment of Council
unity that we must seize and maintain beyond the
30-day timeframe. We hope that the resolution will be a
turning point, where Russia will join us in pushing for
a political settlement to this conflict and take action to
re-establish real accountability for the use of chemical
weapons in Syria.

But we are late to respond to this crisis — very
late. On Wednesday, the Secretary-General made an
emotional plea for an immediate ceasefire in Syria to
allow the very basic necessities to get to the people.
Kuwait and Sweden had a version of the resolution
ready to go for a vote, but Russia called for a delay. On
Thursday, in an effort to stall, Russia called for an open
meeting on the humanitarian situation in Syria. At that
meeting (S/PV.8186), 14 members of the Council were
ready to impose a ceasefire, but Russia obstructed the
vote again. And then yesterday, the Council sat around
for hours, ready to vote, only to have Russia delay
it again.
Every minute the Council waited on Russia, the
human suffering grew. Getting to a vote became a moral
responsibility for everyone, but not for Russia, not for
Syria, and not for Iran. I have to ask: why? At least
19 health facilities have been bombed since Sunday.
As they dragged out the negotiations, the bombs from
Al-Assad’s fighter jets continued to fall. In the three
days it took us to adopt the resolution, how many
mothers lost their kids to the bombing and the shelling?
How many more images did we need to see of fathers
holding their dead children? All for nothing, because
here we are voting for a ceasefire that could have saved
lives days ago.
And after all of this time, hardly anything has
changed in the resolution except a few words and some
commas. The Syrian people should not have to die
waiting for Russia to organize its instructions from
Moscow or to discuss them with the Syrians. Why did
the Council allow this? There is no good reason we
should not have done this Wednesday, or Thursday, or
Friday. We may not know the faces that we are talking
about. We may not know their names, or these people,
4/14

Progress starts by adhering to the ceasefire
with no excuses. After so many years of defying the
Council’s demands, the Al-Assad regime must change
course. None of us should be so naïve as to accept that
the Al-Assad regime can continue indiscriminately
bombing schools, hospitals and homes under the fake
excuse of “counter-terrorism”. Al-Assad’s bombing
must stop. The ceasefire must be given a chance to work.
We look to the Al-Assad regime’s backers, especially
Russia and Iran, to address what the Secretary-General
rightly called a “hell on Earth”. All eyes will now be on
the Syrian regime, Iran and Russia.
Our goal with this resolution is clear. The Al-Assad
regime needs to stop its military activities around
eastern Ghouta, and for once allow humanitarian access
to all of those who need it. We are deeply skeptical that
the regime will comply, but we supported the resolution
because we must demand nothing less. We owe that to
the innocent people of Syria begging for help.
In the days to come, our resolve to stand by our
demands in the resolution will be tested. All of us must
rise to the challenge of maintaining this ceasefire, just
as we came together today. All of us must do everything
we can to make the demands of the resolution a
reality. That is the only way to restore the credibility
of the Council. The Syrian people have been waiting
long enough.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Following lengthy consultations, during
which the overwhelming majority of delegations
demonstrated a sincere focus on seeking joint
solutions — for which we thank them — the Security
Council has unanimously adopted the humanitarian
resolution 2401 (2018), on Syria. I wish to particularly
thank the penholders, the Permanent Representatives
of Kuwait and Sweden, for their tireless efforts
18-05017

24/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

and resolve to reach a compromise up until the very
last moment. Russia supports the resolution because
it encourages the Syrian parties to work as quickly as
possible to bring a halt to the hostilities, comply with
previous agreed-on decisions in that regard, engage in
negotiations on a general de-escalation and establish
extended humanitarian pauses throughout the country.
The reason it took us so long to reach agreement
on the resolution was because we did not support the
directives it included for an immediate cessation of
hostilities for a relatively long period, and the reason
for that was simply because it was unachievable in that
form. A ceasefire would not have happened if we had
adopted the directives without any concrete agreement
between the warring parties, and any approach so
removed from reality would definitely not help to
address the pressing humanitarian problems in Syria.
It will be crucial to ensure that the Security Council’s
demands are reinforced by concrete agreements on
the ground.
It would be naive to think that any of these
complicated issues can be resolved overnight. We trust
that all the external stakeholders with influence will
work to bring that about. We can see that some foreign
sponsors of the illegal armed groups have either fallen
very short in that regard or have been deliberately
flouting their obligations. Russia is working with
all the parties to the conflict and doing everything
possible to normalize the situation and actively assist
the humanitarian efforts. Iran and Turkey, our partners
in the Astana process, have taken on a major part of the
work, and we are preparing for an important meeting
in the Astana format next month. In the southern
de-escalation zone a fairly decent level of cooperation
has been established with Jordan and the United States,
although we have been seeing tension rising in some
areas owing to activity by armed groups.
The resolution clearly states that it does not apply
to military operations against the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Jabhat Al-Nusra, other Al-Qaidaaffiliated organizations and various groups that the
Security Council has recognized as terrorists. That
struggle that will continue. We call on international
stakeholders to coordinate closely on this issue,
including with the Syrian authorities, and in strict
compliance with international law and with respect
for Syria’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
goal of combating terrorism must not become a pretext
for solving this or that geopolitical issue of dubious

S/PV. 8188

legitimacy, which is exactly what the United States is
doing in Syria.
Instead of being drowned in rhetoric about
Russia — and by the way, next time I am going to count
the number of times Ambassador Haley mentions my
country — what we are insisting on is a prompt end to
the occupation-style efforts of the so-called coalition,
which, among other things, would have a definite
humanitarian impact, enabling the Syrian Government
to address the issue of restoring normal life in all the
areas that have been liberated from terrorists, including
in the north and the east of the country. Closing the
coalition’s Al-Tanf military base would solve the
problem of the internally displaced persons in the
Rukban camp. In that connection, we would also like
to point out that every effort should be made to deliver
aid via the most direct routes, as provided for in the
humanitarian resolutions on Syria.
It is important that today’s resolution calls
for speeding up the immediate deployment of
humanitarian mine-clearing operations throughout
Syria. It also reiterates the demand that all parties
demilitarize medical facilities, schools and other
civilian infrastructure and refrain from establishing
military positions in residential areas, something that
the illegal armed groups have frequently been guilty of.
The conflict’s flashpoints are more clearly identified,
and are not limited to eastern Ghouta and Idlib, and
that includes Raqqa, which the coalition has laid waste.
It also expresses indignation at the militias’ shelling of
Damascus, in which our Embassy has been hit several
times. We know that the humanitarian situation in
Syria is dire and in urgent need of effective measures,
but we can see perfectly well that the propagandistic
picture being painted of eastern Ghouta is identical
to the loud campaign in late 2016 during the counterterrorist operation to liberate eastern Aleppo. We must
engage not just with eastern Ghouta, but with Raqqa,
Rukban, Foah, Kefraya and Yarmouk. Every area of
Syria should get help.
The resolution emphasizes the importance of
supporting the restoration of stability in the areas
that civilians are returning to, which in our view
sends an unambiguous message to those capitals that
continue to make restoration assistance conditional on
a specific transitional direction in the political process.
It stipulates that the humanitarian priorities for Syria
in 2018 are not limited to Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock’s five requests. The agenda is far broader. We

18-050175/14

S/PV.8188

The situation in the Middle East

hope in particular that the specialized United Nations
agencies and their partners will be sensitive to requests
from the Syrian authorities.
In conclusion, I would like to express my deep
concern about the public statements by certain United
States officials threatening aggression against Syria,
a sovereign country. This is a warning that we will
not countenance any arbitrary interpretation of the
resolution that has just been adopted. We demand an
end to this irresponsible and hateful rhetoric. Rather,
there should be joint efforts to settle the conflict in
Syria on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015).
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), which demands that a cessation of hostilities be
established without delay throughout Syria, in order to
enable humanitarian personnel to evacuate the wounded
and to gain access to the population. The negotiations
were arduous. However, despite their differences
in approach, the members of the Security Council
managed to prevail in the name of the humanitarian
imperative. The resolution is vital in the true meaning
of that word, since halting the shelling and evacuating
the wounded are matters of life and death for thousands
of Syrian people, especially in eastern Ghouta, which
has been under siege by the Damascus regime for
days. I would like to thank the delegations of Kuwait
and Sweden — which introduced the resolution, with
our support — for their efforts, perseverance and
outstanding work in arriving at a robust text.
As by President Macron and the Secretary-General
forcefully recalled last Wednesday, it is imperative and
urgent to end the shelling of eastern Ghouta, Idlib and
the whole of Syrian territory immediately. That was the
thrust of yesterday’s joint call by President Macron and
Chancellor Angela Merkel to President Putin during
their demanding and close conversation on the issue.
It is also the reason for our vote today. The resolution
is the outcome of our concerted efforts, as well as a
belated response to the violence unleashed against
civilians in eastern Ghouta and elsewhere.
Let us make no mistake: a cessation of hostilities
for an initial 30 days to enable humanitarian access to
meet vital urgent needs is only the very first step. It is
the minimal response to the repeated demands of both
the United Nations and humanitarian actors, which
have been conveyed for months by Council members,
in particular by France.
6/14

24/02/2018

It is now up to the regime’s supporters to ensure
full compliance with the cessation of hostilities
without delay and to respond to all requests for access
to humanitarian assistance and medical evacuations
in accordance with the text we have just adopted. We
specifically call on the guarantors of the Astana process
to assume their responsibilities and effectively ensure
that the Syrian regime immediately cease its hostilities
and ensure respect for the basic principles and rules of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
It is urgent that humanitarian assistance reach without
delay the people who need it. Every minute counts
because every minute can lead to the loss of lives.
Nothing would be worse than to see this resolution
remain a dead letter. That is why France will be
extremely vigilant on all those points over the coming
hours and days.
We all know that a return to stability in Syria is the
only way to put a definitive end to the humanitarian
crisis, for which a political solution is required. More
than ever, therefore, we must redouble our efforts to
establish a neutral environment that will enable a
credible political process and elections to be held in
Syria, as part of the Geneva process and resolution 2254
(2015). France is ready to continue working tirelessly
with its partners to that end.
As we said yesterday in this forum, the elements
for a regional and potentially major international
confrontation have coalesced today. That is a risk that
must be taken very seriously. We must therefore come
together, as we have done today, to put an end to the
humanitarian catastrophe under way, prevent a spillover
of the conflict and seek an inclusive political solution in
Syria. These are three indissociable priorities, and our
generation will be judged on whether or not we are able
to put an end to the Syrian tragedy.
This text is a potentially important step, but it is
obviously not the end of the road. Let us be frank: the
hardest part has yet to be done. Therefore, on behalf of
France, I would like to launch a two-pronged appeal.
The first is a call for the resolution to be fully
and immediately implemented. We are all aware that
pitfalls and obstacles abound. This is a reflection of the
extent to which resolute and coordinated engagement
by all members of the Security Council is crucial to
ensuring that the provisions we have just adopted are
implemented on the ground without delay. To put it
even more clearly: if we do not put all our resources
18-05017

24/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

and energy behind the full implementation of this
resolution, we know that it will not work. Above all,
that applies to Russia and the Astana guarantors.
The second call is to use this truce as leverage to
put an end to the spiral of violence in the Syrian tragedy
and create positive momentum towards an inclusive
political settlement in Syria. That must be our common
ambition. There is a glimmer of hope today in that
regard. Let us seize this fragile moment to begin to
reverse the course of events, despite the magnitude of
the difficulties ahead. As the Council knows, France is
fully committed to that goal.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018).
In particular, we applaud your work, Mr. President,
together with Sweden, as co-penholders.
But this is not a moment for self-congratulation. It
has taken us far too long to agree this resolution. While
we have been arguing over commas, Al-Assad’s planes
have been killing more civilians in their homes and in
their hospitals, imposing unbearable suffering. Despite
the amount of time we have spent in this Chamber over
many years discussing the devastating humanitarian
crisis, we have still not been able to achieve the peace
and security that the Syrian people so desperately need.
As the conflict enters its eighth year, the situation
in eastern Ghouta and elsewhere in the country is far
worse than we ever thought imaginable. The barbarity
and depravity of the Al-Assad regime shows no limits.
We must never lose sight of the fact that the pictures
we see and the stories we hear from this comfortable
Chamber are the agonizing reality for hundreds
of thousands of civilians — for men, women and
children who are being forced to eke out an existence
underground to avoid being killed by a regime that
commits daily atrocities against its own people.
I have heard some say that the information about
the situation in eastern Ghouta is propaganda. A doctor
in eastern Ghouta, having heard such comments, said
this morning:
“Amid the chaos and the bombs, it is the not being
believed that almost hurts the most. We are dying
here every day. And when people say that they do
not believe us, that is pain upon pain.”
This is not propaganda. It is a living hell for hundreds
of thousands of residents of eastern Ghouta. As we have
repeated many times, the intentional and systematic

S/PV. 8188

targeting of civilians and civilian objects not only
violates international humanitarian law, it is a war
crime. The United Kingdom will be unrelenting in our
campaign to ensure accountability.
By having voted in favour of the resolution today,
we are standing up and saying that we will not stand by
and let this happen. In the face of escalating violence,
devastation and suffering, we must all now take
practical steps to improve the situation for those living
and dying in a hell of one man’s making. The resolution
demonstrates our resolve to put a stop to the brutal
violence. It demands that all parties cease hostilities
without delay. That means right now, immediately.
The role and responsibility of the Council does
not end with the adoption of this resolution, quite the
opposite. All States Members of the United Nations,
but particularly Council members, must now take
responsibility for ensuring that the resolution is
implemented in full, without delay.
The resolution calls for the Council to review its
implementation within 15 days, but we must all be
active in supporting and monitoring implementation
from the moment we step out of the Chamber. If we see
any of the parties violating the terms of the resolution,
we must bring it back to the Council immediately.
Those with any influence over the Syrian
regime — Russia, Iran — have a particular
responsibility to ensure that the ceasefire is respected
in full and without delay, that all sieges are ended and
that humanitarian aid is delivered. This is the absolute
minimum that the people of Syria deserve.
As much as we welcome the adoption of this
resolution today, it is only a small step. Just as one aid
convoy in three months to a besieged area cannot even
begin to address the humanitarian crisis, one resolution
alone cannot solve the situation in Syria. We must do
everything in our collective power to ensure that this
resolution is effective in delivering for those whom we
have failed to date. We must all send a clear message to
the Al-Assad regime: abandon your attempt to pursue a
military strategy, stop fighting and engage seriously in
United Nations-led political talks in Geneva.
In conclusion, let me reiterate the words of my
Foreign Secretary. The entire world is looking at the
Al-Assad regime, Russia and Iran. They hold the keys
not only to the end of this obscene conflict, but to the
safety, humanitarian aid and basic medical treatment

18-050177/14

S/PV.8188

The situation in the Middle East

that is being denied to millions of people right now
in Syria. For the mother giving birth underground in
eastern Ghouta, for the child unable to learn as schools
are closed for yet another day, for the doctor battling air
strikes to treat patients in Idlib — all of us sitting here
today owe it to the people of Syria to work together with
renewed and unyielding energy to achieve a political
solution that will bring peace to the Syrian people.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
recent escalation of conflict in the affected areas of Syria
has caught the attention of the international community.
We acutely feel the suffering of the Syrian people as if
it were inflicted upon us. China condemns all acts of
violence that target civilians and civilian property and
destroy innocent lives. China welcomes the Security
Council’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2401
(2018), which is the result of Council members’ patient
consultation and hard work to find consensus. The
resolution includes positive elements such as calling
for respect for Syria’s sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity; demanding a cessation
of hostilities by all parties; easing the humanitarian
situation in Syria; supporting mine action throughout
Syria; and continuing to combat terrorism.
As an active party to the consultation process, China
made unflagging efforts and played a constructive role
in facilitating consensus-building in the Council. China
appreciates that, thanks to the concerted efforts of all
parties concerned, the Council arrived at a solution that
reflects the broadest possible consensus among Council
members. I would like in particular to thank Kuwait
and Sweden, as co-penholders of the resolution, for
their tireless efforts.
By speaking with one voice on the humanitarian
situation in Syria, the Security Council is helping to
alleviate the situation as a whole, helping to consolidate
the momentum towards a ceasefire, contributing to
counter-terrorism efforts in the country and serving the
overarching objective of arriving at a political settlement
of the Syrian issue. Going forward, the international
community should work together to ensure the full
implementation of resolution 2401 (2018), so that it
can play a positive role in improving the humanitarian
situation in Syria.
The only way to fundamentally improve the
humanitarian situation in Syria and to lift the people
of Syria out of their suffering is to find a political
settlement. The international community should
8/14

24/02/2018

support the Syrian parties in seeking a swift solution
that is acceptable to all parties in the context of a
United Nations mediation through a Syrian-owned and
-led political process in order to end the suffering of the
Syrian people as soon as possible. China is keen for the
Council to remain united and forge consensus on the
Syrian issue. The Council must push the Syrian parties
to consolidate the momentum towards a ceasefire,
strengthen cooperation on combating terrorist groups,
advance the process towards a political settlement
and play a constructive role in maintaining peace and
security in Syria and across the region.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): The delegation of
Kazakhstan voted in favour of resolution 2401 (2018),
on the cessation of hostilities in Syria. I express
my gratitude to the co-penholders — Sweden and
Kuwait — for their determined efforts to find common
ground among the Security Council members. I also
thank the members of the Council for their constructive
approach towards the resolution, which has many
significant provisions.
The position of Kazakhstan is very consistent — that
stability in the Middle East can be achieved by reducing
violence for peaceful means and avoiding the emergence
of new tensions. In the past few days, Heads of State
and Government from around the world have called on
the Syrian Government to observe human rights and on
both sides to exercise restraint. Simultaneously, external
incitement that fuels tension should stop immediately
so that it does not endanger regional security.
We see a Security Council united today in
demanding that all parties cease hostilities without
delay. We now expect all countries that exercise
influence on the ground and conduct military campaigns
against international terrorist groups in Syria to
interact and find common ground for fighting terrorism
jointly, while taking practical steps to implement the
resolution. Kazakhstan calls on all forces that support
an early settlement of the Syrian conflict, including the
Government of Syria and the armed opposition, to fully
comply with the ceasefire regime and the resolution.
All the parties must ensure safe and unhindered
access for humanitarian assistance to reach the affected
areas, as well as the evacuation of people in need of
medical assistance. The Foreign Minister of Kazakhstan
hopes that his colleagues — the Foreign Ministers of
the guarantor States of the Astana process — will take
additional constructive steps to strictly implement the
18-05017

24/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

ceasefire agreements and support the de-escalation
zones in Syria, at the meeting scheduled to take place
in the capital of Kazakhstan in mid-March or earlier, if
need be.
These were difficult, but successful, deliberations.
We should all work collectively to find a peaceful
solution. The unity shown today in the Security Council
should continue, since we have yet a lot to accomplish
in Syria and elsewhere.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): On Wednesday,
during the high-level debate on the Charter of the
United Nations, I quoted one of the founding fathers
of the United Nations, Ambassador Stettinius (see
S/PV.8185). He said that the members of the Security
Council had the obligation to agree so that the Council
may be able to act and act effectively. Today we finally
managed to agree to end the atrocious violence in
eastern Ghouta; to end attacks against hospitals; and to
end the killing of innocent civilians, including women
and children.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes the
unanimous adoption of this crucial resolution — resolution
2401 (2018). Let me thank the co-penholders in
particular — Kuwait and Sweden — for their tireless
efforts and skilled diplomatic work. We pay tribute
to them.
Today we have a resolution, now we need to see
action on the ground. All United Nations States Members
have an obligation to make sure that the words of the
resolution are implemented without delay. The Syrian
authorities in particular have a specific responsibility
towards their own people. The resolution means that
all parties must cease hostilities without delay. All
parties must engage immediately for a sustainable and
durable humanitarian pause of at least 30 consecutive
days throughout Syria to enable the safe, unimpeded
and sustained delivery of humanitarian aid and services
and to enable medical evacuations of the critically
sick and wounded, in accordance with applicable
international law.
The implementation of the resolution means the
cessation of hostilities, the delivery of humanitarian aid
and urgent medical evacuations. It is a first step in the
right direction, but much more is needed — a political
solution, accountability and the return of refugees. The
Council should remain seized of the matter and closely
monitor the implementation of the resolution, starting

S/PV. 8188

today. The Council should reconvene without delay if
the situation demands it.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): We highly commend
the work of Sweden and Kuwait as co-penholders on
the humanitarian resolution for Syria — resolution
2401 (2018) — who did their best to accommodate the
concerns of all Security Council members.
On Wednesday I stressed that it is the Council’s
responsibility to not fail in stopping the ongoing human
tragedy in Syria, and in eastern Ghouta in particular
(see S/PV.8185). Today we have managed to reach
compromise and adopt the resolution by consensus.
I would like to thank all my colleagues for their very
constructive attitude.
However, the innocent people of Syria have waited
far too long for that. Now, all of the parties, especially
those with influence on the ground, must make every
effort to implement it. In that context, we reiterate
our call on all sides to comply with international
humanitarian law, cease all hostilities against civilians
and allow for free humanitarian access. In conclusion,
it is not only our legal obligation to act now, but also
our moral duty.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): Following the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2401 (2018), I take the floor on behalf of the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea, whose Government
closely followed the whole process leading up to its
successful conclusion with the unanimous adoption of
this humanitarian resolution.
At the outset, I pay a well-deserved tribute to the
penholders, Kuwait and Sweden, for all their efforts,
patience and dedication to the goal of drafting a
resolution that was ultimately deserving of a favourable
vote. We commend the unanimous support of the elected
members for the penholders throughout the duration of
that process.
In Spanish, it is often said that “it is never too
late if the outcome is good”. This positive outcome
is the result of the contributions of all members of
the Council, to which we extend our gratitude and
commend for the fruitful end. What lies ahead now
is the effective implementation of the provisions of
the resolution with a view to achieving the objective
the Security Council has set out to achieve, namely,
an immediate ceasefire throughout Syria in order to
facilitate the safe, unhindered and sustainable delivery

18-050179/14

S/PV.8188

The situation in the Middle East

of humanitarian aid, services and medical evacuations
of all severely injured and ill persons. The Republic of
Equatorial Guinea energetically calls on all parties, the
United Nations and those involved in the devastating
conflict to do everything possible towards the noble
end of saving human lives and alleviating the suffering
that has been endured far too long by the people.
The adoption of the resolution partially spares all
members of the Security Council from embarrassment.
We will save ourselves completely from that shame if
the ceasefire takes effect in the next few hours and if
humanitarian aid and medical care begin to reach the
affected persons over the upcoming days.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Seven years have elapsed
since the beginning of this war, and the suffering of
the Syrian people continues to worsen. The numerous
human lives lost in recent weeks add to the more
than 500,000 lost since the beginning of the conflict.
We believe that while military tactics prevail over a
political solution, there can be no lasting peace, and
consequently it will be civilians, especially women
and children, who will continue to be subjected to
unnecessary suffering. For that reason, we commend
the adoption of resolution 2401 (2018), and hope that
its timely and effective implementation will help to
alleviate the suffering of the Syrian people.
My delegation underscores and commends the
arduous work undertaken by the penholders. The
delegations of Sweden and Kuwait have demonstrated
strong leadership and resolve up to the very last
moment to reach an agreement. Similarly, we wish to
acknowledge the effort and commitment shown by the
Russian Federation and the parties involved, as well
as all members of the Security Council during the
negotiation process.
In recent days, my delegation has expressed its
position on the matter at hand, and today we do so once
again. Consensus and unity within the Security Council
are pivotal if we are to improve the humanitarian
situation in Syria, which is why we commend the
consensus reached today. We reiterate that there can be
no military solution to the situation and that the only
way forward is through inclusive political dialogue. We
thefaffirm our support for the Geneva process and the
achievements made in Astana, of which the agreements
must be upheld by all parties. Moreover, we have high
expectations that the various forums of dialogue, such
10/14

24/02/2018

as the Sochi dialogue, can contribute to the achievement
of a final and lasting peace.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2401 (2018) on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. We voted in favour because we believe
that the resolution can make a positive difference on the
ground in the alleviation of the continued tragedy of
the Syrians. Having discussed the severe humanitarian
crisis in Syria almost weekly, it was clear that what
was required from the Council was concrete and
collective action that would contribute to alleviating
the intolerable suffering of Syrians in all areas of the
country. We are pleased that the Council has acted
and sent the right message to bring about a cessation
of hostilities that will allow the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners to have safe, sustained and
unimpeded humanitarian access to deliver the muchneeded humanitarian assistance to all Syrians in need.
I wish to express our sincere appreciation to the
delegations of Kuwait and Sweden, which effectively
and efficiently led the process of negotiations. We all
know that it was not an easy task, but they did excellent
work in accommodating the concerns of all delegations
with a high sense of responsibility and patience. We
also thank all delegations for their flexibility during the
negotiation process. We hope that the positive spirit that
led the Council to adopt the resolution will prevail, not
only in ensuring its effective implementation, but also
in laying the bases for greater mutual understanding
among all those with enormous influence over
developments in Syria, whether in the humanitarian
or political and security domains. We know, given the
realities, that this is a tall order.
One matter needs to be stressed on this occasion.
The security situation in Syria is perhaps more
complicated today than it has ever been over the past
few years. We should not overlook the fact that the
source of the humanitarian tragedy that we see today is
the result of the difficult political and security situation
in the country. We trust that all those, including those
whom Ambassador Delattre referred to, will continue
to play a role in contributing to the creation of the basis
for progress in the peace process. That is extremely
critical for ensuring that the humanitarian tragedy is
Syria is brought to an end.
We can only hope that what the Council has
achieved today will lay the basis for averting an even
greater humanitarian tragedy in Syria.
18-05017

24/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
wish to thank you, Mr. President, and your team, as
well as the Permanent Representative of Sweden and
his team, for the tireless efforts made to achieve this
important consensus, and we also thank the members
of the Council for their flexibility. This commitment
will allow for an immediate cessation of hostilities
in Syria and the urgent and necessary provision of
humanitarian assistance.
We underscore the need to maintain unity within
the Council in terms of its responsibilities to protect the
civilian population, in accordance with international
law and international humanitarian law.
Peru, a sponsor of resolution 2401 (2017), which
we have just adopted, will closely monitor its urgent
implementation and compliance therewith by all parties
involved. We wish to express our sorrow concerning
and solidarity with the victims of the conflict in Syria,
and our support and admiration for the United Nations
humanitarian workers and those of other agencies
deployed on the ground. We hope that the important
step that we have taken today will help to achieve a
lasting solution to the Syrian conflict in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke
in French): Côte d’Ivoire, as a sponsor of resolution
2401 (2017), which we have just adopted and which is
purely humanitarian in nature, commends its initiators,
namely, your country, Mr. President, and Sweden.
It welcomes the adoption of the resolution, which
demands the cessation without delay of hostilities. This
demand on the part of the Council must be upheld by all
actors on every battlefield in Syria.
Côte d’Ivoire also welcomes the efforts undertaken
by all parties to arrive at a consensus within the
Council. It thanks in particular the Russian Federation
for its spirit of compromise. The contribution made by
all parties to the adoption of the resolution is aimed at
saving the Syrian people from the horrific war plaguing
that country, which is imperilling the lives of thousands
of human beings, specifically civilians, including
women and children.
Côte d’Ivoire remains convinced that only a
definitive end to the Syrian conflict through negotiations
can enable all Syrians to restore peace, achieve
reconciliation and rebuild their country, with a view to
relaunching its economic and social development. We

S/PV. 8188

hope that the 30-day truce demanded by the Council
will be the beginning of a process that will bring peace
to Syria on the basis of the relevant conclusions and
recommendations of all negotiations held in Astana,
Sochi and Geneva concerning the country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Over the past two days, 10 of the thousands of
missiles that have fallen on the Syrian capital landed
on the headquarters of the Red Crescent in Damascus,
the main headquarters of the Syrian Red Crescent, in
the Abu Ramani neighbourhood of Damascus. Those
missiles were launched by the moderate armed groups
in Al-Ghouta. Thousands of people died, including
Dr. Hassan, a professor at the Technological Health
Institute in Damascus. A French colleague and friend,
Thierry Mariani, said:
(spoke in French)
“Like hundreds of others over the past five years,
Dr. Hassan Haj Hassan was killed by shells fired
from Ghouta on Damascus by these moderate
rebels. Those dead and are not entitled to media
compassion; they are on the wrong side of history.
When will there be balanced coverage?”
(spoke in Arabic)
This French citizen accurately described the
suffering of the Syrian people as a result of the launching
by terrorists of missiles against Damascus. He had
visited Aleppo in 2017, and as he was leaving Free
Syrian Army gangs fired rockets at the airport. Luckily
he was not hurt, but since then the Aleppo airport has
been closed because it is unsafe. Also. the head of the
Syrian Red Crescent in Idlib, Dr. Muhammad Al-Waty,
was kidnapped by moderate armed groups.
My colleague the Permanent Representative of
France said that we must observe a truce, and I agree with
him. However, I think that we also need to implement
the 29 other Security Council resolutions on the
situation in Syria, of which 13 relate to the fight against
terrorism. We need not only a month-long cessation of
hostilities; we also need to see the implementation of
the 29 other resolutions that the Council has adopted.
My colleague the British Ambassador told us
horrific stories that he heard from other people. Perhaps

18-0501711/14

S/PV.8188

The situation in the Middle East

he has not heard about what the British forces have done
in Iraq, Palestine and Libya.
The British Government went to the Malvinas and
fought Argentina for an island that it does not own and
that is situated tens of thousands of kilometres away
from the United Kingdom. However, I say to my British
colleague that his Government — and I am not using
the term “regime”, because I respect international
law — is preventing us from countering terrorism in
our own territories. We are not going thousands of
kilometres away, we have not been fighting in other
countries. It is in our own territories that we are
combating terrorism — terrorism that is supported by
the Government of the United Kingdom.
During the meeting on Thursday (see S/PV.8186), I
explained the reality of what is happening in Syria — the
suffering of civilians as a result of the actions of armed
terrorist groups. I assure members once again that the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic has taken all
the de-escalation initiatives seriously and has observed
them so as to protect the lives of its citizens and to stop
those who have been trading in their pain and blood.
In that regard, I note that the Syrian Government has
complied with the Astana agreement on establishing
de-escalation zones and stipulated a number of
commitments, including compelling the signatory
armed groups to sever any ties they have with terrorist
organizations, especially the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and the Al-Nusra Front and all
other affiliated groups. At the same time, the Astana
agreement gave the Syrian Government the right to
respond in case of any violations by those armed groups.
It was not at all surprising to us that those terrorist
armed groups would not comply with any of those
initiatives, but would use them as an opportunity to
reorganize their forces and their terrorist fighters,
acquire more arms, military equipment, human and
logistical support and perpetuate their crimes against
the Syrian people. They are receiving instructions
from certain States members of the Council, as well
as regional actors that are practicing State terrorism to
ensure the obstruction and failure of those initiatives
and agreements.
Since the signing of the agreement on the
establishment of de-escalation zones, these armed
groups have systematically violated it. In responding
to the violations, the Syrian Government has exercised
extreme self-restraint to protect the lives of civilians
12/14

24/02/2018

and salvage the agreement that terrorist armed groups
and the countries that sponsor them have been trying to
obstruct since the moment of signing it. However, these
violations have become repeated and serious and have
affected the lives of 8 million civilians living in the
capital, Damascus, and its suburbs. Attacks have been
waged by launching rockets and missiles and using car
bombs, with Syrian military sites being targeted. All
this has led to an unbearable situation that we cannot
condone. As a State, we bear a responsibility towards
our citizens and we have a sovereign right to counter
terrorism. We are also receiving repeated appeals
from Syrian citizens for protection — their families,
their children, their schools — from the acts of these
terrorist armed groups
In the light of these violations and terrorist acts,
the Syrian Government has had to take the necessary
steps to protect its citizens. We exercised our legitimate
right to defend them. At the same time, we have taken
all the steps necessary to ensure the safety of the
civilians who have been taken hostage by these groups
and used as human shields inside eastern Ghouta. In
cooperation with our Russian friends, we also ensured
the safe passage of civilians out of danger from 4 to
14 February. We have provided shelter and food and
necessary medical care. The Government has paid for
all that assistance. We have called upon armed groups
to lay down their weapons and stop their terrorism from
residential places and neighbourhoods, and instead
engage in national reconciliation initiatives.
Of course, the appeals of 8 million Syrians do not
reach the Secretariat or the representatives of the United
States, the United Kingdom and France, although they
receive appeals from their proxies — terrorist armed
groups and White Helmet terrorists, the new legitimate
representative of the Al-Nusra Front. It seems that these
countries decided today to replace the black flags of
ISIL and Al-Qaida with white flags in Iraq and the
White Helmets in Syria. We are therefore done with
using the black colour; we are using the white colour
now, white flags in Iraq and White Helmets in Syria.
According to General Assembly resolution 46/182,
which we all negotiated and reached consensus
on, the basic principle that governs the delivery of
humanitarian aid is respect for the sovereignty of the
country concerned as well as coordinating with it
fully in any activity in which the United Nations is
engaged on the territory of the country in question.
However, such principles lose all value when they are
18-05017

24/02/2018

The situation in the Middle East

subject to the political whims and double standards of
the Secretariat and some more influential countries,
particularly when it comes to implementing them in
Syria. How else can we explain that some countries
submit draft resolutions on the situation in Syria and
negotiate them for many weeks with all actors, but
excluding the country concerned? This is what I asked
the day before yesterday. How do we explain that the
Resident Coordinator in Damascus sends a note to
the Syrian Foreign Ministry on 14 February stressing
that the aid convoys reached 2.3 million Syrians in the
so-called besieged and hard-to-reach areas in 2017,
while the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs presented completely false figures yesterday to
tarnish the image of the Syrian Government and to give
Western countries in the Security Council justification
for targeting the Syrian Government and its partners?
The Resident Coordinator said that aid had reached
2.3 million Syrians. But just two days ago, Mr. Lowcock
said that aid had reached only 20,000 people.
Along with some members of the Council, we
have said repeatedly over the past seven years that to
end the suffering of civilians in Syria we do not need
non-consensual draft resolutions, nor do we need to
adopt new resolutions or hold regular or emergency
meetings. We do not need to deplete United Nations
resources to prepare periodic reports that rely on
unreliable sources. We do not need to establish a
committee here and a body there. We need to implement
the 29 — now 30 — Security Council resolutions
that have been adopted; it is quite a coincidence that
by adopting resolution 2401 (2018) today we have
reached 30 resolutions. These resolutions should
be implemented.
The Governments of some countries should stop
spending billions of dollars to support and finance
armed terrorist groups and provide them with arms.
The latest we have heard is that the United States of
America has allocated $4 billion to ublically fund the
terrorists in Syria. Those countries must stop opening
their borders and airports to facilitate the flow of
terrorist fighters to Syria. They must allow the Syrian
people to shape its future and restore its security and
stability without any foreign interference.
You said, Mr. President, that the Council rejects
anything that violates the purposes and principles
of the Charter. Yes, this is very precise. You called
also for the implementation of today’s resolution
in all parts of Syria, which is how we interpret this

S/PV. 8188

resolution in Damascus. Resolution 2401 (2018) must
be implemented in all parts of Syria, including Afrin,
United States-occupied areas and the Golan.
In addition, let me make it clear that the
Governments of the United States of America, the
United Kingdom and France and their enablers in the
region should stop holding meetings in Washington,
D.C., Paris and London, establishing groups, bodies
or forums and devising what they refer to as strategic
plans reminiscent of colonial times. Following a
meeting in Washington, D.C., they announced that they
had drafted a plan to divide Syria within a year — I
am just recounting what they said. The strategic plans
contained in the document adopted in Washington,
D.C., are aimed at dividing Syria, changing its political
system by force, spreading terrorism and maintaining
an illegitimate military presence in our territories. I say
to my colleague the Permanent Representative of the
United States, who threatened us here at the Council a
while ago and no one has responded to her, that none
of the plans will succeed; they will backfire sooner
or later.
According to Article 51 of the Charter of the United
Nations, my country has the right to defend itself with all
of the legal tools available. A United States occupying
military presence exists in our territories, and we have
the right to resist it. The representative of the United
States has threatened us. We, in turn, give her a warning
from this Chamber because, according to Article 51 of
the Charter, we have the right to defend ourselves.
We again stress that double standards will continue
to mar international efforts to counter terrorism as
long as there is a partial approach to addressing the
threat of armed groups in Syria. Some members of
the Council claim that they are concerned about an
area controlled by terrorist armed groups in eastern
Ghouta. The size of that area is 50 square kilometres.
They continue to ignore three illegally occupied Syrian
territories covering 50,000 square kilometres. They
focus on 50 square kilometres and ignore an area of
50,000 square kilometres, of American, Turkish and
Israeli occupation. That simple comparison reflects
the political hypocrisy of some Member States, and the
inaction of the Security Council and of other bodies of
the United Nations, as the Organization succumbs to
the political and financial polarization that has become
the main feature of its working methods.

18-0501713/14

S/PV.8188

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, we will continue, with the support
our allies, to counter terrorism regardless of where it
exists in Syria — I repeat, regardless of where it exists
in Syria. We are exercising our sovereign right of selfdefence and a constitutional right in our territory and
within our national borders. We do not send forces to
conquer areas thousands of kilometres away, as the socalled illegitimate international coalition does in my
country, Syria, today. We do not follow the example
of French forces in Mali, the Niger and other African
countries, or of the United States and United Kingdom
in Afghanistan, Libya today and Iraq previously. We
defend ourselves and counter terrorism within our
borders. We did not go to Mali, the Niger or the Malvinas.
We need serious commitment from Governments
that issue instructions to armed terrorist groups. The
groups should be given orders to immediately stop

14/14

24/02/2018

targeting civilians and perpetrating terrorist acts — I
repeat immediately and without delay, as the resolution
stipulates. I stress that the Syrian Government will
reserve the right to respond as it deems appropriate if
such groups target civilians in any part of Syria with
even a single missile.
I take it that we all understand that paragraph 1 of
resolution 2401 (2018) also applies to the aggression
of Turkish forces in Afrin and the repeated acts of
aggression by the international coalition against my
country’s sovereignty and territories. Of course,
resolution 2401 (2018) applies also to the continuous
violations by Israeli occupation forces against Syria’s
sovereignty, by supporting terrorist factions in the
occupied Syrian Golan. That is how we interpret the
resolution just adopted by the Council.
The meeting rose at 3.35 p.m.

18-05017
