United Nations

S/PV.6723

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6723rd meeting
Monday, 27 February 2012, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ohin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Togo)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mehdiyev
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Osorio
Mr. Araud
Mr. Wittig
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Karev
Mr. Sangqu
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
Letter dated 18 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/45)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-24250 (E)

*1224250*

S/PV.6723

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.

assess the threat of piracy in Benin and throughout the
Gulf of Guinea.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
Letter dated 18 January 2012 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2012/45)
The President (spoke in French): Under rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Benin, the Congo and Nigeria to
participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Issifou Kogui N’Douro, Minister of
State in Charge of National Defence of Benin.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of Procedure, I invite Mr. Lynn Pascoe, UnderSecretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate in
this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah, special
representative of the Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States Commission, to
participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Her Excellency Mrs. Florentina
Adenike Ukonga, Deputy Executive Secretary of the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/45, which contains a letter dated
18 January 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council, transmitting
the report of the United Nations assessment mission on
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
I now give the floor to Mr. Pascoe.
Mr. Pascoe: I appreciate this opportunity to brief
the Security Council on the report of the mission
dispatched by the Secretary-General last November to

2

Members of the Council will recall that, when the
Secretary-General first addressed the issue of piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea in the Council, in October 2011, he
informed the members of his intention to dispatch a
mission to the region following a request from
President Boni Yayi of the Republic of Benin. The
main objective of the mission was to assess the threat
in Benin and in the Gulf of Guinea as a whole, to take
stock of national and regional efforts being made to
address the menace, and to make recommendations on
how to fill the gaps that remain.
As mentioned in its report (see S/2012/45), the
mission visited Benin, Nigeria, Gabon and Angola. In
addition to meetings with Government and other
officials in the four countries visited, the mission also
held discussions with representatives of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), in
Abuja, the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), in Libreville, and with the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, in Luanda.
Allow me to convey our deep appreciation to the
Governments of Angola, Benin, Gabon and Nigeria and
to ECOWAS, ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission for the valuable support and cooperation
extended to the assessment mission, which facilitated
the smooth conduct of its work.
As highlighted by the Secretary-General last
week in his remarks to the Council at the open debate
on transnational organized crime in West Africa and the
Sahel region (see S/PV.6717), piracy and armed
robbery against ships increasingly undermine efforts by
States in the Gulf of Guinea region to maintain peace,
security and stability and to promote socio-economic
development. The threat has become even more
alarming as the pirates have become more violent. The
Secretary-General recalled, in that connection, the
tragic killing of the captain and the engineer of a ship
that was attacked by pirates off the coast of Nigeria
two weeks ago.
While regional States and organizations have
carried out initiatives designed to counter piracy and
armed robbery against ships at the national and
regional levels, the threat not only persists but appears
to be gaining ground in a region where the high-value
assets the pirates target are abundant. The SecretaryGeneral’s mission found that piracy in the Gulf of

12-24250

S/PV.6723

Guinea has become more systematic, with the pirates
resorting to sophisticated modes of operation and
utilizing heavy weapons. So far, the attacks have
primarily targeted the lucrative cargo onboard the ships
rather than taking hostages for ransom, which has been
the practice off Somalia.
Piracy in the Gulf of Guinea hampers efforts by
regional States to engage in peaceful international
commerce and to exploit their vast natural resources
for the socio-economic development of their countries.
Recent reports have suggested, for instance, that
Nigeria is losing an estimated 7 per cent of its oil
resources to criminal activities, including piracy.
While piracy was a largely unknown phenomenon
in the Gulf of Guinea 10 years ago, the number of
attacks and the damage they cause has reached
worrisome proportions. In 2010, 45 incidents in seven
countries were reported to the International Maritime
Organization (IMO). Last year, the numbers rose to 64
in nine countries. In only the first two months of 2012,
the IMO has already recorded 10 incidents off the
coasts of Benin, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and
Nigeria. In addition, we know that not all piracy
incidents are systematically reported.
As highlighted in the report of the assessment
mission, Gulf of Guinea countries need a united front
in order to respond effectively to the growing threat of
piracy along their coasts. Isolated national initiatives
are only temporarily, at best, pushing the pirates to
shift their criminal operations from one country to the
next.
Accordingly, we would like to stress the
importance of a comprehensive regional strategy, as
envisaged in Security Council resolution 2018 (2011),
of 31 October 2011. To that end, and as the SecretaryGeneral reiterated in his remarks to the Council last
week, the assessment mission recommended that Gulf
of Guinea countries should convene a regional summit
as early as possible in 2012 to develop a
comprehensive anti-piracy strategy for the region. We
welcome the commitments expressed recently at the
ECCAS Summit held in N’Djamena in January 2012
and at the ECOWAS Summit held in Abuja two weeks
ago to develop a broad regional maritime strategy.
We also welcome the measures taken collectively
by Central African States, under the auspices of
ECCAS, to set up a Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in Central Africa, based in Pointe-Noire in the

12-24250

Republic of Congo, as well as multinational
coordination centres, which are already operational in
Angola, Cameroon and the Congo. These centres are
designed to monitor maritime activities in the coastal
States of Central Africa. In West Africa, ECOWAS
member States have recently intensified efforts to
establish a joint maritime security plan aimed at
harmonizing West African maritime policies and
operations. For its part, the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, composed of eight members from both
West and Central Africa, sees itself as a bridge to link
ECOWAS and ECCAS initiatives in the field of
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea region.
We see the various efforts already undertaken by
West and Central African States as important building
blocks that lay the foundation for the convening of the
proposed joint regional anti-piracy summit in the Gulf
of Guinea. While all Gulf of Guinea countries, both
coastal and hinterland, are determined to counter the
growing threat of piracy and armed robbery at sea,
limited national and regional capacities undermine
their ability to do so effectively. The resources at hand
are inadequate and the region lacks a harmonized legal
framework in the field of maritime security. This, in
turn, can undermine effective cooperation to initiate
and implement joint and timely anti-piracy activities.
We welcome the support provided by members of
the international community to the Gulf of Guinea
countries to strengthen their maritime security
capacities. However, in the face of the deepening
threat, we strongly believe that much more needs to be
done. Significant logistical support is required, in
particular to bolster national and regional maritime
capacities. National authorities in Benin and Nigeria
highlighted in their discussions with the assessment
mission the need to set up a logistical facility in Benin
to support the operations of the joint Benin-Nigeria
maritime patrol mission. This facility would help, for
example, with the refuelling and repairs of vessels used
by the joint patrols. Indeed, the joint patrol was cited
as a concrete example of the significant results that can
be achieved when countries work together to address
this transnational threat. Consequently, the assessment
mission in its recommendations highlights the need to
support Nigeria and Benin in maintaining the joint
patrols until a more comprehensive and effective
regional strategy is put in place.
The United Nations system has already begun to
provide some support. IMO is assisting the 25 States

3

S/PV.6723

members of the Maritime Organization of West and
Central Africa to implement the memorandum of
understanding adopted in 2008 to enhance maritime
safety, security and law enforcement throughout the
region. The Secretary-General discussed this issue at
some length with IMO Secretary-General Koji
Sekimizu in London last week. The United Nations
Office for West Africa and the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa are working with their
respective West and Central African partners to support
the development of subregional maritime arrangements
in preparation for the proposed joint regional summit.
During its discussions with national and regional
leaders, the assessment mission found strong
appreciation for the role and support of the United
Nations in highlighting the need for concerted
international action to counter the threat of piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea. States and institutions of the region
welcomed the adoption of resolution 2018 (2011),
which they saw as the first major international political
and legal tool in mobilizing global cooperation against
the piracy menace. Building on that resolution, the
assessment mission and the increased efforts of States
of the region, we must take further concrete steps
designed to eradicate piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
which constitutes a clear threat to the security and
economic development of the States of the region.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing.
I now give the floor to I now give the floor to
Mr. Musah.
Mr. Musah: I am honoured to address this body
on behalf of the President of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) Commission, who
is unavoidably absent today, and to be able to present
the point of view of ECOWAS on the disturbing matter
of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. The ECOWAS
Commission thanks the Council for its abiding
preoccupation with the growing threat of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea to the States in the catchment area,
regional security and international maritime activity.
ECOWAS is most pleased with the personal
involvement of the Secretary-General in finding
solutions to the piracy problem, as it will further
strengthen our existing cooperation with United
Nations agencies in the region.
Members may recall that, at the Council’s 6633rd
meeting on 19 October 2011, the ECOWAS

4

Commission was privileged to present its views on this
matter. Soon afterwards, on 31 October 2011, the
Council reiterated its deep concern about the threats
posed by piracy in the Gulf of Guinea by adopting
resolution 2018 (2011).
Since then, unfortunately, the fragile security
situation in the ECOWAS space has taken a turn for the
worse due to two main developments. The first is the
resurgence of rebellion and banditry, as well as
worsening food insecurity, in the Sahel; and the second
is growing piracy and associated illicit activities in the
Gulf of Guinea. Both these developments seriously
undermine the gains made in the past decade to
stabilize the region and to achieve the Millennium
Development Goals by 2015.
Some observers might be tempted to think that
the problem of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has
peaked, wrongly judging by the fact that Benin, the
most affected State in the ECOWAS space, recorded
only 21 piracy incidents in 2011, compared to 45 cases
in 2010. However, the rapid spread of the phenomenon
to other States of the subregion gives reason for
concern. For instance, a total of 18 attacks occurred in
Nigeria, Ghana, Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire last year
alone, while this year one has already occurred off the
coast of Ghana.
Furthermore, piracy is increasingly dovetailing
into other forms of transnational organized crime,
including oil-bunkering, robbery at sea, hostage-taking,
human and drug trafficking, and terrorism. In a region
extremely vulnerable to climate change, these
associated
illegal
activities
are
exacerbating
environmental degradation and injecting an incendiary
element into food insecurity and intercommunal
violence. Piracy is thus also encouraging corruption,
the radicalization of young people and political
instability, as well as maritime border disputes. The
Council cannot also ignore the increasing dependence
of the world economy on Gulf of Guinea oil and the
danger piracy poses to that vital sea lane of commerce.
The Gulf of Guinea, as we know, is a reservoir of
precious hydrocarbons and rich fauna and flora. It is
projected that the region will double the production of
its estimated 14-billion barrel oil reserves from 4 million
barrels per day to 8 million in the next decade. Against
the backdrop of the increasing dependency of littoral
and landlocked States of the region on oil exports, the
consequences of unchecked piracy on both their

12-24250

S/PV.6723

economies and on the world economy as a whole cannot
be underestimated.
To counter the dangers posed by piracy and
associated crimes to maritime security, States and
organizations in the catchment area have, over the past
few years, embarked on national, regional and
international initiatives aimed at preventing and
controlling the illicit activities, while building their
capabilities to strengthen maritime security.
At the national level, the littoral ECOWAS
States — particularly Nigeria, Ghana, Benin and
Senegal — are taking practical steps to police their
waters, including the enhancement of maritime
awareness capabilities, strengthening coastal fleets and
boosting surveillance. In fact, approximately two
weeks ago, Ghana took delivery of four high-speed
boats. The reality, however, is that those efforts remain
but feeble responses to the threat, as hardly any of the
States concerned can boast enough maritime
surveillance and force projection capability beyond
100 nautical miles off the coast.
Consequently, bilateral and multilateral maritime
security cooperation has been sought to complement
national efforts. As the Council is aware, Nigeria and
Benin have been conducting joint patrols in their
common waters under Operation Prosperity, which is
ongoing. Similar operations exist between other States
and international partners, such as France’s roaming
vessel operation off the coast of Benin and the GhanaUnited Kingdom initiative on the national maritime
threat information sharing centre.
At the multilateral level, the United States in
particular — as well as France, the United Kingdom,
Spain and Germany — have been helping to enhance
regional maritime security in the ECOWAS and the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) regions under such initiatives as the United
States Africa Partnership Station, Spain’s operation
under the European Agency for the Management of
Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the
Member States of the European Union, and the priority
solidarity fund of France, Benin, Togo and Ghana.
As a consequence of those disparate initiatives,
the incidence of piracy has diminished somewhat in the
waters of the Gulf of Guinea. But it has by no means
been rooted out. The matter is therefore being given
due attention at the political and strategic levels within
ECOWAS. Recent meetings of ECOWAS heads of

12-24250

State and of Committee of Chiefs of Defence Staff
have devoted much time and effort to piracy and
maritime security.
The extent of concern of ECOWAS heads of State
and Government about maritime security and their
determination to seek a regional solution to it were
reflected in the full consideration they gave to the
matter at their 40th Summit, held in Abuja from 16 to
17 February. In the final communiqué, the Summit
acknowledged the increasing threat posed by piracy
and other forms of organized maritime crime in the
Gulf of Guinea and stressed the importance of the
political leadership and coordinating role of ECOWAS
in combating that scourge. To that end, it tasked the
ECOWAS Commission to urgently develop a holistic,
strategic maritime policy framework to guide future
actions and cooperation, as well as to strengthen
collaboration with ECCAS, the Gulf of Guinea Council
and all other relevant stakeholders, with a view to
confronting the challenges.
Furthermore, the summit instructed the
Commission to convene an urgent meeting of the
Committee of Chiefs of Defence Staff to review all
emerging security threats in the Sahel region and in the
Gulf of Guinea and propose concrete recommendations
to address them.
That level of concern at the highest level has
been matched by the ECOWAS Commission, which
quickly convened a sectional meeting of the Committee
of Chiefs of Defence Staff, held in Abuja on
24 February, to review the region’s evolving strategy
on maritime security. The Committee also decided to
dispatch a mission to the conflict areas in the Sahel and
to the littoral States to gather further inputs to enrich
the regional strategy. A full meeting of the Committee
is scheduled to be convened in Côte d’Ivoire in
mid-March to update the strategy and to make
recommendations on the anticipated broader meeting
with organizations outside the ECOWAS space.
As the Council is aware, for several months now,
ECOWAS, ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea Council
have been exploring modalities for joint action to
combat piracy and shore up the security of
international trade routes in the Gulf of Guinea. To that
end, plans are afoot to convene, as soon as possible, a
wider meeting of regional bodies to harmonize their
various initiatives into a broader and more
comprehensive regional maritime security framework,

5

S/PV.6723

in cooperation with
international partners.

the

United

Nations

and

The need for such a cooperative approach to
security in the Gulf of Guinea reflects the favoured
policy and strategy of ECOWAS on the matter, namely,
that piracy is a regional challenge that requires a
regional maritime security architecture into which
national and bilateral initiatives would dovetail. It is
also dictated by the challenges confronting States and
subregional organizations. Among other things, those
include a lack of financial and technical capacity at the
national and regional levels to effectively monitor and
project force to protect their waters; a paucity of
binding legal frameworks to enforce compliance with
the law of the sea and to prosecute offenders; and the
multiplicity and duplication of efforts due to the
absence of a coordination mechanism.
Going forward, therefore, while encouraging the
continuation of the ongoing limited initiatives,
ECOWAS urges all parties concerned to scale up
efforts, beginning with the proposed multilateral
forum, to develop a more comprehensive framework
that involves all parties so as to ensure a holistic
approach to maritime security, in close cooperation
with the United Nations. To that end, the Commission
exhorts international partners to buy into the long-term
perspective and to scale up their financial, logistical
and technical assistance to the initiative, which aims to
build and strengthen indigenous maritime security
capabilities. The Commission also urges the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the United Nations
Office in Central Africa to facilitate and support the
realization of the broader regional initiative. In such a
cooperative compact lies the sustainability of our
efforts; in it lies the guarantee of security in the Gulf of
Guinea.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Musah for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Ukonga.
Mrs. Ukonga: Let me begin by thanking the
President of the Security Council for inviting the Gulf
of Guinea Commission (GGC) to participate in the
discussion on the report (see S/2012/45) of the United
Nations evaluation mission sent by the SecretaryGeneral to the Gulf of Guinea region and to the
secretariats of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Economic Community
of Central African States and the GGC to ascertain the

6

level of threat posed by piracy and to take stock of
regional and national capacities in ensuring maritime
safety and security in the region.
I would also like to convey the apologies of the
Executive Secretary of the GGC for his inability to be
personally present at this meeting, in spite of the
personal invitation addressed to him by the Togolese
presidency of the Security Council. That was due to
circumstances completely beyond his control.
I would also express our congratulations to the
United Nations assessment team that visited the Gulf
of Guinea region for the painstaking way in which it
carried out their evaluation assignment and for giving
us a detailed report on their findings. The secretariat of
the Gulf of Guinea Commission received the team on
24 November 2011. The report on the GGC contained a
true reflection of our discussions with them. Since their
visit, the Gulf of Guinea Commission has initiated
action towards effecting collaboration between it and
ECOWAS on matters of common interest including.
Among other things, such issues include possible
concerted efforts in the fight against piracy, which is
currently one of the greatest threats to economic
activity within the region; the issue of environmental
pollution and degradation; and illegal, unauthorized
and uncontrolled fishing.
The GGC has also taken steps to draft a strategy
for maritime security in the region that, once it has
been discussed and approved by the relevant higher
authorities, will constitute our basic document for
discussion and collaboration with other subregional
and international organizations.
On the issue of the report that we are considering,
the GGC would like to make some comments on the
observations made in some portions of the report.
On the legal framework, as referred to in
paragraphs 13 and 14, although the report specifically
reports on what obtains in the Republic of Benin, the
situation is more or less the same in many other
countries of the region. The legal framework for
dealing with piracy is insufficient, ineffective and
different from one country to the other, ranging from
the treatment of acts of piracy as minor misdemeanours
in some, to conspiracy to commit theft on the high seas
in others.
There is no standardized, adopted and accepted
definition of pirates in the context of the region with

12-24250

S/PV.6723

the result that when pirates are caught, depending on
where and under what circumstances they are caught,
they can escape with little or no punishment. There is
therefore a need to have an accepted common
definition of acts of piracy, attracting the same type of
punishment in all the countries of the region, and
possibly the establishment of a neutral jurisdiction that
will try those arrested for acts of piracy.
What is true of piracy is also true of the legal
framework for bringing to trial those caught carrying
out illegal activities in other sectors. This means that
there is the need to harmonize the legal texts regulating
activities in these sectors and prescribing punishments
for those who run afoul of the laws.
Our second comment is on the meeting of
ECOWAS, ECCAS and the GGC, as noted in
paragraph 44 of the report. The GGC would like to
propose that the United Nations support the process of
the meeting and give the meeting all the assistance it
will require.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Ukonga for her statement.
I now give the floor to Council members.
Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Togolese presidency for convening this
debate on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. I would also like
to express our gratitude to Mr. Pascoe, Mr. Musah, and
Mrs. Ukonga for their briefings.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General for
dispatching a United Nations assessment mission to the
Gulf of Guinea to assess the scope of the threat of
piracy in the region, as well as for the comprehensive
report (S/2012/45) that the mission has submitted. The
findings and recommendations of the mission require
careful consideration.
Incidents of piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea have risen significantly in recent times,
giving the area the second most acute piracy problem
on the African continent. The increasing number of
piracy attacks, in addition to transnational organized
crime, including illicit weapons and drug trafficking,
constitutes a serious threat to the peace, security and
economic development of coastal and hinterland States
in the region.
We note political will at the highest level in the
individual States of the region and their determination

12-24250

to combat the threat and cooperate to that end.
Measures and initiatives undertaken at the national and
regional levels to mobilize international attention to
this problem and to enhance maritime safety and
security in the Gulf of Guinea should be commended.
However, as the assessment mission concluded,
most countries in the Gulf of Guinea cannot alone
prevent or manage effectively the threat to maritime
security in their coastal waters. Indeed, one of the
characteristics applying to piracy proceeds from a
concept of collective responsibility to fight against this
form of criminality, which affects all States. It is
therefore important that the States and organizations of
the region be provided with substantial assistance from
the international community.
Azerbaijan stresses the importance of affirming
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the States of the Gulf of Guinea and their neighbours.
With reference to the report of the assessment mission,
we note that many States of the region are cautious as
to the possibility of an international naval response in
the Gulf of Guinea to prevent potential pirate attacks.
The United Nations plays an important
coordinating role and should continue and intensify its
engagement and work to help the States and
organizations of the region to act and mobilize
international support, including the convening of the
joint summit of Gulf of Guinea States to develop a
regional anti-piracy strategy. We agree with the
mission’s view that any viable or lasting regional
strategy may need to take into account the root causes
of the problems in the regional countries. In addition, if
any comprehensive strategy is to take effect, it is
essential that the countries of the region further
strengthen
their
interaction,
cooperation
and
coordination, as well as develop a legal framework for
the prevention and repression of piracy and armed
robbery at sea.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, particularly for organizing and sharing
this debate. I also want to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe, Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), and Mrs. Florentina Ukonga of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission (GGC) for their briefings.
The United States believes that piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea requires the strongest possible regional
response with international help. That is why, since

7

S/PV.6723

2007, the United States has provided approximately
$35 million in assistance to regional States to build
maritime security capacity, including coastal radars,
equipment, boats and associated training.
The United States is committed to working with
our African and other international partners through
programmes like the Africa Partnership Station and the
African Maritime Law Enforcement Partnership. It is
worth noting that Obangame Express 2012, a regional
Gulf of Guinea maritime exercise to help local forces
improve their capabilities to counter illicit maritime
activities, will conclude in the coming days. This
exercise includes the participation of Nigeria,
Cameroon, Ghana, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, Sao
Tome and Príncipe, Togo, Benin and the Republic of
Congo, as well as well as non-African partners.
There can go no doubt that the situation has
become more grave. The impact of maritime crime on
local economies is staggering. By one estimate, the
West African subregion loses $2 billion annually to
maritime attacks — a high price for a region with
extensive development needs and already fragile
economies. Benin saw a 70 per cent decrease in the
number of ships entering the Port of Cotonou following
its designation as high-risk by a maritime insurance
company last August. And no price can be placed on
the loss of life as occurred on 13 February, when
gunmen shot and killed the captain and chief engineer
of a cargo ship off the coast of Nigeria.
The primary responsibility for patrolling and
securing offshore areas rests, of course, with the
Governments and countries of the Gulf of Guinea. As
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2012/45) states, there
is an urgent need for these countries to develop a
comprehensive anti-piracy strategy for the entire
region. No country has the capacity on its own to
tackle maritime crime.
Gulf of Guinea countries need to continue
developing regional coordination mechanisms to
address the lack of a collective surveillance system; the
lack of a joint monitoring and patrolling arrangement;
the absence of a sustainable process for equipping,
funding and maintaining maritime infrastructure; the
lack of a formalized information-gathering and
exchange system; and inadequate legal frameworks.
The need to address corruption and to strengthen law
enforcement capabilities also cannot be overstated. The
Secretary-General’s report notes that it is

8

“unlikely that the pilfered fuel, which
subsequently resurfaces on the black market in
the main ports along the Gulf of Guinea, is being
stolen and distributed without the collusion of
officials at the ports” (S/2012/45, para. 9).
Nigeria and Benin have undertaken joint patrols,
as have Cameroon, Gabon, Equatorial Guinea and Sao
Tome and Príncipe. This model should be extended to
other countries of the Gulf of Guinea to ensure that the
problem is fully addressed, rather than simply
relocated.
Cameroon’s experience offers both hope and a
cautionary lesson. Thanks in part to the donation of
equipment, training and materiel by partners, but in
large part through its own efforts, Cameroon reduced
the number of instances of maritime crime in its waters
from 40 in 2009 to eight in the first eight months of
2011. That was done by focusing on the highest risk
areas in its territorial waters. But while mitigating the
risk within Cameroonian waters, that success appears
to have caused much of the illegal activity to shift
farther north and west, underscoring the need for a
regional approach.
As the Council urged in resolution 2018 (2011), a
summit of Gulf of Guinea Heads of State should be
convened to develop a comprehensive response in the
region and to encourage members of ECOWAS, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Gulf of Guinea Commission to devise a united
strategy. The international community has a role to
play in supporting these national and regional efforts.
We welcome the suggestion detailed in the SecretaryGeneral’s report that the United Nations play a
supporting, facilitation and coordination role with
respect to Gulf of Guinea piracy and maritime armed
robbery, supplementing regional organizations’ leading
role.
Piracy and maritime armed robbery in the Gulf of
Guinea have threatened the economies, Governments
and people of the region for far too long. National and
regional political will, with the support of the
international community, will be critical to long-term
success in reversing this threat.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Togo for arranging this thematic debate of the
Council on the question of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. I also thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe;
the Director of Political Affairs of the Economic

12-24250

S/PV.6723

Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Mr. Musah; and the Deputy Executive Secretary of the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, Mrs. Ukonga, for their
briefings.
In recent years, frequent acts of piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea have seriously threatened the normal trade
and navigation security in the Gulf and negatively
affected regional peace and security. They have also
had an impact on the economic activities of coastal
States and the neighbouring hinterland countries. China
expresses its grave concern over this situation. The
countries of the Gulf of Guinea, the relevant regional
organizations and the international community should
fully recognize the serious nature of the problem, take
timely, effective, preventive and comprehensive
actions, and duly solve the problem by strengthening
international cooperation and preparing integrated
strategies.
The Gulf of Guinea countries bear the primary
responsibility for dealing with piracy. China welcomes
the positive initiatives taken by the countries
concerned, including the formulation and enhancement
of national strategies, the strengthening of governance,
naval capacities, judicial systems and law enforcement,
and the deployment of joint maritime patrols. We hope
that the countries concerned will continue to increase
inputs, strengthen coordination and do better in
shouldering the responsibility for maintaining regional
peace and security.
Recently, the relevant regional organizations —
ECOWAS, the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission — actively formulated an integrated
regional anti-piracy strategy and established regional
coordination centres that have already achieved notable
results. China expresses its appreciation for the work
of those organizations. We hope that the relevant
regional organizations will continue to play a
leadership and coordination role, convene a regional
summit on preventing and combating piracy as soon as
possible, and strengthen and improve their
coordination mechanisms so that they can act in
synergy.
The support and assistance of the international
community are indispensable to addressing the
question of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. China
supports the relevant recommendations in the report of
the assessment mission (see S/2012/45). We support

12-24250

the United Nations in playing a coordinating role in
international cooperation to combat piracy and in
providing more financial and technical support to the
relevant countries and regional organizations. We call
on countries with the capacities to do so to effectively
address the question and, on the basis of respect for the
sovereignty of the relevant countries, to provide timely
and necessary assistance. The Chinese Government
will continue to provide assistance within our
capabilities.
The issue of piracy has a profound economic and
social background. Piracy occurs at sea but its root
causes are on land. Poverty and stalled economic and
social development provide fertile ground for piracy. If
the problem of piracy is to be solved, an integrated
strategy to address the symptoms and root causes is
required. We call on the international community to
redouble its efforts and play a more active role in
helping the countries concerned to eradicate poverty
and achieve sustained economic and social
development.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
convene this debate, which allows us to evaluate
maritime insecurity in the Gulf of Guinea, based on the
report of the United Nations assessment mission (see
S/2012/45). I would also naturally like to thank
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing, as well as the
representatives of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission.
Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea
are a recent source of concern for our Council.
However, African States and maritime shippers have
been suffering the consequences of this situation for
several years. As opposed to the situation in Somalia,
acts of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea are usually
conducted in areas near the coast and appear to be
more
opportunistic
than
planned
operations.
Nevertheless, their impact on the coastal States’
economies is substantial, as it increases the costs of
maritime trade and extractive activities. The
assessment mission’s report demonstrates this very
clearly in the case of Benin.
Our political objective must clearly be to
support the Gulf of Guinea States, which bear the
primary responsibility for ensuring the security of the
maritime spaces within their jurisdictions. In this

9

S/PV.6723

context, it is up to those same States, concerned regional
organizations — ECOWAS, the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) and Commission of
the Gulf of Guinea — to identify a regional strategy that
the United Nations can support.
In its resolution 2018 (2011) of 31 October 2011,
the Council welcomed the intention of Gulf of Guinea
States to convene a regional conference. In this regard,
we reiterate our encouragement for that initiative. We
also welcome the measures undertaken by regional
organizations, in particular ECCAS and its maritime
security strategy and its Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in Central Africa in Pointe-Noire, the Congo.
Such good practices deserve to be reviewed at the
ECOWAS level. We also call on the various regional
organizations to better coordinate their action and their
resources so that the maritime zone of the Gulf of
Guinea can be monitored in its entirety and not in a
piecemeal fashion.
France is acting against maritime insecurity in the
Gulf of Guinea. French naval vessels make use of their
stops in the region to conduct educational and training
activities. In October 2011, the authorities of Equatorial
Guinea inaugurated in Bata a new regional naval school
that is supported by French cooperation. France is also
behind several initiatives aimed at strengthening
regional cooperation in the Gulf of Guinea. It organized
a regional seminar last November in Cotonou to take
stock of the needs of States members of ECOWAS and
ECCAS. Its recommendations will be implemented
through a $1.6-million programme to reform the
maritime security sector in Togo, Benin and Ghana. The
first steps have been to underwrite an ECOWAS mission
of maritime experts to Libreville and Douala last week
to give them the benefit of the maritime structures put in
place by ECCAS in recent years, which will facilitate
cooperation between those two organizations in the
future.
In its capacity as chair of the Group of Eight
peacekeeping/peacebuilding experts, in 2011 France
also proposed instituting a coordination mechanism
among its members — including the United Nations
and the European Union — to strengthen maritime
security capacities so as to avoid duplication of efforts
and to address a lack of training in certain areas.
The European Union is currently looking into
financing the establishment of regional mechanisms for
training, information-sharing and strengthening the

10

coastguards of the Gulf of Guinea States. The
European initiative SEACOP also aims to strengthen
the fight against illicit maritime trafficking and to
secure ports. Those efforts, however, will be effective
in the long term only if they are part of a regional
strategy of cooperation among the States of the Gulf of
Guinea and of national policies opposing maritime
crime, including corruption, as the report of the
assessment mission makes clear. The Security Council,
the coastal States and the international donors each
have a role to play.
We hope that the Secretary-General will continue
to keep us informed on the situation in the Gulf of
Guinea. We will read with great attention forthcoming
reports from the United Nations regional offices in
Dakar and Libreville.
We thank Togo for the draft resolution it has
distributed and which is currently under discussion. We
give it our full support and hope for a prompt adoption.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We thank the delegation of
Togo for organizing this meeting on an issue of key
importance to the States of West and Central Africa.
Our thanks also go to Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his briefing
on the situation of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. We are
also grateful to Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah and
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga, representing the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, respectively.
We appreciate the initiative of the SecretaryGeneral in deploying the assessment mission to study
the threat arising from acts of piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea. We have carefully
read its report (see S/2012/45) and believe that it
contains useful recommendations for dealing with that
threat.
Pakistan staunchly supports a comprehensive
approach against maritime piracy. We have been
playing an active role in the fight against piracy by
contributing our warships to anti-piracy patrolling off
the coast of Somalia since 2009. Increasing piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea threatens the economic well-being
of several countries of that region. According to the
International Maritime Organization (IMO), there were
58 attacks in the region during the first 10 months of
2011, of which 21 occurred off the coast of Benin — a
nation whose economy relies overwhelmingly on port
activities. According to the report of the assessment

12-24250

S/PV.6723

mission, piracy is causing an estimated annual loss of
$2 billion to the West African subregion’s economy.
Also worrisome are indications of links between
piracy and other forms of organized crime, such as oil
bunkering and drug trafficking. If left unchecked, such
organized crime can further undermine governance and
economic development in the affected countries. The
climate of insecurity would discourage investments
particularly, in the offshore oil sector. We therefore
fully sympathize with and understand the concern of
the affected countries for taking urgent action to
address the situation.
Acting within their existing resources, the States
of the region have taken several initiatives to counter
piracy, but progress has been hampered by lack of
capacity. For example Operation Prosperity between
Nigeria and Benin is costing Benin $466,000 per
month, which, although it is only 5 per cent of the
entire cost of the operation, is unsustainable. Other
countries of the region simply lack the capacity and the
financial wherewithal to undertake this fight
effectively.
The eradication of piracy in a region the size of
the Gulf of Guinea cannot be accomplished without a
cooperative and collaborative approach involving the
countries of the region and international partners. In
our view, such an approach may consist of the
following elements.
First, there is a need to develop a comprehensive
regional strategy to counter piracy specific to the
circumstances of the Gulf of Guinea. In this regard, the
early convening of the summit of Gulf of Guinea
Heads of State would be critical. The strategy needs to
take into account strengthening the legal framework at
the national and regional levels for criminalizing acts
of piracy and prosecuting and punishing persons
engaged in such acts; developing mechanisms for
cooperation among the respective law enforcement
agencies;
establishing
collective
systems
for
surveillance, information-sharing and joint patrolling
in the Gulf of Guinea; addressing links between piracy
and other forms of organized crime; and addressing the
underlying causes of piracy.
Secondly, pending the formulation of a
comprehensive strategy, States of the region must
consider interim measures to enhance cooperative
action in countering piracy. Thirdly, fighting piracy at
sea is a high-cost proposition for which countries of

12-24250

the region need the capacity-building support of
international partners. Fourthly, the United Nations and
the IMO should assist the countries of the region in
synergizing their efforts through the development of a
comprehensive regional strategy and making it
operational by mobilizing resources and providing
technical assistance. Fifthly, in implementing counterpiracy measures, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the States of the region must be respected.
Finally, in view of the experience of fighting
piracy off the coast of Somalia, we would like to
underline the importance of taking effective measures
urgently to counter piracy in the Gulf of Guinea in
order to prevent the situation from getting out of hand.
We therefore support the draft resolution under
consideration by the Council.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I thank the Togolese
presidency for giving us another opportunity to further
our understanding of the phenomenon of piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, and to discuss what we can
collectively do to deal with that threat to regional
peace and stability. I also thank Under-SecretaryGeneral Pascoe for his presentation and for
highlighting the main findings of the assessment
mission report (see S/2012/45). I also welcome the
representatives of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission and thank them for their statements.
Portugal sees the problem of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea as a ramification of the wider threat of
transnational organized crime in West Africa, which we
had the opportunity to discuss last week (see
S/PV.6717). As we mentioned then, piracy is linked to
other forms of organized crime and benefits from
existing criminal networks and their resources.
As the report highlights, piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea is not a new phenomenon, but has in recent years
become more frequent, more sophisticated in its
techniques and more violent. Its effects are felt much
beyond the purely security realm, as it disrupts trade and
economic activities vital to coastal States. West African
economies have reportedly lost about $2 billion of
annual revenue as a result of piracy. Benin in particular
has seen its shipping activities decline by 70 per cent
as a result of attacks in the past two years. Most
importantly, piracy affects countries with very different
levels of institutional capacity to deal with the
problem, and cannot be solved through isolated

11

S/PV.6723

measures by each individual State. Therefore, we fully
share the central recommendation of the report,
namely, the need for a region-wide strategy to fight
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, based first and foremost
on the efforts of regional bodies. The political will
expressed by the leaders of ECOWAS to work together
with the Gulf of Guinea Commission countries and to
harmonize their anti-piracy policies is a very
encouraging sign. We look forward to the outcome of
the planned summit to bring together all the States of
the Gulf of Guinea.
Let me add a few thoughts on the role of the
international community, and of the United Nations in
particular, in contributing to regional efforts.
It is very positive that a number of regional
organizations, including ECOWAS and the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), as
well as the Gulf of Guinea Commission and the
Maritime Organization for West and Central Africa, are
paying attention to and addressing the problem of
piracy. To be effective, those different efforts must be
coordinated, while fully respecting each organization’s
particular area of competence. The United Nations can
play a central role in ensuring the coherence and
overall coordination of those initiatives, as well as in
mobilizing international assistance to build the
capacity of regional organizations in crucial areas such
as surveillance, patrolling and information sharing.
We should also try to make good use of existing
mechanisms. For example, the ECOWAS Regional
Action Plan on drug trafficking, organized crime and
drug abuse is a reference framework for initiatives in
that area, and it could be enlarged in order to include
the threat of piracy. The West Africa Coast Initiative,
which encourages the pooling of national knowledge
and resources, could also add the issue of piracy to its
areas of activity. The same applies to the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime Regional
Programme for West Africa. Best practices from
individual
countries
and
bilateral
assistance
programmes already in place should be shared with
regional partners.
International assistance can also be instrumental
in helping individual countries and regional
organizations to adapt their legal frameworks to enable
them to deal more effectively with the changing nature
of the threats to security and stability. The creation of
regional judicial institutions to deal with the issue of

12

piracy, as mentioned in the report, is an interesting
recommendation that, in our view, could be explored
by the relevant regional organizations.
As we have learned from the situation in the
Indian Ocean, piracy is a complex phenomenon that
requires our regular and close attention. Encouraging
better capacities, better knowledge and better
coordination among the actors in the fight against
piracy will prove to be a decisive contribution of the
Security Council to regional stability and development.
Mr. Karev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for
presenting the Secretary-General’s report (see
S/2012/45) on the outcome of the United Nations
assessment mission’s visit to the Gulf of Guinea
region. We would also like to thank Mr. Abdel Fatau
Musah and Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga for the
information they provided.
The Secretary-General’s report confirms that the
piracy threat in West Africa is far from being a myth.
There have already been human casualties. We were
shocked by the recent report of the death at the hand of
local pirates of the captain of a vessel who was a
citizen of China. In that regard, there is sufficient cause
for alarm. Of course, the situation has not yet gotten as
far out of hand as it has in the Horn of Africa region.
However, if adequate measures are not taken now to
address the issue, the problem could get out of hand.
We agree with the basic conclusion of the report to
the effect that the region’s States and the major regional
organizations should take the lead in addressing the
problem. In that regard, we welcome the joint efforts of
Benin and Nigeria, along with the initiatives of the
Economic Community of Western African States, the
Economic Community of Central African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission. We support the early
convening of a regional summit on the problem of
piracy in order develop integrated anti-piracy strategies.
The specific character of the pirate attacks in the
Gulf of Guinea demands that instruments be identified
to prevent them. First and foremost, that means
strengthening control over coastlines by national coast
guards of the region, organizing joint patrols,
coordinating activities and exchanging of operational
information. Provided that they are implemented in a
timely and effective way, we believe that such
measures will suffice to adequately resolve the
problem.

12-24250

S/PV.6723

Unlike the situation off the coast of Somalia, it is a
promising sign that those activities will be undertaken
by States with established State mechanisms and with
trained armies and naval forces, as well as with normally
functioning legal and law enforcement bodies that are
capable of independently pursuing and prosecuting
pirates. In that regard, we believe that the role of the
international community is to provide the necessary
material and technical support to the States of the
region, primarily by equipping and training specialists
from their coast-guard services. We agree that the
United Nations can play a decisive coordinating role, in
addition to helping to mobilize international financial
resources to combat the threat of piracy.
Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for arranging and presiding over this
meeting. Many thanks also to Mr. Lynn Pascoe,
Mr. Abdul Fatau Musah of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) and Mrs. Florentina
Adenike Ukonga of the Gulf of Guinea Commission
for their briefings.
As we said in the Chamber during the debate (see
S/PV.6717) on peace and security in West Africa and
the Sahel held on 21 February, the United Kingdom
welcomes the Security Council’s focus on threats to
maritime security in the Gulf of Guinea. Piracy and
armed robbery at sea significantly impact the security
of both coastal and landlocked States in the region.
Such activities, especially when linked to the
trafficking in narcotics, people and weapons, to illegal
fishing, oil bunkering and the prevention of
international trade, pose a threat to regional peace and
security. They also hamper economic development. It
is important that such threats to maritime security be
addressed in order to harness the benefits that can be
delivered by a secure maritime domain. The United
Kingdom welcomes Togo’s leadership on this issue.
The year 2011 saw a significant increase in the
volume and impact of armed robbery and piracy
incidents in the Gulf of Guinea, as we have heard. The
United Kingdom is extremely concerned about that
increase in the number and frequency of attacks, as
well as by their increasingly violent nature. Earlier this
month, three attacks occurred in just four days,
resulting in the deaths of two seafarers. The shipping
industry, too, is rightly troubled by those incidents. It is
unacceptable for innocent seafarers to face the risk of
violent attack and death while transiting that area.

12-24250

In the past year, incidents of piracy and armed
robbery at sea in the Gulf of Guinea have spread along
the coast and further out to sea, including some
evidence of the use of mother ships. That is a regional
problem, not one that is limited to the territorial waters
of Nigeria and Benin. It is in the interest of all States in
the region to work together in the shared goal of
preventing further destabilization.
States of the region could of course harness
considerable benefits by creating a secure maritime
domain. We therefore urge States of the region to
declare their exclusive economic zones. That will
afford States the authority to enforce their national
laws, including those related to fishing, protecting the
environment, including from the dumping of waste,
and armed robbery at sea. It will also enable national
control over all economic resources within the
exclusive economic zones, including with regard to
ocean life, mining and oil exploration.
In that regard, we encourage States to continue to
coordinate on maritime activity, both domestically and
regionally, as well as with the United Nations Office
for West Africa. It is important that action be taken
now to prevent the situation from further deteriorating.
We hope that West African heads of State will be able
to prioritize activities to tackle the range of maritime
security threats facing their countries.
The United Kingdom strongly welcomes the
leadership shown by ECOWAS and the Economic
Community of Central African States to work together
on maritime security off the coast of West Africa. We
also warmly welcome the industry-led initiative to
create a maritime trade information-sharing centre,
following the example of the Maritime Security Centre
(Horn of Africa) website, which has to be proved very
valuable in tackling piracy off the coast of Somalia.
This is a timely and important debate, and I am
grateful for Togo’s leadership on this issue.
Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset,
let me join others in commending you, Sir, and your
delegation for organizing this meeting on an issue that
is becoming a major threat to maritime navigation,
trade and economic activities in the Gulf of Guinea. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his briefing and for introducing the
Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
assessment mission on the subject (see S/2012/45). I
would also like to place on record our appreciation to

13

S/PV.6723

the representatives of the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) for their valuable statements.
The problem of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea was
first discussed by the Security Council during the
Indian presidency of the Council in August last year.
Since then, there have been several new acts of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea and the problem has assumed
more serious proportions. Its impact is felt increasingly
by all littoral States, and its seriousness is
demonstrated by the participation of a number of
delegations in today’s debate. I thank all participants
for sharing their assessments with us.
The piracy off both coasts of Africa illustrates the
degree of instability prevalent in the region and the
reach of organized terrorist and criminal groups. They
are targeting oil and chemical vessels, as well as oil
drilling platforms, in the Gulf of Guinea and
perpetrating severe violence against their captives. The
region produces more than 5 million barrels of oil per
day and three-quarters of the world’s supply of cocoa.
Pirate attacks are thus adversely affecting the emerging
oil industry of the region, as well as commercial
shipping and mariners.
The Secretary-General’s report states that piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea is already causing an annual
economic loss of $2 billion, which is a significant
amount when compared to the annual gross domestic
products of the countries of the region. As regional
stakeholders have said in their statements today, a large
number of unemployed young people are becoming
attracted to the business of piracy and maritime
robbery.
The evolving business model of piracy involves
low cost and risk, but yields high returns. While such
socio-economic issues as poverty and unemployment
may be abetting piracy, the main causes have to do
with the limited institutional capacity of the countries
in the region. Addressing problems such as the
proliferation of weapons, poor naval infrastructure, and
weak law enforcement and prosecution systems must
become an integral part of counter-piracy efforts.
Otherwise, like piracy off the coast of Somalia, piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea can quickly assume the intensity
and proportion of an organized cartel in the countries
of western Africa.
India has been at the forefront of highlighting the
menace of piracy off the coast of Somalia and stressing

14

the urgent need for the international community to
work towards a comprehensive counter-piracy strategy.
India is also concerned about the surge in piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, including its economic and social
costs. While the two situations are quite different in
proportion at this stage, it is quite possible that the
failure of the international community to act decisively
against piracy off the coast of Somalia could have
spawned a new surge in piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
The time has now come for the Council’s
attention to addressing the problem of piracy to be
translated into a concrete plan of action. It being a
regional problem, the action taken to address it must
involve the full cooperation of the international
community, led by the United Nations, with the
countries of West Africa and regional and subregional
organizations. In that connection, we welcome some of
the steps that have been taken, such as the
establishment of a subregional coastguard network in
West and Central Africa, the formulation of the
maritime security strategy of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), the
establishment of the Regional Centre for Maritime
Security in Central Africa, and the creation of the Gulf
of Guinea Commission and the Maritime Organization
of West and Central Africa.
These initiatives have helped create a platform
for Governments to formulate a collective approach to
the problem. Also, the ECCAS maritime security
strategy has yielded positive results in the zone
comprising Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon and
Sao Tome and Principe. These efforts should be
intensified and should include joint counter-piracy
efforts ranging from patrolling and surveilling coastal
waters to sharing information and intelligence and
building the capacities of naval forces. In addition, it is
also critical to strengthen the legal system to ensure
effective and expeditious prosecution.
Greater coherence among the regional States and
organizations will help to support the full and sustained
implementation of these efforts. In that connection, we
welcome the Secretary-General’s proposal to facilitate
a regional summit of Heads of State. The United
Nations should also assist in the mobilization of
resources. United Nations agencies in the region,
particularly the United Nations Office for West Africa,
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the
International Maritime Organization, have an important

12-24250

S/PV.6723

role to play in regional counter-piracy efforts and in
addressing the related problems of terrorism, the illicit
trafficking of drugs and the proliferation of weapons,
which all conspire together to destabilize the region.
In conclusion, India stands ready to contribute to
international efforts aimed at increasing the effective
cooperation among States in the region in tackling the
threat of piracy and armed robbery at sea.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): I would like to take
this opportunity to thank you, Sir, and your delegation
for organizing this important discussion. We thank the
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, for his informative briefing on the report of the
assessment mission on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea (see
S/2012/45). We also thank Mr. Musah and Mrs. Ukonga
for their statements on behalf of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission, respectively.
At a time of global financial and economic
hardship, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has severe
financial and security implications for the States
concerned and diverts important financial resources
from key national development and socio-economic
priorities to maritime security. The economic loss to
the region of West Africa that results from the scourge
of piracy is estimated to be $2 billion per annum.
South Africa welcomes the comprehensive report
of the assessment mission on piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. The report highlights the cost and economic
impact of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, as well as the
numerous strategies implemented at the country,
bilateral and various subregional levels to fight the
scourge. We welcome these concrete actions as a
demonstration of political will by the leaders of the
region to combat piracy.
We share the concern and observation of the
assessment mission that the growing evidence of piracy
in the Gulf of Guinea constitutes yet another major
threat to the peace, security and the economic interests
of the countries of the region. The region has seen an
increase in the number of attacks in recent months, and
the violent nature of these attacks has brought greater
attention to the growing problem of piracy and armed
robbery at sea off the coast of West Africa.
The Secretary-General’s report correctly draws
attention to the fact that no country in the region
appears to have the capacity to tackle maritime

12-24250

insecurity alone. We therefore commend the efforts
already made by the affected countries, including the
joint patrols by Nigeria and Benin in the region.
However, these patrols in themselves are not
sustainable and more needs to be done. The ongoing
efforts of the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), ECOWAS and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission to address the threat of piracy are also
commendable.
It is clear that numerous gaps exist at the national
and regional levels, and we welcome the very practical
and useful recommendations to address the scourge of
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. They include, among
others, the strengthening of national legal frameworks
and of the capacities of States’ criminal justice
systems, integrated and coordinated regional responses
to maritime security challenges, and international
support to the States of the region. South Africa
reiterates its view that piracy cannot be tackled in
isolation and underscores the importance of addressing
the phenomenon of piracy in a comprehensive manner
that includes combating transnational crime and
responding to the root causes of the challenge, such as
youth unemployment.
It is clear from the report that the countries of the
region lack adequate resources and capacity to alone
address the issue of piracy and armed robbery at sea.
We therefore welcome the intention of ECOWAS,
ECCAS and the Gulf of Guinea Commission to
convene a summit of Gulf of Guinea heads of State and
Government in order to develop a comprehensive
anti-piracy strategy that will assist the countries in the
region to develop their capacities to combat piracy and
armed robbery at sea. In that regard, we encourage the
countries in the region to assert their ownership of the
problem and take a leadership role in combating piracy.
We look forward to their recommendations in that
regard.
We call on the international community and the
relevant United Nations agencies to provide the
necessary support for that regional initiative and
related efforts, including through the provision of
financial and technical assistance. For its part, South
Africa stands ready to assist the countries affected by
the scourge of piracy in the West Africa region to the
best of its abilities.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s

15

S/PV.6723

meeting to address the growing problem of piracy and
armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea. I also welcome
the presence of Mr. Lynn Pascoe here today and thank
him for his briefing on the issue. I am also grateful to
the Secretary-General for his report (see S/2012/45),
which both contains the results of the United Nations
assessment mission and forms the basis for today’s
debate. We also express thanks for the briefings that
were made by Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah and
Mrs. Florentina Adenike Ukonga.
The mission to which I have just referred was
needed in order to assess the extent of the threat of
piracy and evaluate the national and regional capacity
to safeguard maritime security in the region. We take
note of the recommendations contained in the report
and believe that efforts at the national, regional and
international levels are necessary in order to address
and fight the phenomenon of piracy.
The Gulf of Guinea is home to countries that
have abundant natural resources and basic goods.
Those resources and their trade represent the
livelihoods and source of employment for millions of
people, and they will not cease to be an attractive
target for criminal acts until a strategy to fight against
them is put in place.
The growing number of recorded cases of armed
robbery in the Gulf of Guinea constitutes unequivocal
evidence that the problem must be addressed with
holistic initiatives and strategies of a regional nature.
Special attention must be given to countries such as
Benin because, due to the intense fight against piracy
initiated by neighbouring countries, the problem has
spread to the most vulnerable countries of the region.
That is why efforts such as the joint maritime patrols
being carried out by Nigeria, Benin, Cameroon and
Chad can potentially serve to share the burden and
fight the scourge effectively.
The fight against the phenomena of transnational
organized crime, armed robbery at sea and piracy
surpasses the national capacity of affected countries to
eradicate them. It is therefore both a threat to the
stability of the entire region as well as a collective
responsibility. The response to those threats
jeopardizes socio-economic development, international
trade and foreign investment in the region.
In addition, we echo what was said by the
representative of the Gulf of Guinea Commission on
the necessity for the Security Council to use more

16

precise terminology, since the Council has sometimes
used the terms “piracy” and “armed robbery at sea” as
if they were interchangeable. When piratical acts are
committed within the territorial waters of a State, they
are not qualified as piracy under United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, but instead as
armed robbery at sea. The report before us suggests
that we are mostly dealing with the latter. We therefore
believe that greater attention should be paid to the
precise context and circumstances of each situation, as
well as to standards shared by all the countries in the
region.
The expected regional summit of the States of the
Gulf of Guinea on piracy should receive all the
necessary support from the international community, as
it has the potential to jumpstart and accelerate the
efforts and different initiatives in order to better
coordinate the procedures that the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) are endeavouring to set up. The goodwill
and readiness of the affected countries to address the
threat is not in question, but the lack of resources for
implementing those various initiatives and the
weakness of institutions are indeed worrying.
The lessons learned and best practices that may
arise from the ECCAS maritime security strategy can
help the initiatives put forward by ECOWAS to be
more on point and more effective in the fight against
piracy and in achieving the needed maritime security,
despite the lack of existing resources.
We believe that the Gulf of Guinea Commission
should be composed of more West African countries in
order to fulfil its goal of serving as a bridge between
both economic communities. We invite ECOWAS and
ECCAS to continue their efforts to work together and
formulate the broad and integrated regional strategy
needed to fight against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, in
close collaboration and coordination with the Gulf of
Guinea Commission and the Maritime Organization of
West and Central Africa.
We believe that all progress must be made on the
basis of the memorandum of understanding on the
establishment of a subregional integrated coast-guard
network in West and Central Africa. That memorandum
serves as the basis for the national and regional action
plans that should be drawn up by the States of the
region in order to expeditiously implement the creation

12-24250

S/PV.6723

of the subregional integrated coast-guard network in
West and Central Africa.

region. We are extremely interested in the follow-up to
the report drawn up by that mission (see S/2012/45).

Finally, the threat that the problem poses to the
stability of the affected countries and to the potential
for trade in those countries to bring about economic
development and the subsequent eradication of poverty
is a cause for concern. We agree with the SecretaryGeneral that the fight against piracy must not be
limited to attacking the problem at sea. Efforts must be
made to address the underlying causes that generally
arise on land. Although we acknowledge that progress
has been made in the ongoing discussions in the region
and we recognize that assistance from the United
Nations and the international community is needed, we
believe that concrete steps must be taken, such as the
holding of the regional summit of States of the Gulf of
Guinea on piracy and the continuation of the joint
maritime patrols.

The impact of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is no
longer just a security matter, but also a trade and
economic issue. International shipping, international
maritime trade and energy security, as well as the
economies of the coastal and landlocked countries of
the region, are significantly and worryingly affected by
that alarming phenomenon. The first observation of the
assessment mission’s report is that many States of the
region have difficulties in terms of their capacities to
effectively combat the phenomenon. The second
observation is that, to date, the various subregional
cooperation mechanisms have been unable to bring
tangible, satisfactory and lasting responses to that
scourge. We therefore support the assessment mission’s
recommendations concerning national and regional
responses to the threat of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.

In conclusion, my delegation is ready to
contribute to international efforts to implement
effective cooperation among States in tackling the
threat of piracy and armed robbery at sea.

In terms of the capacities of States of the region,
we believe that the United Nations system is in a
position to play a key role in helping States, in
particular with the assistance of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, to develop their capacities
and their national strategy to combat piracy and
transnational organized crime, including the drawing
up of a national legal framework that makes it possible
to charge and try alleged perpetrators of acts of piracy
and to promote cross-border judicial and security
cooperation.

Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would like to start by thanking Togo, on Morocco’s
behalf, for having taken the initiative to convene this
debate, thus completing the general overview of the
situation in West Africa with today’s focus on the Gulf
of Guinea. Your presence, Mr. Minister, and that of the
Minister of Defence of Benin clearly demonstrate the
importance that the two brother nations represented
attach to this debate. I also wish to thank Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his clear and concise briefing on the important
assessment work undertaken by the United Nations in
the countries affected by piracy in that maritime
region. The light shed by the representatives of the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Gulf of Guinea Commission is very useful to our
discussions.
In solidarity with the threatened countries, in
recent years my country has continued to alert the
international community to the developments and
threats posed by the phenomenon of piracy in that
region. It is quite logical that Morocco should welcome
with satisfaction the work undertaken by the United
Nations assessment mission that visited Benin, Nigeria,
Gabon and Angola in December 2011 to evaluate the
scope of the challenges posed by that scourge in the

12-24250

The material, technical or financial contribution
of several bilateral partners seeking to support the
countries of the region, from whom we have received
very clear and precise information this morning, must
be commended. We support its continuation and
strengthening, as well as the exchange of good
practices among countries of the region.
With regard to regional cooperation, my country
has invested a great deal in establishing and
strengthening cross-regional cooperation among the
African Atlantic coastal States in order to meet the
challenges posed by that ocean. My country welcomes
the political decision taken by the countries of the
region to convene a regional summit among the
presidencies of the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the Gulf of Guinea Commission.
That meeting will provide the opportunity to develop
an in-depth dialogue and cooperation mechanism at the

17

S/PV.6723

interregional level between the two subregional
organizations and with the Gulf of Guinea Commission
and the Maritime Organization of West and Central
Africa. More precisely, it will enable the countries of
the region to establish a comprehensive cross-regional
cooperation mechanism, facilitating exchanges and the
pooling of efforts to make that region more secure.
We agree with the report’s recommendation on
the need to strengthen the regional security architecture
and to ensure a greater balance between the
mechanisms of Central Africa and West Africa.
Any measure seeking to combat piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea will be sustainable only if the
underlying causes allowing the spread of that scourge
are also addressed. In that regard, it is crucial to
include in any anti-piracy strategy elements linked to
strengthening institutions responsible for implementing
the rule of law and the fight against transnational
organized crime, as well as development issues in
particular.
All challenges posed not only by piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea, but also by transnational organized
crime and terrorism in West and Central Africa, must
also be addressed and considered in the context of a
comprehensive strategy. The international community
must focus on the connection and ties among the
various criminal and terrorist networks that are
increasingly destabilizing the African continent. As
Council members know, the awareness of that
connection has led the ministers responsible for
shipping and port activities of the Ministerial
Conference of Atlantic Coastal States to hold talks in
Libreville since May 2011 on cooperation to secure
their infrastructure and to protect merchant shipping
from such threats.
The adoption of resolution 2018 (2011) is an
important landmark in the debate on piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea. It is essential that the international
community continue to pay particular attention to that
matter and support the States of the region in
combating the scourge. For its part, Morocco will
continue, together with you, Mr. President, and our
friends of South Africa, to keep this challenge at the
heart of the Security Council’s interest. Finally, my
delegation would like to indicate its full support for the
draft resolution on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea,
submitted by your country.

18

Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): In
expressing my appreciation for the convening of this
important discussion, I would also like to thank
Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah and Mrs. Florentina Adenike
Ukonga for their briefings and Under-SecretaryGeneral Lynn Pascoe for his important comments on
the report of the Secretary-General on the assessment
mission on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea (see
S/2012/45).
Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea
region affect the security of international shipping and
threaten the trade and economic development of the
countries of the region. Piracy affects not only coastal
States, but also landlocked countries that depend on
access to the sea for their imports and exports.
According to the report, piracy results in an annual loss
of about $2 billion to the economy of the West African
subregion.
The problem of piracy and armed robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea cannot be tackled in a unilateral or
isolated manner. All affected countries should combine
their efforts to avoid the success of one country
resulting in piracy activities relocating to more
vulnerable countries.
For that reason, any lasting and effective solution
must include genuine, coordinated regional and
international efforts to develop a comprehensive
strategy aimed at strengthening the capacities of the
countries in the region in the fight against that crime.
Piracy attacks in the Gulf of Guinea are neither
opportunistic nor isolated events. Quite the contrary,
there is increasing evidence that piracy activity is
systematic and organized. Therefore, precise, detailed
and verified data on the scope, modalities and specific
zones of the incidents is necessary in order to form a
better idea of the character and nature of the
phenomenon before us and develop initiatives adapted
to the particularities of each case.
The international community should support the
efforts of States of the region in exercising their
sovereign responsibility to fight piracy. In that regard,
it is essential to maintain the leadership role of the
States concerned in applying solutions against that
scourge.
Technical assistance for strengthening legislative
and judiciary systems in fighting this crime is of major
importance. Equally important are the exchange of

12-24250

S/PV.6723

information and the establishment of a framework to
gather, analyse and disseminate information. At the
same time, technical, material and financial support
must be provided towards building capacities in the
maritime security sector of various States of the region.
We believe that any lasting and effective solution
to the problem of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea requires
the implementation of a regional approach to maritime
security that includes the various initiatives developed
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the Economic Community of Central
African States (ECCAS) and the Commission of the
Gulf of Guinea, as well as the participation of the
African Union.
As is the case in other situations considered by
the Council, a viable response to that crime should
include factors identified by the assessment mission,
such as high rates of youth unemployment, wide
income disparity within society, the uncontrolled
circulation of illegal weapons and the prevalence of
corruption.
Colombia supports the early convening of a
regional summit of heads of State of the Gulf of
Guinea, as an appropriate forum to further develop a
broad regional strategy to combat piracy. In that
regard, the United Nations is called upon to provide
assistance to national authorities and regional
organizations in relation to the matter and to coordinate
international assistance in support of regional efforts
aimed at fighting that crime.
Mr. Wittig (Germany): At the outset, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his very
useful briefing, as well as the United Nations assessment
mission on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea for its report
(see S/2012/45). I equally thank Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and Her Excellency Mrs. Florentina
Adenike Ukonga of the Commission of the Gulf of
Guinea (CGG) for their contributions.
In addressing the scope of the threat of piracy in
the region, the report confirms an alarming situation.
Piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea have
risen and pose a growing threat to economic
development and security for the States in the region
and beyond. In that regard, let me focus briefly on two
points, namely, the need for a comprehensive,
integrated approach to maritime security and the

12-24250

importance of enhanced coordination among the
affected States and regional organizations.
First, in order to increase maritime security in the
Gulf of Guinea, an integrated concept is required.
Questions about how to prevent piracy and how to
combat it, as well as the political and legal framework
of dealing with pirates and their supporting networks,
need to be tackled. An effective approach will rely very
much on the affected States’ capacities to deploy welltrained and well-equipped security forces as well as
competent judicial institutions, both acting according
to principles of the rule of law. A comprehensive
approach should adequately address the immediate
threat, while at the same time deal with the root causes
and conditions conducive to the growth in piracy and
armed robbery. Where applicable, lessons learned from
fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia should be taken
into account.
My second point relates to the significance of
regional leadership. In that regard, we welcome the
initiatives taken by States of the region and regional
organizations such as ECOWAS, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and the
Commission of the Gulf of Guinea. Those include
adoption of the ECCAS strategy on maritime security;
the creation of the ECOWAS subcommittee on
maritime security; and the preparatory steps taken by
ECOWAS towards developing an integrated maritime
security strategy, and the increased cooperation
between ECCAS and ECOWAS.
In that regard, we strongly encourage ECOWAS,
ECCAS and the CGG to work on the organization of
the joint summit at which they intend to develop a
coherent regional anti-piracy strategy. Cooperation and
coordination among the affected countries, as well as
with and among the regional organizations, including
the African Union, need to be further enhanced.
The international community, including the
United Nations and its regional offices — the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa and the
United Nations Office for West Africa — should
support those efforts. The European Union started to
focus on the issue in 2010, and is carrying out projects
that aim in particular to support the capacities of
ECOWAS and ECCAS and cooperation with the
International Maritime Organization. Germany will
continue to be engaged in building capacities of the
affected States and regional organizations in order to

19

S/PV.6723

tackle the challenge of piracy, which undermines the
security and economic development of the region.

of piracy on the economies and the strengthening of
economic governance in the region.

My delegation supports the draft resolution that is
currently being negotiated, as well as its swift
adoption.

In order to address that grave situation, the States
of the Gulf of Guinea have taken joint initiatives to
deal with the scourge, including in particular the
programme known as Operation Prosperity, under
which joint patrols are being carried out by the
Nigerian and Beninese security forces off the coast of
Benin.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Togo.
Togo is pleased by the fact that this Security
Council debate on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea is
taking place just a few days after the meeting of the
Council that was devoted to the impact of transnational
organized crime on peace, security and stability in
West Africa and the Sahel region (see S/PV.6717), over
which Togo’s Head of State personally presided.
Today’s debate therefore represents the determination
of the Security Council to provide the necessary
responses to the new threats to peace and security that
the States in the region of the Gulf of Guinea now face.
Before continuing, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his briefing to the
Council on the issue under discussion. I also wish to
again express my country’s gratitude to SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon for his excellent initiative in
deploying, last November, to those countries directly
affected, a United Nations assessment mission on
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
The observations contained in the report of the
assessment mission (see S/2012/45) perfectly illustrate
the gravity of the threat posed by piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. For Togo, those observations inform the
Security Council on the alarming nature of the
situation. At the same time, they justify our serious
concern about the implications of the threat on peace,
security, stability and the economic development of the
region. Those concerns are exacerbated by the everclearer links between piracy and other forms of
organized crime in the region, as was stressed during
the 21 February debate to which I just referred. Indeed,
the statistics contained in the report show that from
2010 to 2011 there was an alarming increase in the
number of attacks in the West African sector of the
Gulf of Guinea. The Republic of Benin, which is
suffering the consequences of that increase, has
witnessed a precipitous drop in activity in the port of
Cotonou. The considerable financial losses suffered by
the country are clear evidence of the disastrous impact

20

Nationally, and in order to strengthening its legal
arsenal in that respect, the National Assembly
authorized the Government of Togo last November to
ratify the international Convention for the Suppression
of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation, of 10 March 1988. Furthermore, the
building of national actors’ capacities to combat piracy
enabled the Togolese navy, on 8 February, to repel a
pirate attack against a Panamanian vessel.
At the regional level, the States members of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) have established a comprehensive maritime
security framework: the West African Regional
Maritime Security Centre. In addition, the States
concerned have adopted a funding mechanism whereby
they pool their maritime taxes into a single community
tax so as to finance maritime security.
We also welcome the determination reiterated by
the heads of State of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), during the summit held on
27 and 28 January last, to enhance cooperation with the
Gulf of Guinea Commission and all stakeholders in
order to combat piracy.
Togo believes that, while we await the holding of
the conference of heads of State and Government of the
States of the Gulf of Guinea, these approaches should
be supported and encouraged in order to promote
exchanges of information and experience. However, as
is made clear in the report of the Secretary-General,
despite the resolve of those States and their efforts to
eradicate piracy, on an individual basis or within the
framework of bilateral cooperation, our countries’
national and regional capacities are insufficient to
allow them to alone effectively put an end to or even
contain that threat.
It is therefore imperative that a collective
approach to the problem be taken in order to prevent
this evil, once addressed at the national or subregional

12-24250

S/PV.6723

level in the Gulf of Guinea area, from spreading
elsewhere. The increase in the number of pirate attacks
off the coast of Benin, even as that number has begun
to diminish off the coast of Nigeria, makes clear the
importance of international support in helping to deal
with this scourge.
It also goes without saying that piracy in the Gulf
of Guinea poses a threat not only to the countries of the
region but also to international trade and seagoing
staff, some of whom are from other regions of the
world. Hence the combat against piracy requires joint
efforts on the part of all regions and cannot be left to
the countries of the Gulf of Guinea to deal with alone.
Togo wishes to commend and encourage the
various forms of support provided to Benin and other
countries of the subregion by various partners,
including France, the United States of America, China,
the European Union and INTERPOL, to enhance their
capacity in the field of maritime security.
My country believes that given what is at stake,
the international community has a very important role
to play. That is why we endorse the proposal that the
United Nations encourage the countries of the region to
take the measures necessary to mobilize international
support for the activities being carried out in the region
and
help
coordinate
international
assistance,
particularly for the implementation of a comprehensive
strategy.
The upcoming adoption by the Security Council
of the second draft resolution on the issue of piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea reflects the commitment of the
United Nations and that of the international community
as a whole to working with resolve to combat maritime
piracy jointly with the States of the Gulf of Guinea.
Togo reiterates its sincere thanks to the members
of the Security Council for their contributions in that
regard and hopes that the implementation of the
aforementioned resolution will help to resolve the
problem.
The President (spoke in French): I now resume
my functions as President of the Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Benin.
Mr. N’Douro (Benin) (spoke in French): I should
like at the outset to warmly congratulate you once
again, Sir, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of

12-24250

February 2012. My country, Benin, welcomes the
particular attention that the Security Council, under the
presidency of Togo, is devoting to security problems in
Africa, as security is an essential precondition for the
sustainable development of our countries.
Mr. President, I should also like to take this
opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor, the
Ambassador of South Africa, for his outstanding
leadership during his term and for the praiseworthy
results achieved for both the international community
in general and for Africa and its strategic partnership
with the United Nations. I also pay tribute to the
contributions made by the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe; the representative
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Mr. Abdel Musah; and Mrs. Florentina
Ukonga, Deputy Executive Secretary of the Gulf of
Guinea Commission.
Last Tuesday, in this very Chamber, the President
of the Republic of Togo, His Excellency Faure
Gnassingbé, personally led a high-level debate on
transnational organized crime in West Africa and the
Sahel region (see S/PV.6717). The objective was to
identify the synergies necessary to wage a
comprehensive war against this faceless enemy, which
is inflicting such suffering on the extremely vulnerable
countries of that region of the African continent.
Today’s debate, during which the Council is
considering the report (see S/2012/45) of the
assessment mission dispatched by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations to the countries of the
Gulf of Guinea, in particular to my country, Benin, is a
logical follow-up to the debate of 21 February 2012 on
transnational organized crime. Indeed, those two
phenomena are closely interrelated, in terms of both
their modus operandi and their very nature. They
represent a real challenge to the Governments of the
region in the exercise of their sovereign functions.
The Government of Benin aligns itself with the
conclusions of the United Nations assessment mission.
We agree with the analysis contained in the report
under consideration, which eloquently sets out the
links among transnational organized crime, piracy and
armed robbery at sea. These phenomena are fuelled by
rock-solid criminal solidarity combining lucrative
fraudulent activities, such as oil bunkering and
trafficking in children, cocaine, counterfeit medicines
and cigarettes.

21

S/PV.6723

In 2011 alone, 21 attacks were reported on
vessels off the coast of Benin. From January to October
of that year, 58 maritime attacks were carried out off
the coast of West Africa, including 18 in Nigeria, seven
in Togo, two in Ghana and one in Côte d’Ivoire. These
attacks have dire political, economic, environmental
and security consequences for our countries. Pirate
attacks are disastrous for the security and economies of
the Gulf of Guinea region in general, and in particular
for the activities of the autonomous Port of Cotonou,
which is the economic lung of Benin. Indeed, the
economy of Benin depends to a large extent on the fees
and transit permits raised from the autonomous Port of
Cotonou. The port’s activities represent 70 per cent of
the country’s gross national product; they generate
80 per cent of the revenue of a national budget that
depends on tax income and represent 90 per cent of
trade with the interior. The autonomous Port of
Cotonou is a natural port for the landlocked countries
of the hinterland — Niger, Burkina Faso, Mali and
Chad — which engage in the export and import of their
products there.
Since the first attacks recorded off the coast of
Benin, the number of vessels entering the Port has
fallen by 70 per cent and insurance premiums have
soared. In the face of the doubling of insurance
premiums, a number of vessels have decided not to use
the Port of Cotonou, whereas the revenue drawn from
the Port is essential to ensuring the functioning of the
State of Benin. The situation has arisen at a time when
we had been hoping to see dividends from the major
investments made to modernize the Port’s
infrastructure, with the assistance of the United States
of America within the framework of the Millennium
Challenge Account.
The President of the Republic of Benin, Mr. Boni
Yayi, therefore acted speedily to alert the international
community and the Security Council to the issue of
piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. I am pleased to report that
Benin’s appeals for assistance received a prompt and
useful response from Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and the Security Council through the adoption of
resolution 2018 (2011). The dispatch of the United
Nations assessment mission to the field has allowed us
to identify the measures necessary to design and
implement a coherent national and regional strategy.
National and bilateral efforts have been stepped
up to address the scourge. I should like to highlight in
particular the positive impact of the joint patrols

22

conducted by the navies of Nigeria and Benin off the
coast of Benin. The joint patrols are a component of
Operation Prosperity, launched on 28 September 2011.
Four hundreds sorties have been carried out, including
316 by the Benin navy. The sorties represent 3,668
hours at sea, of which 1,278 have been conducted by
the Benin navy.
In the context of the Operation, the Chief of Staff
divided part of Benin’s coastline into holding areas for
vessels, which are invited to drop anchor close to the
coast in an area that is accessible to the patrol boats
participating in the Operation. This measure has
allowed them to be grouped together in order to ensure
their greater security. These measures are supported by
enhanced joint patrols conducted 24 hours a day close
to the anchorages. Similarly, a permanent radar and
radio watch has been established, allowing immediate
responses to distress calls. Since the operation was
launched, no further has been reported in the territorial
waters of Benin.
Beyond these very expensive joint patrols, the
Government of Benin has made substantial efforts,
drawing on its own domestic resources, to enhance its
naval capacities, with the support of its partners and in
particular France, the United States of America, the
European Union and China. Other Member States,
including the Netherlands, have indicated their intention
to provide support. Through me, the Government of
Benin expresses its deep gratitude for their active and
spontaneous solidarity.
A second semaphore system has been installed,
complementing the existing semaphore in Cotonou. It
allows us to sweep the entire coast of Benin and a good
part of the Togolese coast. With the deployment in
March 2012 by the Government of Benin of patrol
ships commanded by the Benin naval forces, 10 to
15 people will be able to patrol the high seas 24 hours
a day over a 10-day period to dissuade attacks on
vessels off our coast. Benin is also implementing an
import-control programme aimed at ensuring the
effective control of cargoes by scanning containers,
which will also ensure transparency in the handling of
maritime cargo and limit the opportunities for
malfeasance during customs formalities. Furthermore,
we have established a canine brigade of sniffer dogs to
detect drugs, explosives and all other forms of
contraband subject to piracy and armed robbery at sea.

12-24250

S/PV.6723

With the help of the United States of America, the
Government of Benin has formulated and enacted a
national maritime security and safety strategy, which
will promote the growth and development of the
maritime economy, allow for the free movement of
persons and goods along major strategic maritime
routes off our coasts, enhance security in ports and port
installations, and combat illicit transnational activities
and maritime crime, such as armed robbery in
territorial waters and piracy on the high seas.
The strategy is supported by a participatory
approach involving all stakeholders in its formulation. It
is based on the following measures: the definition of
measures to protect the coasts; the delimitation of
maritime borders and the establishment of partnerships
with neighbouring countries; the involvement of
strategic partners in the training of human resources and
the provision of the logistical support necessary to
strengthen our national capacities; and the enhancement
of our cooperation with the United Nations and bilateral
partners to safeguard the free movement of persons and
goods through that important maritime route.
Efforts are under way at the regional level, as
represented by the meeting of experts from ECOWAS
and the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS), organized in January in Abuja to
consider the draft integrated regional strategy for
maritime security and safety. The meeting set the stage
for the regional economic communities to play a
leading role in coordinating efforts to combat maritime
threats in the Gulf of Guinea, in line with the
integrated maritime strategy adopted by the African
Union. The Abuja meeting took place in the context of
the preparations for the regional summit mentioned in
resolution 2018 (2011). A second meeting of ECOWAS
and ECCAS experts will be held in Cotonou in March.
Benin welcomes France’s decision to support the
efforts to be made by Benin, Togo and Ghana to
preserve maritime security along their coasts through the
maritime security sector reform project in the Gulf of
Guinea. The support will be provided through an initial
€800,000 in funding, which France has put at the
disposal of our three countries in combating maritime
piracy and armed robbery at sea.
Combating maritime piracy and armed robbery in
the Gulf of Guinea entails significant stakes. Maritime
insecurity poses a threat to the exclusive right of
coastal States to comprehensively exercise sovereignty

12-24250

over their territorial waters. That also serves to
underscore the need for clearly delimiting borders. In
addition to those basic political requirements, we must
also not underestimate what is at stake economically.
The Gulf of Guinea is an extremely important
maritime route for international trade. The area is
estimated to contain enormous petroleum resources,
which are now estimated at 14 billion barrels. That,
along with its natural gas deposits and fishing
resources, makes this a first-rate strategic zone for the
global economy.
Fishing resources continue to be subject to
unchecked poaching owing to illegal undeclared
fishing. That represents an annual loss of $20 billion to
the countries of the Gulf of Guinea, according to a
study published in 2007 by the Food and Agriculture
Organization.
We fear that, if the region’s public authorities are
not able to carry out their functions consistently, the
growing number of oil companies, along with their
increasing activities in the region, could lead to a
global environmental catastrophe.
Ensuring security in the Gulf of Guinea is
essential to promoting investment and restarting
development for the countries of the region, making it
a dynamic area for renewal and growth at the global
level.
There is a need for the international community
to respond, while there is still time, to the new threats
affecting the region by piracy and armed robbery at
sea. There is also a need to face the problems posed by
junked ships and decommissioned vessels abandoned
along our coasts, which provide transit points for
criminal groups, pirates and all sorts of traffickers. I
should like to draw the Council’s attention to a threat
report prepared by our navy’s Chief of Staff, which has
been transmitted to the Council.
There are currently a dozen abandoned vessels
along Benin’s coasts. Their existence is a genuine
threat to Benin, which has neither the means nor the
necessary expertise to deal with them. I should like
here to urgently appeal to our partners to help us to get
rid of these ships that, above and beyond threatening
security, pose a major risk of pollution. Several of
those vessels harbour toxic substances, which have
already produced victims among some of the people in
their vicinity.

23

S/PV.6723

The threats to the Gulf of Guinea are enormous
and pose a threat as well to international peace and
security. They should be addressed as such by the
international community, which would benefit from
developing an anticipatory approach to contain the
damage.
The international community should resolutely
support the efforts of the countries of the Gulf of
Guinea to control piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea. Relenting in those efforts will have an
immediate and direct effect on the frequency and
ferocity of such attacks.
Benin believes that combating this scourge call
for resources that are largely beyond our reach. We
therefore hope that the Security Council, which very
early on grasped the real scope of this threat, will adopt
the recommendations contained in the assessment
mission’s report before it, with a view to scrupulously
implementing them at both the national and regional
levels as part of a commitment to synergistic efforts to
combat damaging activities to maritime safety and
security. The stability of our countries is at stake.
The President: I thank Minister of State N’Douro
for his eloquent and instructive statement.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Congo.
Mr. Balé (Congo) (spoke in French): On
21 February, the Security Council held an open debate
(see S/PV.6717) on the impact of transnational
organized crime on peace, security and stability in
West Africa and the Sahel region. Today, the Togolese
presidency has convened another debate on peace and
security in Africa, this time to consider the problem of
maritime piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. We welcome
this timely decision, which places the issue of piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea in the context of the logical
extension of last week’s debate from a perspective that
should lead to a concerted, comprehensive approach to
this threat to peace and security in this part of the
African continent.
While there may not seem to be any links
between the subject of the two debates, last Tuesday’s
debate showed that transnational crime and piracy —
the latter being one manifestation of the former — is
largely fuelled by the illicit circulation of weapons and
narcotics, large-scale armed banditry and illegal
immigration.

24

The report of the Secretary-General (see
S/2012/45) on the assessment mission, whose
relevance I commend, highlights the main
characteristics of maritime piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea. It also helps us to better grapple with this
problem as part of a dynamic approach involving the
other security challenges largely besetting African
countries, in particular those of the Gulf of Guinea.
The report specifically points to the threats to the vital
interests of our countries and to our responses to those
security challenges.
The State of security in the Gulf of Guinea
presents various challenges to peace and stability in the
region. Threats stemming from uncontrolled industrialscale overfishing, the insecurity provoked by pirates
and that surrounding maritime navigation, and
insecurity across borders all entail loss of human life,
the taking of hostages, armed robbery, the destruction
of economic infrastructure, diverting oil shipments,
disturbances to maritime trade and even environmental
hazards at oil installations. While their consequences
are quite clear, they do not provide a full picture of the
effects of such criminal actions, especially on
community policies and on neighbouring countries
lacking a coastline.
A reading of the assessment mission’s report
leaves one with the impression that there is a need for
and effective functional synergy between the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS) aimed at combating maritime piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea. The Gulf of Guinea Commission
should act as the link between the two organizations. In
that regard, we welcome the meeting held in Abuja, as
well as the one scheduled to take place next March. I
would like to limit my statement to ECCAS member
States of the Gulf of Guinea and share with the Council
their response in meeting the host of challenges, which
could in the future give rise to broader efforts to the
entire area of the Gulf of Guinea.
In 2009, ECCAS member States adopted a
maritime security plan (SECMAR) to secure their vital
interests at sea, to be implemented by the Regional
Centre for Maritime Security in Central Africa
(CRESMAC), which is based in the coastal city of
Pointe-Noire in the Congo. CRESMAC, which will
serve as the future nerve centre for the Central African
strategy to fight maritime piracy, has the main mission
of ensuring ECCAS member States’ control over the

12-24250

S/PV.6723

maritime space. The implementation of SECMAR and
CRESMAC’s future operationalization reflect the
undeniable leadership of our States in undertaking
concerted, collective action this scourge.
It has been determined that an exceptional
financial contribution of approximately $1.4 million is
needed to launch CRESMAC and begin work in the
three zones identified by the strategy. An ECCAS
good-offices mission has been established to secure
those funds. However, effectively operationalizing the
Centre is still a challenge owing to the difficulties
associated with its financing and functioning. In the
meantime, the Multinational Coordination Centre of
Douala has been called upon to fill the gaps as much as
possible.
With the initial $600,000 in financing provided
by the Congolese Government, construction is now
under way to build CRESMAC’s facilities on land that
has been provided free of charge. The Republic of the
Congo’s individual involvement also extends to partial
financing of equipment for the centre.
By 1963, when maritime piracy was not as
widespread as it is today, Congolese law already
qualified piracy as a crime under our merchant marine
code. Congo’s commitment to combat this scourge and
all its ramifications has therefore been ongoing, both at
the national and at the regional and international levels.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
my Government’s gratitude to the different bilateral
and multilateral partners in support of our countries’
individual and collective efforts to combat the scourge
of maritime piracy. I call on them to continue their
commitment in this undertaking, specifically by
supporting ECCAS member States in their desire to
effectively and immediately launch the activities of
CRESMAC, which is a key link in the cooperation
chain set up to fight maritime piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea.
Congo’s support for the initiative to organize a
summit on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea, with the goal
of putting in place a collective, comprehensive strategy
to eradicate this scourge, reflects the legitimate and
pressing aspirations for peace, security and stability for
our peoples and States, without which our peoples
could never work towards true and lasting
development.

12-24250

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Nigeria.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): My first words must be to
thank you immensely, Mr. President, for convening this
timely debate on piracy in the Gulf of Guinea. Coming
on the heels of the inaugural debate (see S/PV.6633)
convened by Nigeria in October 2011, I believe that the
holding of this meeting underscores both the enormity
and intensity of the threat. It also reinforces the
message that international attention must stay focused
on this growing menace. I would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his succinct
briefing, as well as Mr. Abdel Fatau Musah and
Ambassador Florentina Adenike Ukonga, for their
insightful remarks.
The incidence of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea has
witnessed an alarming surge. Although underreported,
it has become increasingly violent. Attacks, which
were once almost exclusively confined to the coast,
now range beyond the Gulf of Guinea. The Nigerian
Maritime Security Task Force documented a total of
293 incidents of pirate attacks and robberies at sea
between 2003 and 2008 — on fishing vessels alone.
The cost of piracy to local economies is
staggering. For a region undergoing a post-conflict
transition, the annual loss of $2 billion to the region’s
economy, from offshore oil, fishing and shipping, is
too high a price to pay. Future investments in the West
African oil industry face a clear and present danger.
Indeed, the profitability of any new oil exploration
taking place off the coast of Cameroon, Equatorial
Guinea and the Niger Delta is threatened. In broader
terms, the shipping industry has been rendered
vulnerable.
Let there be no doubt regarding the substantial
political will at the subregional and regional levels in
confronting this growing threat. The countries in the
region are responding to the challenge by strengthening
existing national initiatives. In recent times, mindful of
the importance of joint efforts, they have created
partnerships towards fostering an optimal regional
approach to maritime security.
The Republic of Benin and Nigeria commenced a
six-month pilot joint patrol programme along the coast
of Benin on 28 September 2011. The programme,
which is being conducted under Nigeria’s tactical
command and Benin’s operational command, derives
95 per cent of its logistical support from Nigeria,

25

S/PV.6723

including the deployment of two helicopters, two
maritime vessels and two interceptor boats. That
collaboration has recorded some measure of success,
and includes scope for broader participation. We
believe that such a cooperative arrangement will
benefit enormously from enhanced surveillance
systems, patrol boats, maintenance capabilities,
funding, joint coordination centres and informationsharing, within a legal framework that takes into
account maritime domain awareness.
It is against that backdrop that we warmly
welcome the Secretary-General’s assessment mission
to West Africa. The mission’s report (see S/2012/45)
calls for actions that build on resolution 2018 (2011),
adopted in October 2011, as well as the Council’s
statement to the press of 30 August (see SC/10372).
The findings and recommendations of the mission will
form the bedrock for the development of a holistic
approach in tackling this threat. They provide the
impetus for concerted, bold and swift action, not only
by countries of the region, but also by international
partners.
Nigeria supports the draft resolution submitted by
Togo. The next necessary steps to confront piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea must involve the countries of the region
working more concertedly. It must also involve greater

26

collaboration between the Economic Community of
West African States, the Economic Community of
Central African States and the Gulf of Guinea
Commission, with the support of both the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the United National
Regional Office for Central Africa.
Indeed, a comprehensive regional approach is
now imperative. That is why we are committed to the
convening of a regional summit to address the issue in
a comprehensive manner, and we are glad to note that
the initiative has received wide support. We are
confident that the summit will explore fresh ideas and
provide new directions that will engender further
action by the Council.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. Before adjourning
the meeting, I would like thank everyone for their active
participation. I express those sentiments of gratitude on
behalf of the President of Togo. Peace and security are
the sine qua non conditions for the development of our
respective countries.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
current stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

12-24250
