144

General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

3106 (XXVIII). United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law
The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law~ 1 and the recommendations made to the SecretaryGeneral by the Advisory Committee on the United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are contained in that report,
Considering that international law should occupy an
appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines
at all universities,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States
at the bilateral level to provide assistance in the teaching and study of international law,
Convinced nevcrthele,s that States, international organizations and institutions should be encouraged to
give further support to the Programme and to increase
their activities to promok the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, in
particular those activities which are of special benefit
to persons from developing countries,
Rernlling that, in the conduct of the Programme, it
is desirable tu u,e ::is far as possible the resources and
facilities made av:1ilablc by Member States, intcrnatio,1al organizations am] uthcrs,
1. A uthori7.cs the Secretary-General to carry out
in 1974 amJ l
the activities specified in his report,
incl uJing the j:rnvi~ion of:

ms

(a) A minimum of fifteen fellowships in 1974 and
197 5 at tlL: rcc1uest of G,)vcrnments of developing
countric,:,
( /J) J\s,i,ta1:ee in the form of a travel grant for
one participant frnm ca,:h developing country invited
to the rcg:onal <:ctivities to he organized in 1974 and
1975.
to he lina:1ccJ from bud'.cctziry provisions in the regular
budget plus voluntary fin;:11cial contribution, which
would be ,ec-:ivcd a, a rc~ult c,f the requests set out in
p,;r;1gr<1r,h, t1 ;111J 7 heluw;

') Expresses its op[!reciution to the S,:crctary-Gcner:11 fur his co;:' tructivc dforts to promote training and
as,i<,lancc in ini,.:;n;iti,in:il law within the framework
of the l 111itc:J N:•tions Programme of A,sistancc in the
Tead1i;1:,. Study, Di,,cminati,1n ~llld Wider Appreciation of t 11t•.:rnatiu1d Ltw in 1972 and 19 73;
3, Exrrc.1sc1· i:s· apprccicuiol! to the United Nations
h!u.:.itiu1d, s~:cr;,;lic and Cuitur;il Org;111ization fnr
its particirati,l:, in the i'~,,ur,iillim', in par'ticular for the
effort~ made td support the teaching of international
law:
4. Exr 1rc,·,1cs its upprccicl!ion to the u11;ted Nations
In,tilute for Traiiling anrl Research for its participati, i1, in the Pr,1gr:u,1111c, p:uiic"ul:irly in the urganiz;1tion
of r..:~iorul rnCL'ti11gs and in the conduct of the fcllow,-hip programme in intern:1ti«n;tl law spcimored jointly
hy thL· United °\j;1tions and the Institt1tc:
:r 4 A/9242 and ( \,r r. l.

5. Urges all Governments to encourage the inclusion of courses on international law in the programmes
of legal studies offered at institutions of higher learn-

ing;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
publicize the Programme by periodically inviting Member States, universities, philanthropic foundations and
other interested national and international institutions
and organizations, as well as individuals, to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the Programme or otherwise towards assisting in its implementation and possible expansion;
7. Reiterates its request to Member States and to
interested organizations and individuals to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the Programme and expresses its appreciation to those Member
States which ha,c made voluntary contributions for
this purpose;
8. Reques1s the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation of the Programme during 1974 and 1975
and, following consultations with the Advisory Committee, to submit recommendations regarding the execution of the Programme in subsequent years;
9. Decides to include in the provision:11 agenda of
its thirtieth session the item entitled ''United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination anJ Wider Appreciation of International
Law".
2197th plenary meeting
12 December 1973

~007 (X:\\'gJ). Report of the Committee on
Rcbtions ,1 i!!i the Ho,-t Cmntry

The General Assc111bly,
Having co111idcrcd the report of the Committee on
Relations wi!h the Host Country/''
Drawing a 1 tc11tio11 tu its resolutions 2747 (XXV)
of 17 Dece;n her 1970, 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December
1971 am! 3lJ~3 (XX\'ll) of 18 December 1972 in
which it urged the (,uvcrnment of the host country to
m::kc ecrt:1:n th:1t the rnc:tsurcs takc;i to ensure the
protection ;,;n,I secu1 ity of pcrrna11c:1t mission, to the
United N;itiuns a11d their pcrso;rncl were adequate to
enable tlws,, lllissitin~ to pcrfurm properly the functions
cntrusLt'd t,1 tlic·m by their (iovernments,
lfrrn!li11g lhe rc,ponsibilitics or the Government of
the bust country \Vi,h rc,pcct to the United Naticrns and
the missiuns :1cercditcd tu it, their personnel and their
cnrrcsrundcncc umLr the /\gru:mcnt between the
U11ited i'-'atiuns alld the Cnitcd S!ates of America reg;;rding the I lcadquarters or the United Natious/n the
i. '\ 1 nvcnrion 011 the l'ri\ ilc1.1.cs and Immunities of the
United N:rtiun,~· a•1d gcnc~·a! international law,
Rccal!ing the duty of missio11s accredited to the
Unikd !\ati(•!h and th,..:ir pcrrnnncl to respect the laws
and rc)-!ulati()llS nr the host country,
Con1idcri11g that the 11rohlcms related to the privi-lcLr,cs :i:,d i111111u11·tic,, of the l '.nitcd N:1tions and to the
•.tatu, (,r th,· mi,sions accredited to it arc of mutual
concnn t,i :\kml1n S1.11<:,. 11Kluding the host country,
as well as to the Seucl:iry-Gencral,
2 ~·

O((i,·ial Rfford, of //,p Cie11cral ,ifssemb/_,,, Twc11ty-•ci1:htl,

S,·,·,,. "', Surnl, 111,·nt \'o, .'ti ( A, 90?.li),
~;; Rc,olel ion 1(,<J ( 11 1,
2 7 Rc:,o!ution 72 A I I).

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

Taking note of the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country,
1. States its deep concern at violent attacks against
the premises of missions accredited to the United
Nations as well as the threats, harassment and hostile
actions against personnel of these missions;
2. Strongly condemns all such acts of violence and
other criminal acts against the premises of missions and
their personnel as fundamentally incompatible with the
status of such missions and personnel under international law;
3. Urges the host country to implement effectively
the new federal legislation, including the taking of
effective measures against the organization of demonstrations and picketing where there is reason to believe
that they may be accompanied by violence or may prevent the conduct of the normal business of missions to
the United Nations;
4. Urges the host country to take all necessary
measures to apprehend, prosecute and punish those
guilty of criminal acts against missions and their personnel;
5. Notes the difficulties which the diplomatic p~rsonnel of the permanent missions encounter when parking their automobiles and draws the attention of the
host country, and the diplomatic community, to recommendations 9, 10 and 11 in paragraph 46 of the report
of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country;
6. Appeals to the host country to review the recently
adopted measures with regard to the parking of diplomatic vehicles especially with a view to terminating
without prejudice the practice of serving summonses to
diplomats and towing away their vehicles, in order to
meet more adequately the needs of the diplomatic
community;
7. Welcomes the diplomatic community's readiness
to co-operate fully with the local authorities in solving
traffic problems;
8. Requests all members of the diplomatic community to respect the laws and regulations of the host
country;

9. Believes that the host country, the Secretariat,
the diplomatic community and the organizations concerned should vigorously seek the improvement of relations and the promotion of mutual understanding between the diplomatic community and the local
population in order to ensure conditions conducive to
the effective functioning of the United Nations and the
missions accredited to it;
10. Welcomes with appreciation the efforts of the
host country, the New York City community and the
New York City Commission for the United Nations
and for the Consular Corps to accommodate the needs,
interests and concerns of the diplomatic community
and to provide hospitality;
11. Decides to continue the work of the Committee
on Relations with the Host Country in 1974, in conformity with General Assembly resolution 2819
(XXVI), with the purpose of examining on a more
regular basis all matters falling within its terms of
reference;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide all
appropriate assistance to the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country and to bring to its attention
issues of mutual concern relating to the implementation
of the Agreement between the United Nations and the

145

United States of America regarding the Headquarters
of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations;
13. Requests the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country to submit to the General Assembly, at its
twenty-ninth session, a report on the progress of its
work and to make, if it deems it necessary, appropriate
recommendations;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-ninth session the item entitled "Rcp,)rt of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country".
2197th plenary meeting
12 December 1973
3108 (XXVIII). Report of the l;nitecl Nations
Commission on International Tracie Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its sixth session, 28
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December
1966 by which it established the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law and defined the
object and terms of reference of the Commission,
Further recalling its resolutions 2421 (XXUI) of
18 December 1968, 2502 (XXIV) of 12 November
1969, 2635 (XXV) of 12 November 1970, 2766
(XXVI) of 17 November 1971 and 2928 (XXVII) of
28 November 1972 concerning the reports of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its first, second, third, fourth and
fifth sessions,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the !low of
international trade, especially those affecting the developing countries, would significantly contribute to universal economic co-operation among all States on a
basis of equality and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade and, thereby, to the wellbeing of all peoples,
Convinced that wider participation of States in the
work of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law would further the progress of the
Commission's work,
Bearing in mind that the Trade and Development
Board, at its thirteenth session, took note with appreciation29 of the report of the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law,
l. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its sixth session;
2. Commends the United Nations Commissi,m on
International Trade Law for the progress made in its
work and for its efforts to enhance the efficiency of its
working methods;
·•
3. Requests the United Nations Commission on Jn ..
ternatit,nal Trade Law. whenever the Cornmiss1011 considers it appropriate, to incorporate the reports or
summaries of the reports of it~ Working Ciroups in the
reports on the work of its future sessions;
2 8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Session, Supplement No, 17 (A/9017).
~o Ibid., Supplement No. 15 (A/9015/RevJ), part three,
para, 558.
