TWENTY-NINTH

YEAR

1762””

MEETING: 15FEBRUARY 1974

NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Pay

Provisionalagenda(S/Agenda!1762) ..............................
Statementby the President ....................................

1

Adoption of the agenda ......................................

1

Complaintby Iraq concerningincidentson its frontier with Iran:
Letter dated 12 February 1974from the Deputy PermanentRepresentative
of
Iraq to the United Nationsaddressed
to the Presidentof the Security Council
(S/11216).............................................

S/PV.1762

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
flgurcs. Mention of sucn a symbol indicates a ref. ante to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Socudty Council [symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements
of the Officiul Records of the Se,-urtty Coutrcil. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are pubhshed in yearly volumes of Resolutions
m-l Decisions
of the
Securir) Council. The new system,which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEENHUNDREDANDSIXTY-SECONDMEETING
Held in New Yorkon
Presiden?:

Friday, 19 February P974,at3

Mr. Louis de GUIRINGAUD (France).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, Byclorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, France, Indonesia, Iraq, Kenya, Mauritania, Peru, Unicn of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, UnIted
Republic of Cameroon and United Statesof America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1762)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Iraq concerning incidents on its frontier
with Iran:
Letter dated 12 February 1974 from the Deputy
Permanent Representative of Iraq to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council(S/11216).
TRe meeting was called to order at 30

p.m.

Complaint by Imq concerning incidenrs on
its frontier with Iran
Letter dated 12 Februnvy 1974 frown the Deputy Pennanent Regmsantative of Iraq to the United Nations
addressed to the P&dent of the Security Council
(S/11216)
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from FLench): In a
letter dated 15 February 1974, the representative of Iran,
under rule 37 nf lhe provisional rules of procedure of the
Council, has requested to be allowed to participate, without
the right to vote, in the Council’s debate on the item before
it, In accordance with the pertinent provisions of the
Charter. If I hear no objection, I propose, in accordance
with the Council’s practice and with rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure, to invite the representative
of Iran to participate in the Council’s debare without the
right to vote.
At the invitation of the President,
took a place at tlte Council table.

p.m.

Mr. 8 Hoveyda

(Iran)

4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from ‘l+ench): I have
also received a letter from the representativeof Democratic
Yemen asking to be allowed to participate, without the
right to vote, in the debate, in accordance with Article 31
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure. If I hear no objection, I propose, in
accordance with the Council’s practice and with rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure, to invite the representative of Democratic Yemen to participate, without the
right to vote, in the Council’s debate.

Statement by the President
1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French): Before
we proceed to consider the agenda, I should like to pay a
tribute, as is customary,to the President of the Council for
the month of January, Mr. Conzalo Facie, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica, who did us the honour of
coming to the United Nations on tha : occasion and whose
eminent qualities we were able to appreciate. My tribute
extends also, of course, to our distinguished colleague,
Ambassador Femwdo Salazar, who hhnself engagedably in
consultations on the various matters brought to the
Council’s attention.

It was so decfded.

5. The PRESIDENT (interpretation
from French): This
meeting has been convened in response to the request of
the representative of Iraq contamed in the letter which is
on our agenda. I should like to draw the attention of the
Council to another pertinent document, in addition to that
letter, namely, the letter addressedto me by the representative of Iran on 12 February 1974[S)11218and
Gwr.1).

2. My predecessor has already duly welcomed the four
other new members of the Council, Since I was not in New
York to associate myself with those expressions of welcome, I should like, as the representative of France, to
;rssociatemyselfwith his congratulations in my turn.

6. Mr. ELSHIBIB (Iraq): Mr, President, allow me first LO
extend to you, and to the distinguished members of the
Council, my sitmre thanks for your prompt responseto my
Government’s request to hold an urgent meeting of the
Council. I have been delegated by my Government to
submit to this august body my country’s complaint against
Iran. Before I do that, however, allow me to have the
honour and the pleasure of extending to you, Sir, our

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

1

congratulations
on your assumption of the presi.
dency of this Council and to express our confidence that
the Council’s deliberations wiIl proceed in accordance with
your OWII distinguished
qualities and with France’s high
standards of respect for the rule of law and international
obligations.

13. In the early morning of 10 February
1974 Iranian
armoured units launched a treacherous attack against the
Iraqi border posts at Al-Daraji and Al-Suder. The Iraqi
forces confronted
them in a battle that resulted in the
death of another Iraqi amy officer and the injury of four
others, and a sixth was reported missing. Seventy-seven
Iraqi soldiers were either killed, wounded or reported
missing. The death toll we know of so far amounts to 44. It
is of course not up to me to enumerate Iranian casualties,
There are, as there were, heavy concentrations
of Iranian
troops along the borders and inside Iraqi territory at several
points. Iranian troops are still continuhlg
their military
road-building
activities in the area. Iran rniiitaty aircraft are
consistently violating Iraqi air space in depth. The Mission
of Iraq reported those violations to the United Nations in
document S/l 1216.

Shicere

7. I left Baghdad barely 48 hours ago. I can honestly say
that rarely can one witness such a sudden ar.d passionate
change in the mood of a couutry withhl the span of a few
days as I witnessed in Baghdad recentiy. Only a week ago
my Government
amlounced
sweeping and wide-ranging
fInancia1 and economic measures designed to raise the level
of income of all the people of Iraq, to reduce the burden of
taxation
and to increase the purchasing power of all
citizens. Those progressive measures were proclaimed to use
some of the new revenues to raise the peoples’ standard of
Bving and lead the country further on the road of progress
and development.
The income of all government officers,
employees, workers and pensioners was raised considerably.
The level and percentage of income tax and those of
property, customs and other taxes and duties were reduced.
The charges for services rendered by governmental
agencies,
such as those for electricity
and water supply, were
considerably lowered.

14. I should like to draw the attention of members of rhd
Council to tw6 letters [S/106lS
of 24 April 197.2 and
S/9323 of 11 July 19691 which are directly related to the
item on our agenda. The letter of 24 April 1972, brought to
the attention of members of the Council the details of yet
another Iranian incursion in a long list of several into Iraqi
territory.
The letter dated 11 July 1969, contains a resume
of the history of the Iraqi-Iranian
border disputes.

8. A week ago there was a dominant feeling of joy and
optimism among my countrymen,
a sense of confidence in
the future and in the fact that the country’s wealth was
being use: to ensure the welfare of the people and to raise
their economic and social standards. It took less than three
days and the news of the Iranian aggression to change this
jubilation
into a feeling of anger, total condemnation
and
even surprise. My countrymen
could not help wondering at
and speculating on this sudden and unprovoked
turn of
events. Why is it that whenever a new and constructive step
is taken by Iraq on the road of prosperity
and progress, of
national unity and solidarity, something of the nature of
the Iranian aggression takes place? This wonderment,
however, \ras accompanied by a renewed determination:
never shall we allow others to encroach on our rights or
divert our march towards development and national unity.

15. The problem is neither new nor simple. It goes back in
history to the time when Iraq was part of the Ottoman
Empire, in the sixteenth century, and when modern Iraq
inherited +he old Ottoman boundaries as successor of the
Ottoman Empire.
16. The Treaty of Erzerum of 31 May 1847 [S/9323,
unnex I/ was negotiated as the basis for settlement of the
boundaries between the Ottoman Empire and Persia. Wars
in Europe, however,
delayed the demarcation
of the
boundariesuntil
1911, when, on 11 December, the Protocol
of Teheran was signed by the two parties fmally to settle all
border disputes. It provided infer dia hat in the event a
divergence of views should a:ise on any issue the question
should be suhmitted to the Court of Arbitration
at The
Hague.
17. In 1913 the Ottoman Empire and Persia, together with
Great Britain and Czarist Russia acting as mediators, signed
the Constantinople
Protocol
of 4Novembe.r
/ibid.,
annex IIf/ which established
a boundary
delimitation
commission composed of commissioners
from the four
signatory parties. The Delimitation
Commission concluded
its work in 1914. Its proceedings defined the frontiers in
detail. The border dispute was therefore finally settled, as
article V of the Constantinople
Protocol provided that:

9. NOW I come to the facts of the recent events on my
country’s borders with Iran in the Badra country region.
IO. On 10 December 1973 a group of Iranian technicians
crossed the border into Iraqi territory
to survey and
delineate the area of ALSabal Police Post. They were
accompanied by irregular Iranian troops. They were driven
away, but regular Iranian troops replaced them. They are
still there, 5 kilometres hiside Iraqi territory.

“As soon as part of the frontier has been delimited,
such part shall be regarded as finally fixed and shall not
be liable to subsequent examination or revision.”

Il. On 24 Deccmbcr 1973 Iranian troops again violated
Iraq’s territory
and attempted to build a road in the Badra
county area.

18. After the First World Wa:, however, Iran tried to
repudiate those bounddly treaties, and Iranian violation of
Iraqi frontiers reached a breaking,pohlt
in 1934, when Iraq
was finally forced !o submit a formal complaint to the
League of Nations in a letter dated 29 November 1934
addressed to the Secretary-General
of the League of
Nations /see S/9323, sect. IV/. Iraq’s position then, as

12. On 4 February
1974, one day after Baghdad had
dispatched its ambassador to Teheran as a gesture of
goodwill,
lranian armoured
mbits supported
by heavy
artillery launched a premeditated
attack on Iraqi border
forces, which caused the death of one Iraqi army officer
and two privates, wounding seven others.
2

now, was based on the principles of juridical inheritance,
treaty right and equity. The League’sCouncil was requested
by Iraq to take up the issue of the Iraqi-Iranian frontier in
view of Iran’s persistent boundary violations. The Iraqi
letter to the Secretary-Generalof the League stated that the
Iraqi Government
. . . has left nothing undone in its endeavour to settle
the matters at issue direct with the Imperial Persian
Government. As will be seen from the correspondence,
the numerous conciliatory proposals which it has made,
whether for the investigation by joint commissions of
particular problems affected by the precise alignment of
the boundary, or for the general examination of all
of hiconvenience to either side arising from that align
ment, with a view to eliminating the Inconveniencesby
appropriate administrative arrangements, have been con.
sistentlyrejected or ignored.”
‘I

causes

19. The Iranian position was conveyed to the Iraqi
Government in a note dated 25 March 1934 stating that:
“, . . the Imperial Persian Government does not acknowledge the official nature of the Boundary Limitation
Protocol of 1914, and that it cannot consider the text of
the said Protocol as a basis and authority for the
definition and futing of the alignment of the boundary
between the two Covemments”.l
20. In 1935 direct negotiations between Iraq and Iran
were Initiated upon the recommendation of the League’s
Council and ended in the conclusion of the Boundary
Treaty of 4 July 1937 [S/9323, ennex IV]. Although that
Treaty was not favourable to my country, its acceptance
demonstrated Iraq’s sincere desire to put an end to the
dispute which had dragged on for years.
21. The 1937 Treaty, however, confirmed the validity of
the past agreements which Iran had previously declared
“null and void”. Article 1 of the Boundary Treaty of 1937
specifically states that the boundary between the two
countries is the same as that delimited in 1914 in
accordance with the provisions of the Constantinople
Protocol of 1913, which the Frontier Delimitation Commission applied on the ground In 1914 and which was
described in the proceedings of the Commission.
22. In spite of the Treaty, the Iranian Government
continued its encroachment upon Iraq. In its attempts to
seize as much as it could of Iraqi territory, the Iranian
Government established frontier guardposts with military
strength inside Iraq.
23. Those guardposts were established at the following
points-and they are irldicated on the map which has been
distributed to the membersof the Council:
(a) AI-Behailah, in the Qalat Salih administrative area,
establishedone kilometre within Iraqi territory;
(b) AIJabal, in the Badra county area, established five
kilometres within Iraqi territory. This is the same area
where the recent Iranian attacksoccurred;
1 lmgue ol Naliolrs,Official Jourrral, 16th Year, No. 2,

1935), p. 212.

(vebrum

(c) AlmZiadi, also in Badra, established at five kilometres
within Iraqi territory;
(d) Tek Tek, also In Badra, established sevenkilometres
within Iraqi territory;

(e) Khalat Ian (Kalahan), in the Mandali administrative
area, establishes one kilometre within Iraqi territory; and
(f) Nee Khedher,

territory.

in Ma&Ii,

also established within Iraqi

24. There were 26 other such posts lllegally established
over the yearsin Iraqi territory. Yet my Covermnent chose
to pursue diplomatic means to safeguard its rights, but its
repeated protests and communications were in vain, since
the Iranian Government persisted in its claims, in contra.
vention of the agreements I mentioned earlier. Iran’s
aggressivepolicy towards Iraq was disconthmed for a while
during the Second World War, subsequent to the abdication
of the former Shah; the Iranian forces were withdrawn
from most of the border posts which had been established
inside Iraq. Unfortunately, the Iranian Government reverted to its former policy after the war had ended, and
attempted to reoccupy the former guzrdposts. When the
Iraqi authorities stood fum against those moves,the Iranian
Government did not hesitate to resort to the use of force.
25. Iran’s violations of its treaty obligations culminated in
its declaration, made in April 1969 to the effect that it was
unilaterally abrogating the Iraqi-Iranian Boundary Treaty of
1937. In this connexion, I would again invite the attention
of the members of the Council to document S/9323
wherein the detail8 of the Iranian illegal action and the
historical background of the Shatt Al-Arab dispute were
amply covered.
26. Since then, the situation along our eastern borders has
not been exactly peaceful. My Government drew the
attention of the Secretary-General in 1970 and 1971, in
several official communications, to the seriousnessof the
situation on the Iraqi-Iranian border resulting from the
continued Iranian concentration of troops and massingof
formidable quantities of weapons and war materiel. My
Government expressed its zeadincss to accept a special
mission of the Secretary-Generalto investigatethe situation
along the eastern borders. It had already on several
occasions offered to submit the alleged Iranian compiaints
regarding the implementation of the 1937 Boundary Treaty
to the International Court of Justice. Unfortunately, Iran in
both casesturned down our offer.
27. This aggressioncommitted against Iraq is but another
step taken in pursuit of Iran’s aggressivepolicy of expansionism and the fulfilment of the grandiose dream of
domlnation and empire, of seehlg the Arab Gulf transformed into a Persian lake. And in the pursuit of that
dream, massiveIranian forceslaunched a cowardly attack in
1971 on the three defencelessislands of Abu Musa, the
Greater and the LesserTmibs, belonghig to the United Arab
Emirates. Now we learn, from Le Monde and the Marlcfrester Gmrdh
Weekly of 7 October 1973 that the Shah
“has allowed the United Statesto establish a key electronic
listening post on Abu Muss”. According to other sources,a

now airstrip for the C-130 troop transport planes also ha8
been estnblishedon Abu Muan.

“The now hnrdware will give Iran truly owo~o:no
firepower. Already, the Shah’s Hovercraft floet, led by
the-big BritBh&dc BIT.7 which can carry up to 1Sb
mnrlnes at 70 knots, ha8 the capability to land a battalion
of troops on the other side of the Gulf in only two
hours”.

28. When 1 had the honour to addrossthe Council more
than two vears ago. on 9 Dccombor 1971, regarding the
Iranian &ted occupation of the three Arab i&nds in the
Gulf, I had to refer to Iran’s massivemilitary buildup. I
stated then that:

Mr. do Borchgravogoeson:
“The Iranians do not yet control all the traffic in the
Gulf, but they are certainly moving in that direction.
From their new naval gun ompI~cemontson .2bu Muon
and the Greater Tunb Mlands, which they seized from the
United Arab EmLate seventeenmonths ago, they make
saot radio checks of uassinn vessels.And thov are even
expanding their foothold g the Gulf of Om& and the
Indian Ocean, thus making Iran a potential South-Asian
a8well a8Mid-Eastern power”.

“We have every reason to b&eve that Iran wiZ,uso this
military build.up to threaten the sole commercial and
maht oil artery of Iraq, and to brhtg pressure to bear on
my country, and other countries of the area, in fulilbnent
of Irant~ expansionist policies.” /16IOth
meeting,
para. &I].

29. The Iranian amtament uro~mmmo during the last two
years has received wide news c&eragc. In the31 May 1973
issue of Newsweek, there warsa highly revealing article by
the senior editor of that magazine, Mr. Arnaud de Borchgrave, on Iran’s role in the area, under the title, “Colossus
of the oil lanes”. On Iran’s armament programme he wrote
the followhlg:

Mr. de Borchgrave also quotes the Shah himself on Iran’s
role, 88envisagedby Iran’s ruler:
“Not only do we have national and regional responsibilities but also a world role BEguardian and protector of
60 per cent of the world’s oll reserves.”

“From his command post at Niavaran Palace in the hills
overlookinp. Iran, the Shah has sot out to become the
gutidian of the. world’s oil lifeline-a role he clearly
relishes. In recent months, he hab:hunched the world’s
biggest military build-up sine: the American deployment
in Viet-Nam. Teheran’s brassha8 been buying up milltary
hardware from the United States (and to a lesser extent
from Britain and Frtume) the way‘most people stock up
on a week’s supply of groceries at B supermarket. All told,
Iran has spent roughtly $3 billion of it8 oil revenueson
military equipment this year alone, and in the next two
years Teheran is expected to shell out more for arms than
in the pr& 15 years combined. What’s more, the Shah’s
tastes rtin to the exotic and the very expensive-from
laser-guided bombs and French ground&ground missiles
to KC-135 jet t.snkers to refuel his large Fd Phantom
fighter-bomber fleet in mid-ah (thereby doubling the jet’s
effective range to some 1,400 miles). Among the items on
the Shah’s current shopping list:

I repeat: “guardian and protector”. The Shah goeson:
“Being strong also mean8 we can afford to let people
step on our feet, but they must know there is a point
beyond which they cannot monkey with us. What we’re
buying is a deterrent that will be credible to all our
neighbours.. . . The Nixon doctrine says the United
States wlll help those who help themselves.That’s what
woke doing.”

30. The Iranian Government’s actions in our area would
suggestthat its interpretation of the Nixon doctrine is that
the United States will help those who help themselvesto
the territories of other people. There is no longer any doubt
that the policies implemented by Iran are clearly those of
aggrandizement and territotird expansionism. But the
Iranian vieions of power and domination are not conEmod
to the Gulf area; they now extend to the Indian Ocean as
well. The expansi ,I the Iranian navy which is now under
way is designed to patrol the sea8a8 far a8 India, and Iran
now claims the right to stop and inspect ships 50 miles off
the Imnlan coast.

“100 F-4 Phantoms to add to the 72 ho ha8 now-at a
total cost of $720 million;
“100 F5E Eghters-$300 million;

31. That is how the explosive situation on Iraq’s eastern
border8 ha8 developed, causing death and suffering to a
large number of people. The situation remains tense and
fraught with danger. SeveralIranian divisions arc poised in
strategic positions across our frontiers. We are confronted
by an ambitious, expansionist rind expansively armed
war-machine aspiring to play the part of a super-Power. We
have suffered from the policies of thie covetousneighbour
which readily breaks its treaty commitments and obligatione ln fulfilling its territorial ambitions. Part8 of our
territory are now under occupation. Although we prevloualy, on several occasions, drew the attention of the
Secrctary.General to the seriousnessof the situation a8 a
resu!t of the Irnnian incursions, aggressions and troop
concentrations, we did not bring our legitimate complaints

“10 KC-135 jet tankers-670 million;
“700 helicopters-$500 miiiion;
“800 British Chieftain tanks-approximately $480
million;
“8 cicstroyers, 4 frigates, 12 high.speed gunboats and
q repair ships-about $300 million;
“14 new Hovercraft to add to what is already the
world’s largest operational Hovercraft fleet-f30 mfllion;
“2 new air-sea bases-$1 billion.
4

ame

by
lS0
Uon
two

the
ion.
Iusa
the
take
3x-m
the
Sian

an’s
Insilr of

>ple
oint
‘eke
OUT

ited
#hat

>uld
that
9 to
bubt
0 of
the
lned
nas
lder
tUl!l
: off
tern
a
and
d in
lted
ned
We
K,“T
ligaour
prethe
an a

to

00p
hkt,S

before the Council in the hope that the efforts and the
good offices of other parties could improve the situation.
My Government
has also expressedits readmossto receivea
special roprescntative of the Secretary~onoral to investigate the situation on tho eastern frontiers. It has ahoady
offered on severaloccasions to submit the rdloged Ir~im
complaint regarding the bnplomentation of the lY37
Boundary Treaty to the International Court of Justice.
Unfortunately, Iran has never rociprocatod.

39. In recent years many Incidents have unfortunately
broken out along the IraMraq frontier. In a letter whloh I
had the honour of addrossbrg to the President of the
Security Cow108 on 1 May 1972 /S/10627/, I deaottbed
some of the many casesof violation of our torritoly by
Iraq. I shall not take up the time of the CounoU by
reverting to thoso incidents. I shall simply draw the
attontion of the members of the Seourlty Council to the
fact that the roornt violations of our frontier by Iraqi
troops are part of a long series of provooatlons that data

32. The problem has proved itself tr be insoluble so far
for two formidable and very clear reasons: flrst, Iran’s
refusal to renounce its territorial claims agabrst Iraq; and
second, Iraq’s deter&rod refusal to cede any part of its
territory to the Iranian intruders.

back a long time.

33. Thr Securit] Cot&l is duty bound to expend its
efforts to see that justice is done, tho ~18 of law uphsld
end peace and stabUity restored to the region. Or is an
oxpansionist State armed to the teeth to be allowed to
encroach upon its neighbours and annex their territories?
Iran’s poiicies have already started a dangerous armsrace in
the region. Perhaps the Iranian Government has roahsed
that it is not the only one which can stockpile an arsenal of
weapons, and perhaps that is the reason why the Iranian
Government would like to see a show-down soonor rather
than later.
34. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from l+enchJ: I now
call on the representativeof Iran.
35. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (fnterpretatfon from l+enchJ:
Mr. President, before setting forth my delegation’s views I
should like to thank all the members of tho CounciI for
having kinoly agreed to allow me to speakhere and also to
congratulate you on your assumption of the high pO8t
which you occupy today during this debate. My delegation,
which represents a country enjoying the best of relations
with yours, is sure that you wIlI preside over these debates
in a spidt of neutrality and sympathy.
36. There ti much irony in the fact that it was Iraq which
asked for a meeting of the Security Council on this sorry
chapter of the relations between our two countries. For
Iran Is the victim of a veritable aggression and yet the:
perpetrators of the aggression claisn to occupy.here the
position of the plaintiff. We know that certain strategiste
recommend attack rather than defence In ordar better to
hide the truth. But I must warn the representativeof Iraq
that his manoeuvre designed to sow confusion by turning
facts topsyturvy bespeaksa naivete which Isequalled only
by the Inconsistencyof his arguments.

40. In recent years a number of Iranians-crutographers,
road enpinoers, herdsmen, frontier guards and others-have
been constant!, harassed by Iraqis, and we have had to
deplore extensive human and materlal losses. Often these
Inddents have been accompanied by inoureions of armed
Iraqi elemonta into our territory.
41. The inoudon of Iraqi troops on 10 February last was
the clbnax of this long seriesof violations. With the leaveof
the CounoU , I should iIke to relate the seriesof event0that
preceded this latest attack.
42. On 15 December 1973, at 1530 hours local time, the
Iraqi polke opened tke on the Kanisakhat frontier post.
me d&&h that followed lasted until 10 o’olook at night
of the next day.
43. On 24 December 1973, at 1000 hours Iooal time,
armed Iraqi elements took up positians on the heights of
Zaluab and opened tire on the Iranian frontier guards that
were making their way towards Kanbakhat. The exchange
of fire lasted until 3 o’olock that day and causedthe death
of one Iranian. It was approximately at the same momont
that the Iraqi Command oonoentrated heavy forces, reinforced by armoured vehicles, along the heights of the
Irsnian Srontier.
44. On 25 December 1973, at 0800 hours local time, the
Iraqi forces started to bomb the Iranian frcntier guards in
Kanisakhat. The invaders, baoked by heavy mortars and
IIUO~IIIO-~M
tlm, during the night occupied the three h&
of the Zaluab heights that dominate the KanjanCham Dam
and the frontier post of Reza Abad. At mId.day, local tbne,
on 25 December, the IranIan frontier guard managed to
mpe1the invadsmfrom Iraq and reestabbsh its positions on
the heights. These Incidents caused the death of a soldier.
45. On 26 December 1973, at 0800 hours local tbne, Iraqi
armed elements, entabhshod close to the frontier port of
Dorraji, In Iraq, oponod flro on the Iranian frontiot guards.

37. Unlike Iraq, which on one protoxt or snother has not
ceasedto provoke disturbances,Iran has constantly tried to
show a maximum of self-control and has endoavourod to
solve the problems in a spirit of goodnoighbourlinos,
particularly through the recently tc-establisheddiplomatic
rolations.

46. After this axios of incidents tho manoeuvres of the
Iraqi armed forces and the shootLg continued sporadiodiy
and at different intervals. In the meantbne, tho Iraqi forces
began to out up fortlflcations to and brtrodua heavy
srmamont along the Iraqi side of the frontier.

38. However, since the Govoromcnt of Iraq has chosen to
present here a distortei view of tho recent events, I am
duty bound to set the record straight.

47. On 30 January 1574, while the Iranisn herdsman were
trjtlng their livestock for gaszIngin the Kulak Heights along
the frorrtier line, they were sttacked by the Iraqi armed
forces.

48. On 31 January 1?74, Iraqi nrmod clomonta from the
nortlbwestern heights of ALJab fired with machhio guns
upon tho lranhm frontior guard8 that wore ongagod ln n
patrol mi8sion within Iranian territory.

57. But there 18much more to it. As though the suddon
upro0th.g of those families, ostabli8hod in Iraq for 80 long,
were not BUfnCiOntto damngo and harm thorn 80 traglcdly,
the Iraqi nuthoritios hnvo, furthermore, pushod cruelty to
the pohit of unlondhig their victhns in isolated arons, so
49. At 1050 hours local time, on Mondny, 4 Fobruary, that women, children and the agedhad to cro8smino~fIo1ds
while Iranian frontlor guards wore transporting supply -and 8omo of them wore wounded or crippled-before
mntorhdlsnlong snpply rout08 of tho Mahran region, thoy !‘CaChingthe nOaro8tpO8tS.Thi8 bespoke SUCh COlltOlnpl for
wore caught in tho flro of Irnqi forces.Tho Iranhul frontior
the most elomentary human right8 that in the course of a
guard8 returned the flro and pushod the intrudors back. As n series of mooting8 with the Secrotnr~Gonoral, and in n
result of this encounter, which Mod ullffl the ovonhg of
number of lottors, lnoluding one of 9 June 1973 nddrossod
S Fobruary, one Imnian soldier was killed.
to tho Commission on Human Rights, I draw the attontion
of n number of the organs of tho Unltcd Nations to those
SO. Tho following munition8 belonging to tho Iraqi in= act8 of atrocity and urged thorn to take atop8 and to
truders wore selzod inside Iran terrltory: one automatic
approach tho Irnqi Govcmmcnt in ordor to put an ond to
weapon, one mortar bnttory, a large number of CartridgOB, them.
two box08 containing hand gronados, four artillery battorlos, two boxes of R.P.C.amniunltion, and two telephone S8. Unfortunately, the Irnai urovocntion8 havo not been
B&S.
limited only to-&e froniio; violation8 and the mass
deportation8 of Iranian nationals. I shall put boforo the
51. At 0430 hours local time on Sunday, 10 February, Council a mere few example8 of specific violation8 of the
Iraqi armed elements, using light and heavy weaponry, norms of international conduct committed by Iraq in its
artillery, tanks and armoured carriers, ahelled Iranian
mlntion8 with Iran.
frontior post8 at the Zaluab heights, Kanisakhat, Reza
pbad, Jazman and the KanjaMham Dam. Faced with the80 59. For n number of years, wo havo been the victims of
unprovoked attacks, the Iranian armed forces returned the incredible hate-camuaianson tho unrt of our noiahbour that
fire and forced the lntrodudors to withdraw.
have acquired qua&p~.thologicai scope and proportions.
For days and nights, the press,the radio and the television
52. In the meantime the commandant of the frontier
controilod by the Iraqi State have ceaselesslyhurled insults
guards at Mahran tried to contact its Irnqi counterpart. against our legltbnate r&me and incited our people to
Parenthetically, the denial of this by the General Staff rebel.
Radio Baghdad on 11 Fobruary is entirely groundless.
60. But thore is something even more serious. The Irnqi
53. A8 a result of this lastincunion of 10 February, a authorities havealso sot up training campsto train terrorists
certain number of Iranian frontier guards were killed or
and send them to Iran to carry out acts of sahotage.They
wounded. The Iraqis left behind on Iranian soil 14 dead and have constantly incited the Iranians, through the radio and
television, to plot against the legitimate rOglme and to
much ammunition and weaponry, which constitutes irre.
futnble proof of the violation of Iranian territory by the overthrow the Government by violence. They hnvooffered
asylum to alI sort8 of movement8 that are opposed to the
Iraqis.
constitutional r&me of Iran.
54. In the note sent to the Embassyof Iraa in Teheran bv
the Minister for Foreign Affair8 of I& on 1 i February /se> 61. I would not have mentionod these incredible acts of
S/11218 and Corr.11 my Government described the facts hostility on the part of a responsible State had I not in my
hand8 tangible proof. For, far from di8gUiBbIgtheir design8
that I havejust moitioned, drew the attention of the Irnqi
Government to the very dangerous consequencesof such against the security of our nation, the Iraqi authorities have
pushed their arrogance to the point of announcing on their
violations, and demanded of the Iraqi Government that it
take the necessarymeasuresto punish those responsible and government radio and television station8 a series of raids
to assurethe compensation of Iran for the lossessufferedin
carried out within Iranian territory and originating from
human livesand materlal, and to assureus that in the future
Iraqi territory. Thus, to take one example at random, on
such provocations or violations would not be repeated.
Friday, 23 Juno 1972, at 10.20 hour8 local time, the radio
of Bassorasuddenly interrupted it8 programme to broadcast
a communiqud signed by the so&led National Liberation
55. It must be added that these territorial violations
unfortunately arc only one n8peLbof a far vasterand more Front of Ahwaz. The communiquO began as follows:
complex problem which my country has been forced to
facein its relation8 with Iraq.
“Children of our great nation, Arab peoples of Ahwaz,
in the light of the effort8 of the Shah’s rOgim0 to turn
56. Thus, two years ago, a few tens of thousands of
Ahwaz, our lost land with all its Arab characteristics,into
persons of Iranian origin and nationality, whose families
a Persian province, it now is up to us, in our just socialist
had, for the most part, lived in Iraq for severalgeherations,
stmggle, to reconquer our beloved land and to unite it to
were summarily arrested by the 1r;qi police, bundled into
our vastArab homeland.”
trucks and buses and literally dumped on the Iranian
front%r without any other form of tiial. The practice of
62. In using the name of Ahwaz, the capit;il of our
expelling Iranians has since been continued, although, after province, the communiqu6 was speaking of the entire
certain appeals, they have not been as massivein number. provingof Khuzistan where our main oil industries are
6

sudden
so long,
agictdly,
uelty 10
,reas, 80
ae-fields
-before
lmpr for
lrse of a
nd in a
idresscd
ttontion

t0

locotod, rind a province that inciudos amcng its historic
gioriea the city of Sum, the old capitol of Uie Achemcnides.
63, In that SOIUC radio broadcast, Radio Ra8sora Sent out
six buHcUn8 concerning the raids carried out deep into
Iranlan territory.
According
to thcsc bullcUn8, ormcd
elements entercd Iran and returned 10 Iraq aftcr having
couscd lo.%es and domogc to the Iranian ormcd forces. Let
me pick one at random. I quote, for example, bullcUn
No. 68:

the80

and to
I end to

ot been
le IIN
Fore the
s of the
1q in it8

AIns of
our that
1OrtiOn8.
:Icvision

d iIlSUk8

:ople

to

he Iraqi
BrrOl’i8t8
:e. They
rdio and
and lo
offered
d to the

I acts of
3t in my
r design8
ties hove
on their
Of raids

ng from
dam, on
he radio
roadcast
beration
/ahwax,
to turn
ios, into
socialist
1ib3

it to

of our
0 entire
tkics are

I

“At 0030 hours local time, on 3 JUIIC 1972, one of our
detachments of fedayeen attacked 011 Iranian gendarmerie
post in Kharabeb in the very heart of Uio province of
Ahwru and inflicted tile foiiowing 108808: Seven soldiers
killed; destruction
of the entire ammunition
dump;
destruction of an automatic field gun that the cncmy wa8
using against U8.
“Our force8 managed to silence the -nemy artiiiery and
returned sound and 8afc to their bases after 20 minutes.”
64. Allow me also to quote from the long list of radio
Baghdad broodcrists that 1 hove before me, ono corn.
mtiniqu6 put out in the form of a slogan on 13 September
1972, at 2030 hour8 local time:
“Revolutionary
the just banner
Iran, arise.”

workers, Iraniun ma8888 united under
of the fight against the mercenaries of

65. Mombet% of the Council, I shall not take up your time
by auotinn ail the bulletins that attest to premeditated
in&ions
if Irontans torritoiy
or of inciting ihe people to
revolt in Iran. The example8 I hove quoted ore sufficiently
clear lo reveal the true nature of the acts of that
Government
of Iraq that today wishes to pose h the
Security Council a8 a victim. I could go ou for hours
madhi cutting8 from the pre88, exccrp6 from the Iraqi
radio and television that would illustrate similar bellicose
design8 against other province8 of my country, but 1 shall
refrain from doing 80. I shall, however, hold at the disposal
of the members of the Council that may desire them the
document8 that I po88e88. it is, however, intereeting, I
think. to Bee in the liaht of these facts, the accusationsof
“bnp&ialism”,
of “o&esSion’*,
of “expansionism”,
that
the representative of Iraq, foi~owing in the footsteps Of hi8
own Government,
has launched against my country.
66. It should not be believed that Iran alone is exposed to
these acts of Iraq that ore contrary
lo the terms of
international
low. It happen8 to be a general and current
practice in Iraqi circle8 to carry out these acts. I 8hall
content myself at this moment with citing il few facts.
67. In 1973, the Iraqi troops unleashed a premeditated
attack against n neighbouring
country and set up their
bridgebcad on its territory.
And it was only after very
strong diplomatic
pressure that they were forced to
wltbdraw. But what is curious and edifying is to recall the
broadcast from Rtidio Baghdad o !O March 1973, the day
of tbo invasion that I am referring to. In fact, it was a
repetition of its usual claun, in that it accused the other
party of having started the firing to which the Iraqi troops
were “forced to reply”.

68. But I am 8ure that ail mcmbors of the Council ore fully
aware of the events to which 1 am referring, and therefore, 1
nccd not press my co80 on that.
69. ShOrUy aflOr UiCSC events a surprising WC~O~iOi~ WD
madc by the Government
of another noticn of the region.
Large amount8 of weapons and ammunition were smuggled
in by tbc Iraqi Govormncnt
under tho cover of diplomatic
immunity
to be dtstributcd
enlong subversive eicmonts 111
the country and tbcy were discovorrd at the Iraqi l?mbossy
in Uic capital of Uist country.
70. In a statement uf 10 February
1973 tho Government
of the country conoorned expressed the consternation
and
shock caused by the discovery of o voritablc arsenal in the
Iraqi Ihnbassy building and by the betrayal of the fraternal
mlations between two Muslim COUntrie8.
71, I shall not multiply these examples, but these acts ore
not surprishlg to UB because f-r a long time we hove been
exposed to the curious octivitioa of our neighbour. Theso
act8 prove the origin of the violations of our territory
and
of i.ltcrnationd
law. These sets indicate who in these CO808
is the expansionist in our region.
72. The city of Baghdad, formerly
known ss Madinatal&lam-the
city of peace--has, in fact, today become a
centre of conspiracy against the security of States, and
quite justifiabiy
has acquired a notoriety
for its iraining
camp for armed groups intended for sabotage iii neighbouring countries.
73. Therefore, it can be seen that the plaintive language of
the representative
of Iraq in this Council is in singular
contrast
with the oggressivc attitude
adopted by hi8
Government.
And it is hardly the delegation of Iraq that is
most indicated to come to give us lessons on international
conduct.
74. Gbvious~y,
I can put many other facts before the
Council. But I tbhlk that the few example8 I have given will
inform the member8 of this body regarding the contents of
the other documents I hove in my po%ess&
Nor do I wish
to go into consideration
of the true reasons hidden behind
the2 acts. I merely wish to reply to gome of the comments
mode by the representative
of Iraq in his statement.
75. The representative
of Iraq said that we msssscd troops
along the frontier-1
think he said numerou8 troops. Once
S&U
he drifted into exaggeration.
But I wonder what a
m8pon8ibiC Government
is expected to do fpllowing upon
an incident a8 regrettable a8 that of 1.0 Fcbruar] lost? Is it.
not normal for any country to adopt the measures dictated
by its defence needs? Furthermore,
Iraq ha4 already
planned In advance for the defence of its frontier. According to my information,
bcforc the incident of 10 February
lraai trooos Olonr! the frontier amounted to about two
divi’sions, includhig
one infantry
brigade, one nrmourci
brigade, two heavy artillcry batallions, four light artilicly
batteries, three police batnliions and, ia the lirst bne, a
botailion of mechonieed cavahy, on annourcd bntallion,
two anti-aircraft
bataihons and two anti-tank batnliions.
That wos nt R thnc when Iran had only frontier
posts aud
gendarmerie posts. Furthermore,
according to my informa-

important point concernsthe regions that I havementioned
where the skirmish took place between the frontier guards
and the Iraqi armed elements, and where the latter
abandoned their dead soldiers as well as their military
equipment.
80. In his statement the representative of Iraq roferred to
the old IranJraq dispute on the river frontier of Shatt
AhArab. He cited at length the documents that ho
transmitted either to the Security Council or to the
Secretary.General on this subject. -Wehave replied to all
those communications.

tion, the Iraqi General Staff could send two additional
divisions to the frontier in three hours.
76. The representative of Iraq feels that this situation is
dangerous. Certainly it is dangerous. But who provoked it?
In the light of the incursions, ln the light of the deployment
of troops, are we to remain umnoved and to refrain from
takhrg the most olementary precautions? Furthermore, I
can assure members that it is not we who will provoke
regrettable incidents. As we have proved ln the past, we
have always shown restraint, and last Wednesday the
Iranian Under-Secretary of State for Fore&u Affairs reminded the ambassadors of Arab States that the Iranian
Covenmrent had shown great patience ln the face of the
actions and the provocations of the Government of Iraq. He
ad&d that that patience was considered by us as being ln
the interests of the two parties and in the interest of peace
in the entire region. But; he added, patience has its limits.
That is why we clearly warned the Iraqi authorities, in our
note, that if another incursion took place on our territory
the Iranian armed forces would have to perform their
national duty.

81. Without trying to remopenthe debate on this question,
I should like to draw the attention of the Council to the
fact that the impasseln which we fmd ourselveson this
matter is the direct result of the intransigent policy of Iraq
over a period of 32 years. In fact, despite our numerous
representations, Iraq has always refused to implement
certain basic clausesof that treaty. I do not wish to take up
the time of the Council on this matter since our oosltion
was made amply clear in the letters of 1 and 9 Mai and of
2September 1969 /S/9190,
S/9200
and Add.1 and
S/9425/ addressed by the representative of Iran to the
President of the Security Council at that time.

77. Moreover, it is not the first time that Iraq has loudly
denounced the existence of a dangerous situation provoked
by its own actions. The representative of Iraq recalled the
letter of his delegation of February 1970 to the Secretary
General warning of what he celled the massive concentration of troops along the frontiers and claiming that that
constituted a threat and a danger. Obviously the representative of Iraq, then as today, omitted to saythat Iraq on its
side had set up a number of forces along the frontier and
that Iran had proposed in a letter to the Secretary-General a
simultaneous withdrawal of the forces, negotiated between
the two parties.

82. The representative of Iraq also alluded to the three
islands nf the PersianGulf over which Iran re-establlshedits
sovereignty, the exercise of which had been interrupted
during the colonial period. That question was examined by
the Security Council on 9 December 1971 /16lOth meeting/, and the representative of Iraq cited this matter at
great length. I shall say that our position was described at
that time, end I see no reason whatever to state now what
our representative said at that meeting of the Security
Council. Suffice it to recall and to stress once again that
those Iranian islandshad been wrested from the sovereignty
of my country during the colonial domination of the region
80 years earlier. All we did was to restore the exercise of
our sovereignty over that area that had never ceased to
belong to Iran.

7%. The sole difference between then and today is that at
that time Iraq had not alerted the Security Council, but had
only informed the Secretary-General. The representativeof
Iraq may think that he is ln a stronger position today
becausehis country is a member of the Council. But 1 wish
to tell my Iraqi colleague that his calculations on that score
ere false.

83. The representative of Iraq saw fit to criticixe our
defence policy. He cited at length newspaper articles from
various countries. I shall not cite newspaper articles, for I
believe that after the summary that I have given of the
activities of our neighbour, and of certain extracts from
Iraqi State radio and television broadcasts,it would be very
difficult for anyone to blame us. Hence, any criticism by
the representative of Iraq seemsto me to be quite out of
place.
84. As I said from the rostrum of the General Assemblyin
October 1973,
6‘. * * the arms expenditure of any country should be
measured in the light of its size, population, gross
national product and per capifu income. And I submit
that, on the basis of authoritative surveysby the London
Institute of Strategic Studies, confinned by the Swedish
International Peace Research institute (SlPRl) surveys,
the arms expenditure in Iraq since 1965, in terms of
percentage both of gross national produce and per ,apitu
income, has been substantially more than Iran’s.“s

79. The representative of Iraq has contended that Iranian
troops were on Iraqi territory to a depth of 5 kilometres,
according to the French interpretation to which I listened.
Obviously that is entirely false. The bloody encounter of
lat week took place on hill 343, ln Zaluab and on the
heights of Reza Abad, that is to say,on Iranian territory. If
the Iraqis, in mentioning the 5 kilometre factor, were
fi&hlg of the region of Kanisakhat, I must stressthe fact
that that was not the sceneof the bloody incident on 10
February. For a number of years a lot of border incidents
have occurred at that point within Iranian territory. If the
Iraqis have any claims on that area, that is another
question. There then would perhaps be a difference on the
question of the drawing of borders. But we havelong tried
to urge the Iraqis to discussthis matter in order to resolve
our points of disagreement, including differencesconcerning the drawing of the boucdaries. But from the procedural
point of view it is necessaryior the two parties to agree on
the modalities of such a discussionin order to resolvethese
differences. But here-and I repeat---in our discussion the

2See Officbl

Records

Session,
PletraryA-feelings,

8

of the Gencrd Assembly.
Twenty.e~hllr
2135th meeting,pars.156.

85. The representative of Iraq began his statement by 92. Mr. ELSHIBIB (Iraq): I do not wish to take up much
speaking of the measureshis Government was adopting to of the Council’s time, but I fee! r-ther confused by the
improve the standard, of living of his people and of the varied themes contained ln the statement of the represenBOUOW that people felt at what he tenned Iran’s aggression.
tative of Iran. Perhaps that is exactly what lte was aiming
Need I remind him tltat for some time now Iran has been at-ccnfuslng not only me but also the members of the
improving its standard of living and hasbeen industrialising
Council and the whole issue.
and developing the country at an extremely rapid rate?
Also, need I remind him of what the Iranian people feels 93. I have addressed myself to a clear specific questionregarding the aggression of 10 February, which is ln our the question of an armed incursion into our territory and
the military occupation of part of it, resulting from Iran’s
country known as “bloody Sunday”?
refusal to abide by its legal obligations and treaty under.
86, Once more I must draw the Council’s attention to the takbtgs. But we havebeen treated to a variety of arguments,
fierce hatred of the Iraqi authorities for Iran-a hatred evasionsand diversions. We have been accusedof inciting
irrefutably proven by the recent events.The magnitude of terrorism, sending arms into other countries, threatening
the recent Iraqi violations was such that the armed forcesof the lives of the innocent, But then those are not arguments
that country even attacked the Kanjan Cham Dam, which that are new to t!te Council. The Council has heard them
before, from another party that was very covetousof Arab
supplies irrigation waters to the peasantsof the region.
territory. J em delighted to say that those arguments were
87. The new Iraqi attacks are all the more incompre- totally and utterly rejected then, as I hope they will be
hensible to us, and, I am sure, to the Council also, since rejected now.
they lmmedlately followed the resumption of diplomatic
relations between our countries,
at a time when conditions 94. My colleague from Iran has been telling the Council
propitious for the hnprovement of relations between the that Iraq attacked Iran’s borde:s, and that the Iraqis left
two parties had begun to appear on the horizon. Evenmore their arms and the bodies of their comrades in Iranian
astonishing is the fact that instead of making use of the terdtory.
recently reeestablishedrelations, the Iraqi authorities prefer
to come to the Security Council and accuseIran of having 95. Now, let me ask lthn one very simple question: What
initiated those incidents. I have put the truth before the line does Iran regard as its boundary? By what means does
Iran defme what is its territory and what is not its
Council. I have explained and proved to the Council who
the aggressorwas. And I must add that from the end of territory?
December until this day the Iranian Embassyin Baghdad
has sent three notes and the hlinistry of Foreign Affairs in 96. The clahn is that when we drive away intruders, we are
Teheran sent two notes to the Iraqi authorities. Today harrasslng Iranian engineers and topographers, I must
inform the members of the Council that Iranian engineers
those five notes are still awaiting a reply.
and topographers have been most industrious on Iraqi
88. Even so, and to leave the door open to negotiations frontiers. The typical ploy used for this creeping annexabetween the parties-which is the only reasonable and tion and the incursions into Iraqi territory has been exactly
fruitful course-Iran abstained from calling on the Security that of sending these land enpineers,topographers, cartogra.
Councl!. And today in this august body I repeat that we phers, escorted by regular armed Iranian troops, If they are
consider the recent events regrettable frontier incidents, not spotted and driven away, a military emplacement is
and we trust that such violations wffl not recur and that the Immediately established; then a border post is built, the
Iranian flag is raised, and a new claim is made upon Iraqi
dispute between the parties will be solved peacefully.That
is why we have set tomorrow morning as the time for the territory. I have told the Council how many times this ltas
presentation by the Ambassadorof Iraq of his credentials in been done ln the past. And that is exactly what the Iranians
Teheran. What we are seeking is not confrontation with
were attempting to do when the clashthat is the immediate
Iraq but d!rect negotiation based on the principles of subject of this discussiontook place on 10 February.
international law and justice, principles which take fully
97. I have referred, in part, to the armada and armed
Into account the legitimate interests of the two parties, in
arsenal which Iran has become. The representative of Iran,
oV’ .r to achievea full settlement of the whole dispute.
quoting the Institute of Strategic Studies, claimed that we
89. We trust that the Government of Iraq will also set its spend more per cupfta on armaments. Perhaps that is true,
feet on the road of reason and will duly consider the But if we spend more on one gun than they spend on 10, in
reiation to per cupitu income, does that make us more
contents of our notes as well as our constant and patient
daring, more covetous, more aggressive? J believe this
offers for negotiation to bring about a complete normalizaargument is too spurious to be taken seriously.
tion of our relations.
90. I believe it is in that ligllt tltat the Security Council 98. We have also been accusedof carrying out illegal acts
can best contdbute to the creation of the necessary in other countries-acts that are contrary to the norms of
favourable climate between the parties, 1-l recommending diplomatic behaviour. Let me ask the representative of
Iran: Is Irar trying to punish Iraq for these acts? Has Iraqi
to Iraq that it have recourse to the existing diplomatic
territory been set as a fine for theseacts? Has!ran become
relations between the countries.
not only the protector-as its ruler claims it to be-but the
91, The PRESIDENT I’vterpremtion
from I+erdr):
I call
policeman, judge and executioner of our arca? Have the
upon the representa; _ of Iraq, who wishes to speak in norms of intemationa! relations so deteriorated that a State
exerciseof his right of reply.
can allot to itself such a role?
9

99. And why ls Iran nibbling at Iraqi territory? And this
can be described In no other way. Is it becausean imperial
title demands the ocoupotion of other people’s territory to
make it trulv hnwrld or more convlncin~?
Or is there a
more sinlate;, poiitlcal purpose? Here I ai only speculata
lng, but I leave it to the intelligence of the members of the
C&cil to adduce the reasons-that are behind the acts of
our Irtian neighbours.
100. The whole issue between Iraq and Iran centres on
one question: Does Iran recognlze its treaty obligations as
they are specified and clearly stated In the 1937 Boundary
Treaty between Iraq and Iran? If that is the case,and there
is no dispute, we are willing to sit down with them today,
on the basisof that Treaty, to consider any complaint they
may have,regarding navigation, regarding alignment of the
border, or any other subject. And we will certainly reach an
agreement. They can go to the International Court of
Justlce.andput whatever complaint they have before it, and
we wlll submit to its ruling.

105. The PRESIDENT (hterpretation
frottt French): I call
OII the representative of Iran in exercise of his right of
reply.
106. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretatlott
from French):
I really do not want to take up much of the Council’s time,
but, unfortunately, once again my colleague from Iraq has
indulged in hls method of accusing me of brlnghlg
dlss4naloniilto the Council.
107. If I made reference to some instancesof Ns country’s
vls&vls other countries, it was not at all in order to
enter upon problems that are no concern of mine, but
merely in order to characterize the customary attitude of
his country. The only reply he has made to me has been in
the form of slogans,without reference to facts.
actions

108. So far as the frontier is concerned, and what he said
about It, I might remind hlm that my Government has
taken every opportunity of repeating its readiness, as of
todav. to sit down at a table with the representativesof
Iraq to consider the totality of the points at issuebetween
the two countries, on the basisof the tried and tested rules
of international law and international justice.

101. But perhaps they are following the very good
example of 1935 and 1936, when direct negotiatfona were
going on between Iraq and lran over the establishment of a
new border treaty. I refer here to a meeting that took place
between the IraqI Minister Plenipotentiary ln Teheran ln
1936 and the Shah, Shah Reza, who is quoted as having
said: “Iraq is calling me to account by the centimetre and
the mllllmetre. I want no more than two miles of
Shatt-Al-Arab opposite Abadan.” He got seven.Now his
successorwants more, How much more? Is lt only water?
Is it land? Where do the Iranian borders stand; where do
they end? What rule of law governsthem?

109. As usual, the representative of Iraq has sent the bail
back to me and claimed that it was alwayshis country that
had sought negotiations with mine and that it waa my
countrv that had refused. May I remind him that in 1969
my present Minister for Foreign Affairs, who at that timo
was Under-Secretary of State for PolItical AffRirs,headed a
delegation which went to Baghdad to initiate negotiations
and that circumstances-which I do not wish to mention
now-obliged him to pack his bags and go home again
becaus the Iraqi delegation was uawlIllng to negotiate.

102. My country facesa very critical situation. Part of it
has been occupied and is still under the occupation of the
Iranian armed forces. Heavy artlllery and tanks have been
Introduced into that area. A concentration of six Iranian
dlvlaions stand at strategic points on our borders. At the
point of the 10 February clash there is a tank battalion and
a mechanlzed regiment In attack and readinessformation.
We have taken defensivemeasuresand we have deployed
our troops occasionally, We have come to the Council
because.we do not want war; we do not want bloodshed;
we do not want this kind of relations to be the rule
between us and our neighbour Iran.

110. As to the question of the troops purportedly massed
along the frontier, there again he sendsthe ball back to me.
I wonder whether in the reply just given by the repreaentatlve of Iraq to some of my statementsthere waa anything
that needs to be taken into consideration.
111. I shall conclude by taking careful note of what he has
said, particularly as concerns negotiations between the two
countries for the purpose of resolving our disputes. I can
only repeat what my Foreign MInIster said on this subject
at the last sessionof the General Assembly.

103. But we cannot tolerate occupation; we coot
tolerate humiliation. For flve years we have been patient
and tolerant. We have explored, as my colleagues well
know, every means and every venue for reaching an
agreement, either bilaterally or through the good officesof
many friendly persons and friendly States. These efforts
have been to no avail. On the contrary, the rate of incidents
has been increasIng; they have become bloodier and
bloodier. On 10 February they reached a new pitch and a
new height.

“Iran has repeatedly offered to resolve its problems
with Iraq in accordance with accepted norms of lntomational law and practice of States and with due regard to
the principles of equity and mutuJ rights and the
interests of both parties.“s, 4
112. Mr. ELSHIBIB (Iraq): I shall sayonly a few words. I
have expressed the readiness of my Government to enter
immediately into direct negotiations with the Iranian
Government once it recognizes its obligation under the
mutually binding border Treaty of 1937. I have not
receivedan affmnative reply.

104. Unlessthis Council rules for the establishmefitof the
rule of law, unlessit acts for the preservation of the peace,
urdessit tells the aggressorto desist and the lawbreaker to
respect international law, then it has been established to no
avail, and that would be to the sorrow of everyone,in Iraq
and in Iran.

3 Ibid., 2127lh mce~ing, yam. 190.
4 Quoted in Englld~ by the sycaker.

10

113. Mr. HOVEYDA (Iran) (interpretation
fiotn
wench):
not have to repeat them. I wish simply to repeat that my
For the sake of the verbathn record, I must sitnply sayhi
Governmentis ready to enter tmmcdiately into ncgotiatlona
turn that in my statement I very briefly gavethe rcBsons with the Government of Iraq on the basis of the accepted
why we do not consider the 1937 Treaty to bc valid. The principles of International law and justice taking into
details of tl~csc reasonswill be found in the communica- account the interests of the two parties.
tions sent to the President of the Security Council on a
number of occusions from 1969 to the present day. I do
rite tueetltig
rose at 5.25 pm.

11

HOW

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

Unite4
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult your bwkatore
Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

from bwkstmea
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations.
.Salea

LBS PUBLICATION5

DES NATION5

Les publications
dea Nations Unies Bent en vente dam lee librairies
d&maitaires
du mondo entier. Infonnez-vous
auprPs de votra Iibraire
B : Nations Unies. Section den ventes, New York ou GenBve.
KAH

IlOAY’lHTb

COMO

CONSBGUIR

HBAAHHB

OPI’AHH3A9HR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS

lJNl5S

et les s3enees
ou adrew%.-vou

OB’bE~HHEHHhlX

NACIONES

HAUHH

UNIDAS

Las publicacionea
de Is8 Nnciones
Uuidas &An en venta en IibrerIns y ~888~ diatribuidoran
en todas pates do1 mundo. cOr.sulte a su librero o dirljssa
8: Nscionea
Uoides. See&n de Ventas. Nuove York o Ginebra.

Lltho

in United

Nations,

New York

P&e:

$U.S. 1.00

74.32001--AprU

1930-2,200
