S/PV.8822

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8822

nd meeting
Friday, 16 July 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Le Drian. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Jürgenson
Mr. Shringla
Mr. Flynn
Ms. Omamo
Mr. Casaubón
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. King
Mr. Jerandi
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Preserving humanitarian space
Letter dated 1 July 2021 from the Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/618)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-19358 (E)
*2119358*

S/PV.8822

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

this year increased by 29 per cent as compared to last
year. The increase for women was 37 per cent.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Protection of civilians in armed conflict
Preserving humanitarian space
Letter dated 1 July 2021 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/618)
The President (spoke in French): I wish to warmly
welcome the Deputy Secretary-General, the Ministers
and the other representatives present in the Security
Council Chamber. Their presence today underscores
the importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Robert Mardini,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross; and Ms. Lucile Grosjean, Delegate Director
for Advocacy at Action Against Hunger.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/618, which contains the text of a letter
dated 1 July 2021 from the Permanent Representative
of France to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept note on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Deputy SecretaryGeneral.
The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
bring greetings from the Secretary-General, on whose
behalf I am delivering these remarks today.
We are facing a bloody surge in humanitarian
crises around the world. Civilians in conflict zones
are paying the highest price. From the Tigray region of
Ethiopia we have heard credible reports in the past few
months of executions of civilians, arbitrary arrests and
detentions, sexual violence against children and forced
displacement on a massive scale.
In Afghanistan, brutal attacks killed at least 24
civilians, including five health workers during just one
week in June. Civilian casualties in the first quarter of
2/23

16/07/2021

In Yemen, on average at least five civilians are
killed or injured each day. Twenty million people are
in dire need of humanitarian assistance and 5 million
are face-to-face with famine. Schools and hospitals,
which should be safe havens, are not spared. Scores of
Afghan schoolgirls were killed or injured in one of this
year’s most heartbreaking attacks. Last month’s attack
on Al-Shifa hospital, one of the largest in northern
Syria, killed 19 civilians, including three children.
One missile reportedly hit the emergency room, while
another landed in the delivery ward.
We are in uncharted waters. The sheer scale of
humanitarian needs has never been greater. This year
alone, the United Nations and our partners are seeking
to reach 160 million people with assistance — the
highest figure ever. This hurricane of humanitarian
crises is compounded by a relentless wave of attacks on
humanitarian and medical workers and the imposition
of ever-narrower constraints on humanitarian space.
The Secretary-General urges the Council to take
strong and immediate action to support its numerous
resolutions on the protection of civilians, humanitarian
and health-care workers and humanitarian space.
Three weeks ago, humanitarian aid workers
Yohannes Halefom, María Hernández and Tedros
Gebremariam were brutally killed in Tigray while
working for Médecins sans Frontières. That was just
the latest in a string of attacks that have killed 12 aid
workers in Tigray since the start of the conflict in
November 2020. Many more have been intimidated,
harassed and detained.
Around the world security incidents affecting
humanitarian organizations have increased tenfold
since 2001. Such incidents include shootings, bodily
and sexual assault, kidnappings and raids.
In the five years since the Council’s landmark
resolution 2286 (2016) calling for an end to impunity
for attacks on health-care systems, workers and patients
have suffered thousands of attacks. The World Health
Organization has recorded 568 incidents affecting the
delivery of medical care in 14 conflict zones so far in
2021. That has caused 114 deaths of health-care workers
and patients. Such attacks include shootings, shellings,
threats, the removal of equipment and the militarization
of medical facilities.
21-19358

16/07/2021

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Meanwhile, it is becoming ever-more difficult to
provide desperately needed humanitarian aid to people
in need. Since late June, just one convoy of aid has
been able to enter Tigray, where an estimated 2 million
people are displaced and 5.2 million need humanitarian
assistance. A second convoy is now on its way.
In Afghanistan, aid workers, particularly women,
face increased attacks, harassment and interference in
their work.
In Yemen, there were more than 350 incidents
involving restrictions on humanitarian organizations,
personnel and goods in just two months earlier this year.
Our humanitarian agencies often negotiate with
Governments or parties to conflict that undermine or
completely reject their work. We are all too familiar with
many of the strategies that they use, from restrictions
on the movements of humanitarian staff and supplies to
long visa and customs procedures, delays at checkpoints
and high taxes and fees on humanitarian supplies.
While Governments may create systems around the
delivery of humanitarian aid, it is essential that those
systems support aid rather than blocking it.
Likewise, every country needs to take action against
terrorism. But every country also has the responsibility
to make sure that its counter-terrorism efforts do not
undermine humanitarian operations. Humanitarian
organizations report ever more frequent attempts to
interfere in their selection of beneficiaries or partners.
There are growing pressures on organizations that
negotiate with non-State armed groups, an essential
element of impartial humanitarian operations. Some
counter-terrorist legislation may even criminalize
humanitarian and medical activities. Conversely,
political and military actors may portray humanitarian
assistance as part of the counter-terrorism agenda.
All of those practices politicize humanitarian action,
eroding the trust of communities and parties to conflict
and, ultimately, curtailing the ability of humanitarian
organizations to deliver aid.
The best way to protect humanitarian space is by
ending violence and conflict. That was the thinking
behind the Secretary-General’s call for a global ceasefire
to focus on our common enemy: the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The United Nations
is engaged around the world in difficult negotiations
to produce lasting ceasefires and build sustainable
peace. In the meantime, life-saving humanitarian aid

S/PV. 8822

needs to continue, and humanitarian organizations are
making remarkable efforts to protect humanitarian
space. They strengthen security systems and improve
due diligence to reduce the risk that aid is stolen or
diverted. They invest in conflict analysis to improve
humanitarian access, and they are negotiating with
parties to conflict to ensure equitable access to those
in need. They improve training for their personnel,
and they have a strong focus on local outreach and
community engagement.
All of those efforts work. Humanitarian assistance
has never reached so many people so quickly.
Humanitarian agencies and their donors deserve
enormous credit for that. But even so, humanitarian
needs are outpacing our capacity to meet them,
turbocharged by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Members of the Security Council have a
responsibility to do everything in their power to end
attacks on humanitarian personnel and assets, to ensure
and promote respect for international humanitarian law
and to seek accountability for serious violations in line
with the numerous resolutions on the protection of
civilians, medical care, and humanitarian and United
Nations personnel.
The Secretary-General sees four main areas
for action.
First, there are practical tools available within
and outside the Council to foster greater respect for
international humanitarian law. When those tools are
used systematically, we see results: examples including
training national militaries, developing national policy
frameworks and applying diplomatic pressure. The
Security Council has the power to impose sanctions
when there are no other remedies.
Preserving humanitarian space also requires that
we do not blur the lines between military operations,
political objectives and humanitarian efforts. Upholding
the principles of humanitarian action — humanity,
impartiality, neutrality and independence — is essential
to building trust with political, military, security and
non-State armed groups and others.
Secondly, investigation and accountability are
essential to preventing attacks on aid workers. National
authorities are in the lead, but when they are unable
or unwilling to act, the international community,
including the Council, can and must use all available
mechanisms. Attacks on humanitarian workers are

21-193583/23

S/PV.8822

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

completely unacceptable and may constitute war
crimes. They should be investigated and prosecuted
accordingly. What goes unpunished will be repeated.
Thirdly,
all
Governments
must
protect
humanitarian organizations’ ability to engage with
all parties to a conflict, including non-State armed
groups. Humanitarian agencies that engage with such
groups are better able to negotiate access and establish
humanitarian pauses or even ceasefires. Their personnel
are safer, and they can deliver aid more effectively.
When humanitarian agencies are perceived as part of
a political agenda, that creates enormous risks for their
personnel and reduces their effectiveness.
Fourthly, counter-terrorism measures should
include clear provisions to preserve humanitarian
space, minimize the impact on humanitarian operations
and ensure that humanitarian and health-care personnel
are not punished for doing their jobs. Several Member
States have passed legislation to that effect in line with
resolutions 2462 (2019) and 2482 (2019). The Council
has included humanitarian exemptions in its Somalia
sanctions regime. The Secretary-General urges others
to emulate those good practices.
Fifthly, the Security Council must use its influence
to ensure that attacks against schools and hospitals
cease immediately and that such facilities and their
personnel are protected. The unprecedented healthcare emergency caused by the COVID-19 pandemic
makes the protection of medical facilities and workers
more critical than ever. Member States should review
and revise military policy and practice to ensure the
protection of medical care and schools. They should
refrain from and condemn the use schools for military
purposes.
The Secretary-General further urges Member
States to endorse and implement the Safe Schools
Declaration, which aims to protect all educational
institutions from the worst effects of armed conflict.
He also calls on Member States to support the Health
Care in Danger initiative of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement aimed at preventing and ending
violence against patients, health-care workers, facilities
and vehicles and ensuring safe access to health care in
armed conflict and other emergencies.
In recognition of the enormous challenges faced
by the humanitarian agencies, the Secretary-General
has asked his incoming Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs to appoint a special adviser on
4/23

16/07/2021

the preservation of humanitarian space and access
and to strengthen humanitarian negotiations in that
context. Ultimately, most of our work on protecting
humanitarian space is done by humanitarian aid
workers on the ground and in dialogue with parties to
conflict, Governments and the communities affected.
The international community owes humanitarian
agencies and health-care and humanitarian workers its
full and unwavering support in their difficult and often
dangerous work.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mardini.
Mr. Mardini: It is an honour to be able to address
the Council in person on a topic that is a major
preoccupation of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC). We welcome the considerable efforts
by France, the European Union
and other States to shine a much-needed spotlight on
the protection of humanitarian space and humanitarian
workers.
When we talk about humanitarian space, we are
not talking about an abstract concept. Humanitarian
space is tangible: it is a prison, a hospital, a water
network, a camp. But it is also normative: it is rooted in
international humanitarian law and principles and aims
to have an effective and sustainable impact.
The Geneva Conventions, and international
humanitarian law more broadly, mandate a license to
carry out impartial humanitarian action. That puts the
onus squarely on parties to armed conflict to provide
rapid and unimpeded access to people in need.
Access is more than allowing humanitarians to
work. It is about ensuring that conflict-affected people
and communities can obtain what they need in a safe and
dignified way. That requires us to stay as close to them
as possible. Access is not static and cannot be binary.
It is negotiated by humanitarians with proximity on the
ground. It can even be refused out of military necessity.
Proximity to people in need is not just key for
access; it is key for trust. We know from experience
that working in a neutral and independent way is
needed to build trust and acceptance across front lines.
That helps facilitate agreements between the parties on
practical measures such as evacuation of the wounded
or the transfer of human remains, for example.
21-19358

16/07/2021

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

While there may be different views on what
humanitarian space is, there can be little doubt about
what happens when there is no humanitarian space.
My fellow briefers and I have certainly all seen that
close up, and, believe me, it is ugly. It is a dire lack of
protection and assistance for those who need it most. It
is humanitarian workers, including our own colleagues,
in mortal danger, far too many of them traumatized,
missing, maimed or even killed. That really is the
bottom line. Humanitarian space, or spaces, must be
protected without exception. That is where some of our
most pressing concerns lie. I would like to highlight
just three.
The first, which comes as no surprise, is the
politicization and manipulation of humanitarian aid.
All too often, aid is used to justify, legitimize or help
both States and non-State armed groups to further their
particular objectives — be they political, military or
economic. It puts humanitarian organizations under
pressure and effectively holds civilian populations
ransom. Humanitarian space is created and upheld by
respecting the law to which States have already agreed
by consensus. It is not about abusing the law to make a
political point.
The second issue of concern relates to resorting
to armed escorts. When States insist on armed escorts
to ensure the safety and security of those delivering
humanitarian aid, the result is often the exact
opposite — less safety and more security incidents.
It is critical that neutral and impartial humanitarian
organizations be allowed to do independent needs
assessments and aid delivery. Access must not be
unlawfully denied or withheld, especially when
people’s basic needs are not being met. As we have said
before, the divisions within the Council, notably with
regard to access to populations in need, are increasing
suffering on the front lines and the ground.
The third issue of concern is the growing negative
impact of sanctions and counter-terrorism measures on
humanitarian aid. Such measures come in many forms.
In the absence of essential safeguards, the humanitarian
impact is the same — preventing or restricting the
ability of conflict-affected people to access the
protection and assistance they need, which the parties
owe them. For the ICRC, such measures may curtail
its personnel’s ability to visit persons being detained
by listed groups, recover dead bodies, train armed
groups in international humanitarian law and facilitate
mutual detainee swaps. While the precise impact of that

S/PV. 8822

may be hard to measure, there is no doubt that people
suffer just when international humanitarian law should
protect them. We see a clear trend of States and donors
transferring the risks associated with operating in
fragile or conflict environments to humanitarian and
local actors. That is simply unsustainable and wrong.
Those are some of our top concerns. In terms of
how they can be resolved, we have three clear asks for
States, including Council members.
The first is to ensure that humanitarian organizations
are able to maintain close physical proximity to affected
populations and sustained engagement with parties to
conflict. Protecting the humanitarian space in physical,
digital and normative terms means accounting for
the specific risks and responsibilities facing local
humanitarian workers. When they lose their capacity
to be first responders or volunteers, civilians suffer
more and the space shrinks. We would like to take
this opportunity to pay tribute to the relentless work
and sacrifices of the millions of Red Cross and Red
Crescent volunteers worldwide.
The second is to renew consensus around the key
tenets of international humanitarian law and ensure
that they are respected and implemented. That means
ensuring that all the words spoken here in New York
are translated into reality when they really matter — at
checkpoints and on the front lines in armed conflicts
around the globe. To that end, we must understand
patterns of harm and patterns of influence and find
new entry points to influence those who are engaged
in fighting and innovative ways to incentivise better
behaviour on the part of States’ and Council members’
own armed forces, as well as allies, partners and proxies.
Appropriate training in international humanitarian law
and accountability are just part of that.
The third is to consider and mitigate the
humanitarian impact of counter-terrorism measures
by putting in place well-crafted standing humanitarian
exemptions. In future resolutions, the Council
should explicitly require States to adopt concrete
practical measures to facilitate the work of impartial
humanitarian organizations. It should carve out similar
protections in sanctions regimes, as the Council did in
the case of Somalia. We know that it can be done. In
the past few years, Switzerland, the Philippines, Chad,
the European Union and many others have adopted
more protective language, contributing to improved
safeguards for humanitarian action.

21-193585/23

S/PV.8822

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

We stand ready to guide and support States and
other stakeholders to take practical measures to achieve
those goals. Decisive and bold action in those three
areas would demonstrate the much-needed political will
to protect and serve the people who need humanitarian
action and those who provide it. And it would help
turn words about our commitment to humankind into
meaningful deeds.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Mardini for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Grosjean
Ms. Grosjean (spoke in French): Action Against
Hunger and its 17 signatory organizations thank you,
Sir, for organizing the discussion today on an issue that
is more critical than ever. We hope that it will enable
the Security Council to take concrete action in ramping
up the protection of humanitarian space, as well as to
react meaningfully when the latter is threatened.
Current humanitarian needs are unprecedented. The
confluence of the effects of conflicts, environmental
and climate crises, social inequalities the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic are affecting those most
in need disproportionately and are leading to a veritable
hunger pandemic. In the face of that, humanitarian
work is more vital than ever, which involves working
to save people’s lives and guaranteeing their protection
and dignity, which is their fundamental right.
We, as humanitarian organizations that abide by
the principles of impartiality, neutrality, independence
and humanity, are facing an unprecedented decrease
in humanitarian space, in which we provide protection
and critical aid. Let us be clear. The causes of that
shrinkage are well known — widespread disdain for
international humanitarian law by all, in particular
warring parties, and the blatant instrumentalization of
aid, which is increasingly threatening our work.
The Security Council has so far been unable to
prevent or reverse the narrowing of humanitarian space.
The failure to act and deadlocks within this organ are
putting in jeopardy the lives of vulnerable people and
the humanitarian workers helping them. It was only
when the number of 10 million people infected by
COVID-19 had been reached that the Council finally
agreed to call for a global ceasefire in order to facilitate
humanitarian work.
Furthermore, certain conflicts have been on
the Council’s agenda for years. However, sparse
6/23

16/07/2021

concrete action has been taken, effectively imperilling
humanitarian space. The words “we are concerned” are
not enough. We require firm, rapid and unambiguous
condemnations followed by ambitious measures
when respect for humanitarian space is flouted. We
nevertheless welcome the historic progress represented
by the adoption of resolutions 1325 (2000), 1502 (2003),
2175 (2014) 2286 (2016), 2417 (2018) and, most recently,
2573 (2021).
At the same time, those resolutions seem to
remain without effect. They are disregarded by
States and parties in conflict, as they are convinced
that the Security Council will not follow up on their
implementation. That inconsistency endangers human
lives and the work of the humanitarian workers and
undermines the credibility of the Council.
The Security Council continues to adopt resolutions
while failing to take into account the potentially
harmful and extremely serious consequences that they
may have for humanitarian activities and humanitarian
and medical workers. I would mention in particular
certain counter-terrorism measures and sanctions
regimes. Such a lack of consistency encourages States
and parties in conflict to ignore their obligations
concerning humanitarian space.
In conflict areas, State and non-State armed actors
prevent access and instrumentalize assistance. In the
same areas, a number of States criminalize assisting our
workers, prevent dialogue with parties to the conflict
and gradually erode our neutrality and that space.
With regard to donors, their interpretation of sanctions
regimes and counter-terrorism measures are also
threatening our operations. One of the most striking
examples involves the obligatory screening of those
who benefit from our work, which is an absolute red
line for humanitarian organizations, as it compromises
in every situation our ability to provide impartial aid
based solely on need. Such measures undermine our
standing and the people’s trust in us and put our staff
at risk.
Everywhere, widespread impunity related to the
blatant violation of international humanitarian law is
resulting in further attacks against civilian populations,
humanitarian workers and their property. Unfortunately,
too many incidents allow me to illustrate this last point.
Next month will mark 15 years since the Muthur
massacre in Sri Lanka. That day, although not
identified as such, 17 humanitarian workers from
21-19358

16/07/2021

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Action Against Hunger were lined up, forced to kneel
and executed, one by one, in our offices. Even today,
the Sri Lankan authorities continue to oppose any
judicial investigation. Two years ago, in Nigeria, five of
our counterparts were killed and one of our colleagues,
Grace Taku, was kidnapped. Grace continues to be held
captive. We again call for her immediate release.
The tragic spate of attacks on humanitarian staff
appears to be never-ending — Médecins sans Frontières
in Tigray, People in Need in Afghanistan and ACTED
in the Niger. Some 191 humanitarian workers have been
killed, injured or kidnapped since the beginning of this
year. The majority of them are national humanitarian
workers, who are more exposed to risks as they work
on the front lines. Often, local non-governmental
organizations are present in areas that are extremely
hard to reach. It is vital that they receive the same
international support provided to others so that they
can overcome the risks they encounter.
Our appeal is clear — the Security Council must
take action and put an end to this deadly spiral. We
call on the members of the Council to reaffirm their
unequivocal support to provide assistance based on
humanitarian principles, while ensuring that their
decisions do not block the humanitarian space. We again
call on the Council to adopt a systematic humanitarian
exemption, thereby excluding impartial humanitarian
work from the scope of sanctions and counter-terrorism
measures. Such exemptions are crucial as they enable
us to continue to safely provide essential services and
engage in dialogue with all parties to a conflict without
the fear of being prosecuted, in line with humanitarian
principles. We urge the Council to collectively and
systematically condemn crimes against civilians and
medical and humanitarian workers. Violations of
international humanitarian law cannot be ignored.
They must be addressed here in the Council, as well as
at the highest level by each Member State.
Combating impunity for crimes perpetrated
against medical and humanitarian workers must be a
genuine priority for the Security Council. The Council
must systematically demand and support national and
international inquiries to ensure that such crimes do
not go unpunished.
Lastly, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
announcement of the appointment of a Special Adviser
for the Protection and Strengthening of the Humanitarian
Space. We are ready to work with that individual to

S/PV. 8822

reverse the disastrous trends I just mentioned. The
Security Council has demonstrated that, when there is
collective will, progress is possible. Millions of people
throughout the world are in need of an unprecedented
level of humanitarian protection and assistance. It is up
to the Council to take decisive measures to protect the
humanitarian space and uphold the basic principles of
our collective humanity.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Grosjean for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.
All three briefers just painted an extremely
worrisome picture — an unprecedented shrinkage of
the humanitarian space to the extent that respect for
international humanitarian law is being undermined,
and an increase in the number of attacks of all kinds
perpetrated against humanitarian and medical workers.
The briefers recalled that civilians in crisis zones pay
the price. That is particularly worrisome as we have
never before been in such dire need of international
solidarity, given the upsurge in the number of crises
and the disastrous situation across the world, which
continues to deteriorate.
That is why it is incumbent upon us to take
action — first and foremost to raise awareness of
and ensure respect for international humanitarian
law. The Security Council has a major role to play to
remind armed forces and non-State groups involved in
conflicts of the principles of international humanitarian
law. We must also ensure that the troops engaged in
peacekeeping operations receive the right training.
Each one of us can and should support those efforts
by extending those duties to national armed forces and
their partners.
France, which is already engaged in the Sahel,
just adopted a new international humanitarian law
training plan to be implemented in partnership with
French Government stakeholders working to address
such issues and with our partners — armed forces,
parliamentarians, non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and French companies interested in the effort.
Taking action also means mobilizing so that
impartial humanitarian workers are not prosecuted
or convicted solely because they have conducted
humanitarian work in line with international
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles.

21-193587/23

S/PV.8822

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Humanitarian medical personnel should not be selective
in treating the wounded for reasons that are foreign to
medicine. That attitude would be at variance with their
professional ethics. They should not be imprisoned for
treating people and allegedly “assisting combatants”.
Similarly, the funding of humanitarian operations, in
line with international humanitarian law, should not be
undermined by excessive compliance by banks, which
could, de facto, deprive humanitarian workers of the
possibility of conducting their work. We paved the way
for that with the adoption of resolution 2462 (2019).
We should continue to strive to better incorporate
those specific concerns into the texts we adopt. The
recent review of the sanctions regime concerning
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has led to
considerable progress without undermining the
usefulness of the regime. France is again of the view
that action is also required at the national level. We
therefore established a direct communication channel
in France between banks and NGOs in order to build
a dialogue of trust to ensure that the two sectors can
learn to better understand and engage with each other.
To develop good practices, the guidelines were updated
for banks and NGOs.
Under the auspices of the French Justice Minister, we
have also prepared a circular that encourages the Public
Prosecutor’s Office to take into consideration the special
nature of the work conducted by humanitarian workers
when applying anti-terrorist criminal legislation. The
text stipulates that simply providing impartial medical
or humanitarian assistance to civilians in areas where
terrorist groups are present cannot be punished. We
have also expressed our unequivocal support for the
principle of non-discrimination against the intended
final beneficiaries of humanitarian aid provided
by humanitarian NGOs, in line with international
humanitarian law and humanitarian principles. We are
currently assessing the legal impact of those principles.
Taking action also involves protecting humanitarian
workers. We must be resolute in our fight against
impunity for crimes and attacks against humanitarian
workers in order to deter such attacks. We must punish
more frequently the perpetrators of and those who
orchestrated attacks on humanitarian and medical
workers. That presupposes that sanctions regimes can
target those responsible for crimes against humanitarian
workers. The Council just introduced that criterion in
the regime concerning the Democratic Republic of the
8/23

16/07/2021

Congo, which I mentioned earlier. It should be extended
to other regimes.
At the national level, we must open investigations
and start prosecutions. In France, the Public Prosecutor’s
Office will be encouraged to seek the most severe
penalty for the crimes they prosecute. We are prepared
to strengthen our international judicial cooperation
with our partners on the issue.
The path to international criminal justice must also
be forged, as crimes against humanitarian workers are
within the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court. It conveys a strong message.
Lastly, taking action also involves strengthening
the warning system and preserving the humanitarian
space from within the United Nations by enhancing
the crucial efforts of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East. I would therefore like to thank the Deputy
Secretary-General for announcing the forthcoming
appointment of a Special Adviser for the Preservation
and Strengthening of the Humanitarian Space. We very
much look forward to working very closely as soon as
possible with that person.
The Council can count on France to continue the
fight. We are proud to be able to contribute by promoting
the Humanitarian Call to Action, which I launched with
my German counterpart in 2019 and now includes 50
signatories. I hope that all Council members will join
that appeal. This will be a key issue for France during
our presidency of the European Union in the first half of
next year, as Europe, the primary humanitarian donor in
the world, has a special responsibility on the issue. We
take this opportunity to announce that we will organize
a European humanitarian conference, together with the
European Commission, in the first half of 2022.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico.
Mr. Casaubón (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank France for convening this timely meeting, as
well as Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed,
Mr. Robert Mardini and Ms. Lucile Grosjean for their
21-19358

16/07/2021

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

briefings. I also acknowledge the presence of other
ministers and high-level officials.
The work of humanitarian workers worldwide
is vital to ensure that millions of people in conflict
situations receive medical, food and psychosocial
assistance. Their work is not only admirable but also
necessary and indeed indispensable for peacebuilding.
Ensuring unhindered humanitarian access is therefore
critical. That has become even more evident during the
current pandemic, which is not yet over. While today’s
topic is very broad, I will focus on three points.
The first is the importance of unrestricted respect
for the rules of international humanitarian law and
accountability. The protection of the lives of those
who are not participating in hostilities in the context of
armed conflicts is the main objective of international
humanitarian law. Yet attacks against humanitarian
personnel persist and have even increased in some
regions. That was the case both in Afghanistan, among
the demining workers of the HALO Trust, and in
Tigray, against the staff of Médecins Sans Frontières.
Mexico condemns in the strongest terms the fact
that medical and humanitarian personnel, as well as
infrastructure and essential services for civilians,
such as schools, hospitals and water treatment plants,
are targets of intimidation and deliberate attacks by
any actor under any circumstances. Those actions are
undoubtedly violations of international humanitarian
law and constitute war crimes, which must therefore be
investigated and those responsible punished as matter
of priority.
That responsibility lies primarily with national
jurisdictions. However, if necessary and based on the
principle of complementarity, the Security Council
should consider whether some situations should be
referred to the jurisdiction of the International Criminal
Court, as provided for in the Rome Statute.
The second point I would like to address is the
effect of widespread sanctions and counter-terrorism
measures on humanitarian action. It is clear that those
measures have a negative impact on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance. It is therefore essential to
understand in greater detail the scope of sanctions,
especially in terms of unintended consequences.
For example, financial institutions that provide
services to humanitarian organizations and operate in
countries considered to be at risk avoid providing them

S/PV. 8822

in order to avoid being directly or indirectly subject to
sanctions, thereby directly affecting their operations
and the people who most need their services. In other
cases, humanitarian actors face restrictions on the
import of goods needed to carry out their work and
even face risks of fines and criminalization.
Those potential consequences have a so-called
“chilling effect” and inhibit humanitarian action. It is
therefore essential that measures be taken to mitigate
such impacts and efforts be sustained to ensure that
new sanctions do not directly or indirectly affect the
operations of humanitarian organizations.
Mexico recognizes, however, that the sanctions
approved by the Security Council against individuals
who attack medical or humanitarian personnel can be
deterrents. In that regard, we recognize the progress
achieved through resolution 2582 (2021), on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
My third point pertains to implementation at the
national level. As Mexico has pointed out in different
forums, the main challenge for the protection of
humanitarian space is not the lack of norms but their
implementation in practice.
In that sense, the Humanitarian Call to Action
launched by France and Germany in 2019, following
up the earlier initiative of Switzerland, Germany and
Mexico, is pertinent because it reinforces the political
commitment that States undertook when they joined
international humanitarian law instruments. In that
way, Mexico honours its obligation to respect and ensure
respect for international humanitarian law and invites
States that have not yet done so to join that initiative.
It must be borne in mind that national actions
must be developed first and foremost in times of
peace. In Mexico, the Intersecretarial Commission on
International Humanitarian Law, established in 2009,
studies and conducts ongoing reviews of national
legislation to bring it into line with developments in
international humanitarian law. The Commission
also conducts specialized courses to disseminate
our country’s obligations under international
humanitarian law.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Mexico’s
support for the Secretary-General’s call for the global
ceasefire to be respected and underscore my country’s
commitment to continue promoting the protection of
humanitarian space as a key element in guaranteeing

21-193589/23

S/PV.8822

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

international security, while fostering peacebuilding.
Humanitarian assistance cannot and should not be held
hostage to political considerations, since what is at
stake is people’s lives and well-being.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Kenya.
Ms. Omamo (Kenya): I am honoured to join you
this morning, Your Excellency Mr. Jean-Yves Le
Drian. I thank you, Sir, for convening this important
debate. I also thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Her Excellency Ms. Amina Mohammed, participating
on behalf of the Secretary-General. I acknowledge the
briefings offered to us by the Director-General of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, Mr. Robert
Mardini, and by Ms. Lucile Grosjean, Delegate Director
for Advocacy at Action Against Hunger, and the
important information they provided. I acknowledge
the presence of our colleagues the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Tunisia and Mexico at this meeting.
We pay tribute to every humanitarian worker. Some
have paid the ultimate price in the course of duty. We
honour their memory and offer our profound thanks to
those who have served.
We are close to a dangerous tipping point, if we
have not in fact already gone beyond it. Humanitarian
crises are proliferating, as is the number of people
needing assistance. Moreover, humanitarian crises
and conflicts are lasting for prolonged periods without
resolution. Countries hosting major refugee populations
are bearing long-term security and environmental costs
that are unsustainable and dangerous to their stability.
Meanwhile, financial resources from donors lag
even further behind humanitarian needs. Finally,
humanitarian workers are increasingly under threat of
violence and harm as they discharge their important
duties in many theatres across the world. We must
change course if the multilateral system is to be fit for
purpose and not stretched to breaking point. Please
allow me to share four recommendations by the Kenyan
delegation for members’ consideration.
First, all parties to conflict must comply with the
fundamental humanitarian obligations agreed in the
1949 Geneva Convention and articulated in multiple
Security Council resolutions.
Secondly, humanitarian intervention should
be temporary, rather than an almost permanent
10/23

16/07/2021

outcome of conflicts. The Security Council has been
accorded the mandate and the powers to encourage,
inspire and enforce political settlements that deliver
ceasefires, dialogue, reconciliation and post-conflict
reconstruction in an expeditious manner. The Council
needs to work a lot harder to collaborate with active
and engaged regional organizations such as the
African Union. That collaboration should extend to
its peacekeeping mandates, sanctions and statements
so that they are realistic, achievable and responsive to
specific political contexts.
Thirdly, all States have humanitarian obligations
but only a few are bearing the bulk of the burden of
humanitarian crises. That is particularly true for States
hosting major refugee populations. Very often, those
countries into which desperate and suffering refugees
flee are themselves politically and economically
fragile as well as environmentally weak, with weak
governance. If they are to fulfil their humanitarian
obligations, many of those States may therefore be
strained to the breaking point.
We must therefore develop a new global
infrastructure of burden- and responsibility-sharing in
order to protect the humanitarian space. As a country
that has hosted one of the largest refugee populations in
the world for decades, we appreciate the financial aid
humanitarian organizations receive. But it is time that
burden-sharing went beyond financial means only.
We are seeking the real sharing of responsibilities,
including collaborative solutions or the physical hosting
of refugee populations among many States. We are
also thinking about third-party solutions for refugees,
accelerating political efforts for the expeditious
resolution of conflicts and concerted efforts to establish
safe havens for refugees in their countries of origin in
order to enable them to return home safely and to carry
on with their productive lives. We need new thinking
in this area.
Fourthly, the humanitarian community and its
network of multilateral, national and civil-society
institutions must also do more to protect the humanitarian
space. Humanitarian actors have consistently expressed
concerns about the implications of counter-terrorism
measures for humanitarian operations in some contexts,
fearing to incur criminal liability by coming into
contact or engaging with non-State armed actors listed
as terrorist entities. Although the Security Council has
made efforts to minimize the impact of its counter21-19358

16/07/2021

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

terrorism and sanctions resolutions on humanitarian
action, tensions persist.
The more the humanitarian space is used to
raise funds, disguise operatives, recruit fighters
and utilize human shields, the more attention it will
attract the attention of security agencies. It is critical
that humanitarian actors actively find new ways for
effective cooperation with security agencies.
In financial networks and across many other domains,
compliance with critical security needs is becoming a
normal part of doing business. Humanitarian actors
can be more innovative and ambitious in protecting
their supply chains and processes from penetration
and exploitation — by terrorists in particular. When
exploited by terrorists, the humanitarian assistance
that is desperately needed for relief can become a major
source of human suffering.
Finally, over the past few decades of deregulation
and market-driven outsourcing, we have seen higher
economic growth rates. But we have also seen States
that are less resilient and less capable of facing major
crises. What is certain is that there are many unknown
and unpredictable dangers ahead. The greater those
dangers, the more that will be demanded of States’
capabilities, abilities and resources. States will need
to be prepared and resilient and to collaborate. That
means that we must do more than simply pursue good
governance. I look forward to the United Nations
leading a vibrant conversation on how to initiate a new
global paradigm, seeking more capable States so that
we can have political responsibility derived from the
strength of those States.
The status quo is not sustainable. If everyone agrees
with that assessment, then we are well on our way to
addressing it. I welcome one and all to work with Kenya
and other countries and institutions outside the Security
Council in order to develop a new architecture of
burden-sharing and shared responsibility to ensure that
the humanitarian space that we duly seek is preserved
for the good of all.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on the
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Migration and Tunisians
Abroad of Tunisia.
Mr. Jerandi (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome my friend Mr. Le
Drian and, through him, to thank the French Republic
for taking the initiative to convene this important and

S/PV. 8822

special meeting on the preservation of the humanitarian
space. This is a new step forward in fulfilling the 2019
Humanitarian Call for Action — a joint initiative of
France and Germany that Tunisia and 50 other States
have joined and to which we are thankful.
I would like also to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Amina Mohammed, Mr. Mardini, Director-General of
the International Committee of the Red Cross, as well
as Ms. Lucile Grosjean, Delegate Director for Advocacy
at Action Against Hunger, for their valuable briefings.
I would like to welcome as well Ms. Raychelle Omamo,
Cabinet Secretary for Foreign Affairs of Kenya, and
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mexico, who are
participating in this important meeting.
Decades-long wars and conflicts have depleted
people’s capacities and resilience, especially in Arab
and African regions. In recent years, many regions
have seen unprecedented humanitarian crises. The
Global Humanitarian Overview 2021 reports a new
record of 235 million people in 56 countries around the
world who need urgent humanitarian assistance and
protection, compared to 168 million people reported in
2020. We should be aware of these figures. The same
reports attribute this increase to the repercussions
of the coronavirus disease pandemic (COVID-19),
exacerbating climate impacts and many other
humanitarian impediments, in addition to the entry of
new countries into cycles of tension and conflicts.
Given the increase in the humanitarian suffering
of millions of people, we also see that the humanitarian
space is being targeted and restrictions are being
imposed on humanitarian workers, be they from
governmental or non-governmental organizations.
This has multiplied the challenges and increased the
number of those in need of humanitarian assistance. In
this context, there is an urgent need for humanitarian
workers to be able to fully carry out their role in relief,
rescue and assistance operations amid the current health
crisis. However, we also see that they have become
the targets of attacks and grave violations, including
premeditated killings, violence, kidnapping, detention
and forced disappearances. These are blatant violations
of the provisions of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. All these acts
of aggression are condemned under legal and moral
criteria. They are crimes that rise to the level of war
crimes and require justice and accountability. I stress
in this regard the need to ensure the safety of medical

21-1935811/23

S/PV.8822

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

16/07/2021

and humanitarian workers, in line with the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

with the provisions of international humanitarian law at
all national and international levels.

The humanitarian space is neither just for
humanitarian workers, nor is it a space within areas of
conflict and humanitarian intervention. Rather, it is a
space that represents our joint humanitarian values, and
protecting it is a collective responsibility. We need to
pool our efforts to address the humanitarian tragedies
that we are facing while addressing their root causes,
foremost among which is the need to bring conflicts to
an end and advance peaceful settlements.

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank the French presidency for bringing
us together to discuss this pressing issue. I also would
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina J.
Mohammed, Director General Mardini and Delegate
Director Grosjean for their compelling remarks.

Tunisia once again calls for ensuring a permanent
global ceasefire in response to the call of the SecretaryGeneral and in line with resolution 2532 (2020). In that
context, we emphasize the need to intensify our efforts
to end various conflicts and address tension hot spots
in the African continent, in particular, and the world
in general.
Ending the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territories remains a cornerstone of peace and respect
of international humanitarian law.
The protection of humanitarian space also
requires the preservation of the principles and rules
of humanitarian work, including the principles of
humanity, independence, neutrality, impartiality and
humanitarian responsibility. These should constitute
a joint code of conduct for all organizations and
humanitarian workers, enabling them to address
all crises and all parties to conflict, including
non-governmental parties.
If humanitarian organizations are to be more
effective, it is important to define their prerogatives,
areas of work and responsibilities within the framework
of complete complementarity and coordination among
them. Indeed, in the context of irregular migration,
we are seeing duplication of effort that reduces the
effectiveness of humanitarian work, especially in
migration and asylum. This sometimes causes security,
economic and social challenges for host or transit
countries, and reflects negatively on humanitarian
efforts.
In conclusion, we reiterate the fact that the protection
of humanitarian space requires all Governments,
governmental and non-governmental organizations
and civil society to demonstrate more solidarity and
effective coordination to help humanitarian workers to
fully carry out their role, and to ensure full compliance
12/23

A new and sickening trend has emerged: the
deliberate targeting of humanitarian workers. We have
heard with horror today from briefers the prevalence
of such attacks: attacks against doctors, aid workers,
drivers and people delivering food, clean water and
medicines, as well as attacks against hospitals and
against schools.
Humanitarian workers are the world’s superheroes.
They go into war zones unarmed. They do not support
any side to any conflict. They voluntarily risk life and
limb purely to save lives and alleviate suffering.
I have spent my career supporting their work,
visiting refugee camps, meeting with humanitarian
workers and seeing their life-saving work in action.
Personally, I can only imagine how stressful it must
be to do this difficult and dangerous work, day in and
day out. The world owes humanitarian workers our
unending gratitude.
And yet, somehow, perversely, these heroes are
being attacked, kidnapped and sometimes killed. These
appalling incidents are far too common. Just last month
mine clearers from the HALO Trust in Afghanistan
were attacked, and three Doctors Without Borders aid
workers in Tigray were killed. And we heard so many
other examples today.
Again, these humanitarian actors are not armed.
Their security depends on host nations, parties to armed
conflict, peacekeepers, communities and Member
States. It is our collective duty to ensure these impartial
actors are protected. And it is our responsibility to listen
to local and national aid workers, actively solicit their
input and implement real solutions for their security.
We therefore call on Member States and all parties
to conflicts to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law and respect and protect
the independence and neutrality of humanitarian
organizations. It is time to give aid workers the
protection and the security they deserve so that they
21-19358

16/07/2021

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

can do the world most important work, namely, saving
lives and creating livelihoods.
Beyond the danger faced by aid workers,
humanitarian access is too often restricted in other
ways. In Syria, one of the worst humanitarian crises,
the Al-Assad regime has put far too many conditions
and limitations on the ability to deliver aid.
In Venezuela, one in three people is food insecure
and, for far too long, the World Food Programme was
not able to reach desperately hungry people. We are
greatly relieved it is finally able to begin operations,
which represents a major breakthrough in humanitarian
access. Now it is time to press forward. We call on others
to join the United States in urging the Maduro regime to
work with the United Nations so that the Organization
can again publish an independent humanitarian-needs
assessment to support the humanitarian response.
And in the Tigray region of Ethiopia, access by road
and by air, along with electricity, telecoms, banking,
activity and fuel supplies essential to aid delivery, are
being denied. This is unconscionable, especially in
the very place that woke the modern world up to the
scourge of hunger. Aid workers must be permitted to
provide unhindered humanitarian assistance in this
region and stave off terrible famine.
In every humanitarian crisis around the world, the
coronavirus disease has created more need and more
difficult working conditions for aid workers. That is
why we support the Secretary-General’s statement
and the Security Council’s resolve in resolution 2532
(2020) calling for a global ceasefire, while continuing
to conduct legitimate counter-terrorism operations.
Finally, as noted by the briefers, policies addressing
humanitarian assistance, sanctions and counterterrorism issues are often intertwined. We must
make sure that those policies are not conflicting, but
mutually reinforcing and do not compromise security.
We therefore support discussions on how to facilitate
humanitarian assistance in contexts where there are
applicable Security Council sanctions, while seeking
to ensure that Member States are fully complying
with their international obligations under international
humanitarian law.
Humanitarian workers represent the best of us, and
they deserve our protection — and, as Mr. Mardini said,
without exceptions. Today let us therefore recommit
ourselves to protecting them, to holding those who

S/PV. 8822

threaten them accountable and to ensuring that they
have the space and the resources that they need to serve
the world.
Mr. Shringla (India) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the delegation of France for
having taken the initiative to organize this meeting
on an important issue. France is a key advocate for
the protection of humanitarian space, and this timely
initiative deserves our appreciation.
(spoke in English)
I thank Ms. Amina Mohammed, Deputy SecretaryGeneral, and Mr. Robert Mardini, Director-General
of the International Committee of the Red Cross, for
their comprehensive briefings. I also thank Ms. Lucile
Grosjean of Action Against Hunger for sharing her
insights. I would also like to welcome the presence of
the Foreign Ministers of Kenya, Mexico and Tunisia at
today’s meeting.
The world today is engulfed in a range of
humanitarian crises. Most of those are caused by armed
conflicts, which severely impact the lives of millions of
innocent civilians. The coronavirus disease pandemic
has further exacerbated that situation.
While international humanitarian law, as we see it
today, has its genesis in the recent past, civilizations
and cultures throughout history have developed rules
of warfare for the protection of non-combatants and
civilian populations.
The humanitarian law principles found their
existence in India long before modern humanitarian
jurisprudence evolved. India has followed the path of
Dharma, or righteous conduct, and provided refuge to
persecuted people over centuries. The Dharma-based
norms for armed conflict in ancient India were founded
on the principles of humanity and humanitarian norms
and had many rules protecting civilians during conflict.
High importance was attached to distinguishing
between combatants and non-combatants during armed
conflicts. In a Dharma-yuddha, or righteous war,
civilians were not attacked; on the contrary, they had
to be protected. In that regard, we condemn the killing
yesterday of an Indian photo journalist, Danish Sidiqui,
while he was on a reporting assignment in Kandahar,
Afghanistan. I extend our sincerest condolences to his
bereaved family.
The complex nature of humanitarian situations
around the world today demands the urgent attention of

21-1935813/23

S/PV.8822

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

the Council. We believe that the primary responsibility
for providing protection and assistance in a humanitarian
crisis lies with the country concerned and its national
Government. However, international humanitarian
assistance, when provided, must be given impartially,
in accordance with the guiding principles outlined in
General Assembly resolution 46/182 and other relevant
resolutions. India remains committed to preserving
the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality
and independence in responding to all humanitarian
situations. Being party to all four Geneva Conventions,
India’s legal framework is fully aligned with supporting
the principles of international humanitarian law and
its implementation.
We also believe that respect for the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, including the
sovereignty, political independence and territorial
integrity of Member States, should remain the basis
for all humanitarian actions taken by the Council. The
Council must avoid the politicization of humanitarian
work and of humanitarian actors involved in conflict.
Humanitarian action should not be used as a ploy to
undermine the territorial integrity of States. Too often
we have seen humanitarian assistance being linked to
coercive measures by external players in order to force
outcomes desired by them. Such actions run the risk
of being counter-productive in achieving a resolution
of the conflict itself and could further shrink the
necessary space for much-needed humanitarian action
or assistance.
Violence against humanitarian workers in
situations of armed conflict remains a matter of serious
concern. I extend condolences to the families of the 99
humanitarian workers who were reported to be killed
over the past year. We strongly condemn attacks against
humanitarian personnel. Member States must take all
measures to implement resolutions 2175 (2014) and
2286 (2016) to ensure the protection of humanitarian
personnel and actors.
Ensuring accountability for serious violations of
international humanitarian law remains one of the key
challenges before us. States must accord a high priority
to addressing that issue. We must assist national
authorities in developing capabilities and capacities to
strengthen their national legal frameworks and related
structures to investigate and prosecute the perpetrators.
Terrorism further compounds the twin problems
of violence against humanitarian personnel and
14/23

16/07/2021

lack of accountability. Access to new and emerging
technologies has enhanced the capacities of terrorist
groups to obstruct humanitarian action, including safe
and unhindered access for medical and humanitarian
agencies. There needs to be zero tolerance for terrorism.
Sanctioning individuals and entities perpetrating
serious violations of international humanitarian
law, especially attacks on humanitarian and medical
personnel, is an effective tool for the Council to
check and cease violations. We believe that such
measures should have wider regional and international
support, in the absence of which there may be further
deterioration of the humanitarian crisis and shrinking
of humanitarian space. For example, in the context of
Syria, both the Secretary-General and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs have repeatedly
spoken about the worsening impact of such measures
on humanitarian operations on the ground.
To conclude, we call upon all States to respect
and adhere to the Charter of the United Nations,
international humanitarian law and humanitarian
principles. That alone will prevent any further shrinkage
of the humanitarian space. India remains committed to
working with the international community to address
the global humanitarian challenges in an effective and
comprehensive manner.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Director-General
Mardini and Ms. Grosjean.
Attacks on humanitarian operations are an assault
on basic human values. They are shameful. They add
to the human suffering caused by conflict by targeting
those workers who are trying to alleviate it.
For example in Tigray, which is on the brink
of a man-made famine, parties to the conflict are
impeding aid deliveries, destroying infrastructure
and targeting civilians, including aid workers. While
the announcement of a humanitarian ceasefire by the
Government of Ethiopia on 28 June was welcome, we
have witnessed continued efforts to hamper aid delivery.
The United Kingdom again stresses that all sides must
remove barriers blocking aid, protect infrastructure,
facilitate banking services and allow communications
equipment into Tigray.
Sadly, Tigray is not unique, not an exception. In
Afghanistan, hospitals are being targeted. In South
Sudan, humanitarian supplies are being destroyed.
21-19358

16/07/2021

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

In Yemen, bureaucratic restrictions are delaying the
delivery of life-saving aid. And in all three countries
and others, aid workers are being attacked.
The United Kingdom’s Special Envoy for Famine
Prevention has visited several countries to call for
the respect of international humanitarian law by all
parties to conflict. The Council has a responsibility to
ensure that. We welcome our agreement last week to
adopt resolution 2585 (2021), facilitating the continued
delivery of life-saving cross-border assistance for
3.4 million people in Syria.
We must now work together to implement the relevant
resolutions, which have the provisions to hold to account
those who breach international humanitarian law. That
includes strengthening our use of sanctions while
ensuring that sanctions and counter-terrorism measures
do not themselves hinder the delivery of assistance.
Through our tri-sector group, the United Kingdom is
working with non-governmental organizations and
banks to find legal, safe and transparent ways to ensure
that humanitarian aid benefits those in need.
While we work towards an end to conflict,
international humanitarian law is there to protect
civilians and the humanitarian space and the workers
on which they rely. The Council has a duty to hold to
account those who fail to respect those basic principles.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I highly appreciate
the interventions by the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Mohammed; Mr. Mardini; and Ms. Grosjean.
Humanitarian needs globally are at an all-time
high, and we are required to improve our efforts to help
the most vulnerable. Expectations are constantly rising
whereas our capability to provide help, especially during
the pandemic, is not following suit. Humanitarian
workers and their activities are increasingly under
attack by various parties to conflict, hence greatly
lowering the probability of delivering assistance and
protection to the most vulnerable.
A vivid example of how danger surrounds
humanitarian workers is that of Syria. Despite the
de-confliction mechanism, attacks against medical
facilities have continued. Al-Atarib surgical hospital
has been under almost constant fire since 2014. The
protection of medical and humanitarian workers and
maintaining full and unimpeded humanitarian access
remains our priority. We welcome last week’s renewal

S/PV. 8822

of the cross-border humanitarian aid mandate for
another 12 months (see S/PV.8817).
In addition to bureaucratic and administrative
impediments, various actors have also restricted the
movement of aid workers using the coronavirus disease
as a pretext to consolidate their grip on power. They
worry less about the consequences of harming or
impeding humanitarian workers, creating an increasing
cycle of impunity.
Estonia deplores the impunity for serious violations
of international humanitarian law and human rights
law that is prevalent in many conflict situations today.
We have an obligation to hold accountable people
who violate accepted norms, including international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
States need to investigate all crimes, including crimes
affecting humanitarian workers and the delivery of
humanitarian aid. The perpetrators must face justice.
It is unacceptable that in some cases perpetrators are
rewarded with positions in the Government or, more
broadly, in the public sector. We must be very careful
with the signal that such “promotions” send.
If a State is unwilling or unable to carry out the
necessary effective investigations, other international
mechanisms, including the International Criminal
Court (ICC), must step in. We highlight the important
role of the Security Council in referring cases of serious
crimes to the ICC. Estonia commends the work of the
ICC and other international investigative bodies for
their work in helping bring about accountability.
To achieve accountability, we must be proactive
in educating our armed forces in international
humanitarian law. That should be seen as a valuable
tool in ensuring adherence to and the dissemination of
the standing rules. Therefore, all efforts to sustainably
provide basic international humanitarian law training
to armed forces prior to their deployment should
consistently be encouraged and supported.
Last but not least, the Security Council previously
unanimously agreed on resolutions such as 2286 (2016)
and 2417 (2018), among others. We must implement those
resolutions. Humanitarian actors need to be empowered,
and we must stand behind them. Resolution 2417
(2018) gives us the possibility of considering sanctions
measures, where appropriate and in line with existing
practice. Such targeted measures are necessary to hold
individuals or entities accountable for obstructing the
delivery or distribution of humanitarian assistance.

21-1935815/23

S/PV.8822

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Mohammed, Director-General Mardini
and Delegate Director Grosjean for their insightful
briefings. My appreciation goes to the French
presidency for bringing this crucial topic to the
Council’s attention today.
Every day, millions of civilians bear the brunt of
ongoing armed conflict. They face the dire situation of
compromised access to essential services and means
of survival such as water, food, shelter, sanitation
and health care. The coronavirus disease pandemic,
sanctions and counter-terrorism measures have put
further stress on the process of meeting humanitarian
needs. It is estimated that in 2021 235 million
civilians rely on life-saving humanitarian assistance
and protection. Without the support of humanitarian
workers, their suffering is bound to get worse.
While aid workers and United Nations personnel
risk their lives assisting those in need, they are exposed
to widespread and increasing security threats. From the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to Mali to Somalia,
aid workers have lost their lives or faced an increased
risk of abduction, armed robbery or physical violence.
We condemn in the strongest terms such cowardly
and outrageous attacks and violations. We take this
opportunity to express our gratitude to humanitarian
workers for their courage and dedication to alleviating
the suffering of people affected by armed conflict. We
express our deepest condolences to the families of those
who have lost loved ones in the course of providing
humanitarian assistance to those in need.
There are many things that we must do to ensure
the safety and security of humanitarian workers.
Full compliance with obligations under international
humanitarian law is a robust preventive measure to
protect humanitarian workers. That is incumbent upon
all parties to armed conflict, including States and
non-State armed groups. Those obligations include in
particular the principle of distinction and the obligation
to refrain from attacking, destroying or rendering
useless objects that are indispensable to the survival
of the civilian population. Infrastructure critical to the
delivery of humanitarian assistance and food production
systems must be protected. We welcome measures to
integrate international humanitarian law obligations
into domestic frameworks and raise the awareness of
armed forces and non-State actors with regard to their
obligations in the conduct of hostilities.
16/23

16/07/2021

Attacks against humanitarian workers and United
Nations personnel might constitute war crimes. It
is disturbing that the vast majority of victims are
national humanitarian personnel, as they work to save
their own people. Such violations must be addressed
appropriately and the perpetrators must be brought to
justice in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international and national laws.
Humanitarian action is based on the paramount
principles of neutrality, impartiality and independence.
Upholding those principles is key to building trust and
acceptance by the host community and parties to armed
conflict, which is critical to guaranteeing the safety,
security and full, immediate, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access. The Charter, including the
principles of sovereignty and non-interference, and
the laws of the host State must be fully respected.
Engagement and dialogue between humanitarian
organizations and the host State can help to improve
understanding of social and cultural contexts and
manage the risks related to humanitarian activities.
As important as it is, in the long run, humanitarian
assistance cannot replace a comprehensive approach to
building national capacity. The primary responsibility
to protect civilians rests with the State. We should
make every effort to enhance local resilience, reduce
humanitarian needs and address the underlying root
causes of armed conflicts. In resolution 2573 (2021),
the Council recognizes the need to build back better
and provide more resilient essential services for the
civilian population in post-conflict situations. All
parties should join efforts to implement concrete and
meaningful steps towards peace and recovery.
The protection of civilians is one of the core issues
on the Council’s agenda. It should mobilize every tool at
its disposal to respond to civilians’ suffering, including
through preventing attacks against humanitarian
workers and ensuring humanitarian access. We
continue to stress the paramount importance of conflict
prevention and peacebuilding. We believe that there
is ample room for regional organizations to play a
leading role in promoting preventive diplomacy and
confidence-building measures.
Mr. Flynn (Ireland): I thank France for convening
this important and timely event. I also would like
to thank Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed,
Director-General Mardini and Ms. Grosjean for their
21-19358

16/07/2021

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

insightful briefings. I also welcome the participation of
the ministers here today.
As members of the Security Council, we bear a
unique responsibility. We are entrusted by the Charter
of the United Nations with maintaining international
peace and security. In that context, we must promote
and ensure respect for international humanitarian law,
which serves to protect humanitarian space. We heard
from our briefers today just how important it is that we
do that. We need to match our words with action.
I will focus on three points that are informed by
the first-hand experience of Ireland’s partners on the
ground, whose work we salute and courage we admire.
The first concerns the physical safety and security
of humanitarian actors in the field and the need to ensure
accountability for serious violations of international
humanitarian law. Humanitarians seek to provide care
and dignity to those who need it most. They must be
respected and protected. The targeting of medical
facilities and humanitarian workers in air strikes on the
Al-Atarib hospital in northern Syria, as well as attacks
in Afghanistan and elsewhere, are totally unacceptable.
During the seven months that we have been on
the Council, Ireland has consistently used its voice to
call for accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights committed in the
middle of conflict. Ireland was appalled by the recent
brutal murder of three humanitarian staff members of
the medical humanitarian organization Médecins Sans
Frontières in Tigray, which the Deputy SecretaryGeneral and others also referenced earlier. We call for
an independent investigation to be carried out and the
perpetrators to be brought to justice.
As others said today, history has taught us that
when we fail to ensure accountability, a culture of
impunity can spread from one conflict to the next. We
know also that women and girls are disproportionally
impacted and struggle to receive justice. Yet it is
clear that — from Yemen, to Syria, to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo — we continue to tolerate such
impunity. When the Council is informed of serious
violations, it must seek to ensure accountability.
I would like once again to reiterate Ireland’s support
for the Humanitarian Call to Action, led by France and
Germany, which aims to strengthen accountability
for those who would attack medical and humanitarian
workers in the course of their vital work. As a troop-

S/PV. 8822

and police-contributing country, Ireland recognizes
that United Nations peacekeeping operations play a
major role in the protection of civilians, including
humanitarian workers. As peacekeeping missions
prepare to transition, the Council must ensure that
clear, people-centred approaches, coordinated with
humanitarian actors, are in place to protect conflictaffected civilians and humanitarian space.
My second point relates to the unique challenges faced
by humanitarian actors working in their own countries.
Local medical and humanitarian staff, notably women,
are often at the forefront of humanitarian responses. We
see that today across the globe in the Central African
Republic, Yemen and in the Tigray region of Ethiopia.
Local partners are often under intense pressure to
save lives and take on disproportionate risks to deliver
humanitarian assistance.
Local actors’ insights and connections to the
communities they serve bring significant advantages,
but local actors can face greater pressure from local
authorities, community members and security forces
than their international colleagues. Those heightened
challenges must be factored into planning for the
security of all staff. The humanitarian prerogative to
respond quickly must not result in those humanitarians
bearing the greatest burden of risk. In addition, every
effort must be made to ensure that often unjustifiable
bureaucratic restrictions, such as visa delays, do not
hinder the scale-up of an international presence in
response to complex emergencies.
My third point relates to the impact that counterterrorism measures can have on humanitarian action
as a whole. There is now a greater awareness of the
extent to which such measures can limit humanitarian
access, criminalize the delivery of assistance or curtail
the ability of non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
to finance humanitarian operations in areas under the
control of individuals and entities on which sanctions
have been imposed, including designated terrorist
groups. Ireland supports efforts to promote dialogue
among donors, regulators, banks and international
NGOS, while United Nations bodies working on
countering terrorism should engage systematically with
humanitarian actors.
The Security Council also has a role to play in
improving the protections for humanitarian actors in
United Nations counter-terrorism and sanctions regimes
by including designation criteria for sanctioning

21-1935817/23

S/PV.8822

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

those that obstruct or harm humanitarian activity and
actors and providing for appropriate exemptions in
sanctions regimes for humanitarian work. A common
understanding among all stakeholders, based on the
humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality,
impartiality and independence, will be essential to
finding solutions and moving forward.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm that Ireland’s
commitment to principled humanitarian space, action
and access will not waver. Humanitarians can always
rely on us for support.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I should like to commend France for convening this
debate on the protection of humanitarian space, which
is a testament to its commitment to maintaining respect
for international humanitarian law on the agenda of
the Security Council. I thank Ms. Amina Mohammed
for her participation in our work and the important
message that she delivered earlier. I would also like to
thank Mr. Robert Mardini and Ms. Lucile Grosjean for
their excellent briefings and firm commitment to this
important issue.
We pay tribute to the courage and altruism of
humanitarian actors in conflict zones and other fragile
environments, as they work to assist vulnerable
populations in distress, at times, costing them their
very lives.
Just one month before we mark World Humanitarian
Day on 19 August, as established by General Assembly
resolution 63/139, it is high time that all States reaffirm
their commitment to protecting the heroes who have
stood out in the terrible fight against the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
In the Sahel, terrorist groups and other criminals
attack peaceful citizens, including refugees, whom my
country, the Niger, welcomes. Regrettably, they also
attack humanitarian workers who assist those people.
We will always remember the tragic attack on 9 August
2020, which killed six humanitarian workers from the
Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development,
their Nigerien driver and a guide in the Kouré nature
reserve, the Niger. Since that tragic incident, my
country has taken measures to prevent such an attack
from recurring. We must also pay a resounding tribute
to the Secretary-General, who remains a staunch
advocate for the protection of such valuable and
indispensable personnel.
18/23

16/07/2021

Over the past few years, we have seen an increase
in the number of major attacks against humanitarian
workers in all areas where duty calls. The violence
against humanitarian organizations not only endangers
the lives of their staff but also disrupts the delivery of
aid, which is vital for people exposed to various risks.
Those attacks, combined with the ever-changing nature
and new kinds of conflict our world faces, must force
our States to re-evaluate their role and reflect on new
ways to ensure the protection, safety and security of
humanitarian workers, including medical personnel.
Allow me to make a few recommendations that
could strengthen the protection of the humanitarian
space.
First, it is crucial to depoliticize the debate
surrounding the humanitarian space, although, as
a famous author once said, humanitarianism is the
continuation of politics by other means. Humanitarian
aid should not be used as an instrument by States to
achieve foreign policy objectives, just as it cannot be
deliberately politicized by humanitarian workers in
response to the challenges they face in the field. To
be effective, humanitarian action must be impartial,
independent and neutral. If not, the trust of the parties
to conflict is lost.
Secondly, we encourage stakeholders to respect
international humanitarian law in order to create the
conditions that enable humanitarian workers to conduct
their work effectively and safely. It is equally important
for all States to raise the issue of the protection of
humanitarian workers in their domestic policy. That will
allow humanitarian workers, in particular nationals,
who have greater knowledge and a better understanding
of the environments in which they operate, to have
access to people and security forces. Security forces
should provide them with adequate protection, as that
element of protection will then be part of the mandatory
commitment of the country. We therefore encourage
humanitarian actors to cooperate with the various
security actors, using as a basis manuals and training
material on professional standards for protection work.
We must promote complementarity between those who
provide protection and humanitarian workers. That is
particularly important in the Sahel, where the presence
of several military actors, with mandates that are not
necessarily harmonized, can, at times, hamper the
humanitarian response.
21-19358

16/07/2021

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

My last recommendation would be to pay greater
attention to the very controversial issue of the impact
of unilateral sanctions on humanitarian assistance,
so that exclusively humanitarian activities conducted
by impartial organizations, in accordance with
international humanitarian law, can be excluded from
the scope of application of those sanctions.
I would like to conclude my remarks by inviting
Council members to reflect on the words of Pierre
Curie, who said,
“It is because we have not organized the world from
a place of genuine humanism that we are forced to
employ humanitarianism as a way of remedying
this major shortcoming”.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
France for its initiative to convene today’s meeting and
Foreign Minister Le Drian for presiding over it. I would
also like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Amina
Mohammed, Director-General Robert Mardini and
Ms. Grosjean for their briefings.
As we speak, the coronavirus disease continues
to ravage the world. Food security in some developing
countries is deteriorating. In particular, conflict areas
and countries face new economic and social challenges
and mounting humanitarian needs. Meanwhile, violence
against humanitarian workers continues unabated.
Humanitarian issues are increasingly politicized. The
negative humanitarian impact of unilateral sanctions
continues to emerge.

S/PV. 8822

law and avoid committing any violence against
humanitarian workers.
Recipient Governments must assume the primary
responsibility of preserving the humanitarian space. The
United Nations and other international organizations
should step up coordination and cooperation and assist
countries concerned in improving their institutional
framework and capacity-building to protect the
humanitarian space.
To preserve the humanitarian space, we must stop
the politicization of humanitarian issues. Humanitarian
aid should follow the principles of impartiality,
neutrality, objectivity and independence, and should
remain humanitarian in nature. It should never be
a tool for geopolitical rivalry and manipulation.
Humanitarian operations should be in line with the
Charter of the United Nations, General Assembly
resolution 46/182 and international humanitarian law;
respect the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of recipient countries; abide
by their local laws and social norms and refrain from
interfering in their internal affairs. Only in so doing
can we ultimately garner the support of and ensure
cooperation with recipient countries, and preserve the
humanitarian space.

Such complex factors have contributed to the
worsening of the global humanitarian situation and have
seriously jeopardized the effectiveness of humanitarian
operations. The international community must uphold
and practise true multilateralism, increase humanitarian
input, strengthen solidarity and collaboration and
ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access.

To protect humanitarian space, unilateral sanctions
should be lifted without delay. Illegal, unilateral
sanctions prevent countries concerned from having
access to requisite humanitarian supplies; disrupt
their economic and social order; hinder humanitarian
workers from performing their duties and interfere
with their operations. It is challenging for the so-called
humanitarian exemptions to make much difference
on the ground. The international community should
encourage countries concerned to immediately lift
unilateral sanctions, eliminate their negative impact
and create the conditions conducive to international
humanitarian operations.

Ensuring the safety of humanitarian workers is the
key to preserving the humanitarian space. According
to the Secretary-General’s report on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict (S/2021/423), across 19
countries affected by armed conflict, 99 humanitarian
workers were killed in 2020. Humanitarian workers
provide relief and assistance to those in need, yet their
own life and safety are under constant threat. That
situation should not continue. We must urge all parties
to conflict to adhere to international humanitarian

The violation of the humanitarian space is
essentially a regrettable by-product of armed conflict.
The solution must be focused on the root causes of
conflict and on adopting a systematic approach.
Experience has proved that sustainable development
is the right way to break the vicious circle of extreme
poverty, intercommunal tensions and violent conflict.
It is the key to achieving long-term stability and lasting
peace. Countries must adopt a long-term view, more
effectively implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable

21-1935819/23

S/PV.8822

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

Development and prioritize poverty eradication. The
international community should persevere in political
dialogue, mediation and negotiations, among others,
for the prevention and peaceful settlement of conflict,
while increasing development assistance to countries in
conflict, so as to help them achieve more inclusive and
sustainable development as soon as possible.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We wish to recognize the participation of the Foreign
Ministers and to thank the briefers for their remarks.
Attacks against humanitarian workers and the
infrastructure needed to sustain aid delivery have
risen dramatically since the start of the coronavirus
disease pandemic. Heightened and extended volatility
in conflict-affected countries and regions has also led
to an exponential increase in the need for humanitarian
assistance. Collectively, we have advocated for the
preservation and expansion of humanitarian access in
the light of the adverse effects of multiple crises on
civilian populations, increased displacement and the
intensification of violence against humanitarian workers.
The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs estimates that over 235 million persons
globally are in need of humanitarian assistance in
2021. In conflict settings, last year saw a widespread
increase in instability, resulting from the compounding
effects of the health crisis, contracting economies and
climate-related security risks. Accompanying that
rapidly eroding humanitarian context is the increased
incidence of fatal and non-fatal violence against
humanitarian workers, the overwhelming majority of
which is committed against national staff.

16/07/2021

peace agreements, the principles, protocols and ground
rules must emerge through collective dialogue.
Secondly, national counter-terrorism legislation
and policies must avoid criminalizing critical actions
undertaken by humanitarian organizations and workers.
Similarly, sanctions and counter-terrorism measures,
set out in various Security Council resolutions, must
not restrict the ability of humanitarian workers to
undertake relief efforts. In fact, there is greater need
for more systematic monitoring and reporting on the
impact of sanctions regimes on humanitarian actions.
Efforts to systematize reporting can be undertaken
by the Secretariat. Humanitarian impact and risk
assessments should precede the establishment and
renewal of all sanctions regimes.
We also wish to add that notwithstanding the
existing capacity challenges at the national level,
States must be supported in their efforts to improve
accountability mechanisms to end impunity for violence
against civilians and humanitarian workers, in keeping
with resolutions 2175 (2014) and 2286 (2016).
Adequate resourcing is needed to protect
humanitarian space. That includes ensuring sustainable
financing for security efforts to protect civilians and
humanitarian staff. Humanitarian organizations
must be able to access funding to support training
for context analyses, negotiation skills and improved
communication equipment. Donors should ensure that
their funding agreements provide scope for adequate
and ongoing risk assessment and management,
as a means through which to ensure the safety of
humanitarian workers.

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines takes this
opportunity to make the following recommendations as
we urgently seek to improve the safety of humanitarian
workers and to preserve and increase humanitarian
space to meet the growing needs of civilians in affected
countries and regions.

Finally, and notwithstanding the foregoing, I must
emphasize that humanitarian aid must not be an end
in itself. Similarly, humanitarian aid should not be
used as a tool to impose foreign policy objectives from
afar. Throughout the delivery of humanitarian aid we
must respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the State.

Regarding insights drawn from humanitarian
workers and their experience of brokering access with
diverse and dispersed non-State armed groups, they
note that moral and legal obligation is simply not enough
to secure adherence to international humanitarian law.
In practice, there is no one-size-fits-all to negotiating
access. Context-specific, pragmatic arrangements
become necessary. Whether through multi-agency
negotiations with parties to conflict or more formal

In closing, I wish to underscore the huge
debt of collective gratitude owed to humanitarian
staff. Increasingly, they provide the only source of
psychosocial support for women and children surviving
sexual violence, critical food and water supplies for
civilians on the brink of starvation, and health services
to increased numbers of displaced persons. We mourn
the loss of those killed in the service of civilians and
call for the release of those kidnapped. In honour of

20/23

21-19358

16/07/2021

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

their memory and sacrifice, we have an enormous
responsibility to engage in decisive actions that protect
and support all persons providing critical relief in
conflict settings.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I am pleased to welcome you, Mr. Minister,
as President of the Security Council. I would like to
thank Deputy Secretary-General Ms. Mohammed, the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, Mr. Mardini, and Ms. Grosjean for their
informative and substantive briefings.
The theme of today’s discussion is truly multifaceted.
Of course, we condemn unlawful actions committed
against humanitarian workers and advocate providing
them with unhindered humanitarian access, subject to
the consent of the host Government. Time is often of
the essence in the success of humanitarian efforts to
alleviate suffering and often to save lives. However, we
have recently witnessed a dangerous trend in a number
of countries bearing the brunt of armed conflict in
which the Governments of affected States have been
accused of deliberately blocking humanitarian access.
Without providing explanations or bothering to try to
understand what is going on, many donors believe they
have the right to dictate their will to sovereign States
and threaten them with investigations. We remind
our colleagues that all humanitarian activities must
be carried out in strict compliance with the guiding
principles on humanitarian assistance set out in the
annex of General Assembly resolution 46/182. A key
principle is the consent of the State to the provision of
assistance and subsequent coordination with that State
of every step taken in the framework of humanitarian
operations. That is the basis of the security, neutrality
and impartiality of humanitarian work.
In this context, I note that the concept being
actively promoted in the United Nations — the socalled humanitarian space — raises many questions.
At its core and hidden behind eloquent slogans is, in
essence, a desire to grant humanitarian workers some
kind of immunity in agreeing upon and carrying out
their work. In practice, that could lead to a disregard
for sovereignty in the initiation and management of
humanitarian assistance. That is the polar opposite of
the principles of the aforementioned General Assembly
resolution 46/182.
The humanitarian situation in territories controlled
by terrorists and their associates is of particular concern.

S/PV. 8822

The task of protecting humanitarian staff in such
territories has become considerably more difficult. As a
rule, militants blatantly flout the norms of international
humanitarian law and, in general, the principles and
rules of human conduct. Terrorism can be countered
only through joint efforts. In order to do that, we must
reject double standards and to stop exonerating — either
politically or through terminology — those who profess
the tenets of extremism and terrorism.
The importance of unfettered delivery of
humanitarian assistance in zones of armed conflict is
indisputable. At the same time, the goal of creating
conditions conducive to the work of humanitarian
organizations and medical staff should not in itself
be used as an excuse for States to fail to uphold their
obligations to counter terrorism. It is unacceptable for
medical and humanitarian organizations to support
terrorists directly or indirectly, thereby undermining
international counter-terrorism efforts. In that
connection, resolution 2462 (2019) remains relevant
in that it dictates that, when implementing relevant
measures, States should take into account only
humanitarian activities carried out impartially and in
strict conformity with the requirements of international
humanitarian law.
We have promoted accountability for crimes under
international law. Unfortunately, the experiment of the
Security Council referring situations to the International
Criminal Court has been a failure. The same is true of
the practice of establishing ad hoc tribunals. Against
that backdrop, some States have sought to prosecute
suspects on their territory on the basis of the concept of
universal criminal jurisdiction. We have always been
very cautious about the widespread use of that concept,
which, as experience shows, is subject to abuse. It is
precisely for that reason that lengthy discussions on this
subject in the United Nations have been unproductive,
without a hope of ever reaching consensus.
In these circumstances, we believe that the main
role in eradicating impunity should be played by the
national judicial systems of the States where the
alleged violations took place, and the accused should be
prosecuted in accordance with the severity of the crime.
Ending the vicious practice of sanctions and
blockades is key to overcoming humanitarian crises.
Unfortunately, the increased use of politically motivated
unilateral sanctions has become a modern reality.
This spiteful practice, especially the use of various

21-1935821/23

S/PV.8822

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

secondary restrictions, including extraterritorial ones,
infringes on the sovereignty of States and interferes in
their domestic affairs. The use of unilateral sanctions
to overthrow so-called undesirable regimes through
economic strangulation or by fomenting political
unrest in countries is particularly reprehensible. Such
actions demonstrate an archaic bloc mentality and lead
to the intentional build-up of purely confrontational
potential in international relations. Sanctions are not
commensurate with the principles of international
cooperation and restrict it unnecessarily even in those
areas where there is a real need for and tangible interest
in pooling efforts to combat contemporary challenges.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important meeting, and I thank the
briefers for their presentations. We also welcome the
participation of the Deputy Secretary-General, Foreign
Ministers and other high-level representatives.
International
humanitarian
law
is
clear — humanitarian aid workers and facilities should
never be targets. Yet, we see widespread and increasing
violence directed against humanitarian workers, their
activities and their spaces. This is unacceptable.
Protecting civilians, including the effective
protection of humanitarian personnel and assets, must
be a priority for all parties to conflicts. Upholding
humanitarian principles is key as humanitarian
organizations negotiate and secure humanitarian access,
which must not be unlawfully denied or withheld.
As we know, denial of humanitarian access affects
the most vulnerable in armed conflict, in particular
children. It is critical that humanitarian organizations
can carry out their life-saving mandates safely, without
interference or politicization. We have all seen the
deadly consequences when that is not the case.
The Security Council has just unanimously adopted
resolution 2585 (2021) in order to secure humanitarian
access to some of the most vulnerable people affected
by the conflict in Syria. Cross-border humanitarian
assistance remains a lifeline for millions of people.
Access is negotiated by humanitarian actors on a
daily basis as they engage with local communities and
authorities. Such front-line negotiations are complex
and done best by the humanitarian organizations
themselves. While community acceptance is crucial,
it is not sufficient to ensure the safety of aid workers.
Humanitarians must be able to engage directly with
parties to conflicts, including non-State armed
22/23

16/07/2021

groups. That is why regular and consistent high-level
access diplomacy by donors and senior humanitarian
representatives is required and must be coordinated
with organizations on the ground.
Continuing attacks on health-care and humanitarian
personnel is a worrying trend we must address,
including through effective data gathering, monitoring
and dissemination. That is why we support the World
Health Organization’s monitoring system for attacks on
health care as a way to better understand the context and
dynamics of attacks. Norway also supports a focus on
increased protection of non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), including through the International NGO
Safety Organisation’s Conflict and Humanitarian Data
Centre project, which enables vital, yet unprecedented
data-sharing among NGOs. We must use such data to
craft better responses, and we must cooperate and share
best practices. We are also taking domestic measures
to that end.
Under the Norwegian penal code, all targeting
of medical and health-care personnel, facilities,
material, units or vehicles constitute war crimes,
and we encourage all actors to explore domestic and
global measures that will strengthen compliance with
international humanitarian law and the protection of
civilians, including humanitarian workers.
When humanitarian workers are attacked, less
people are protected and assisted. Accountability
is necessary to reverse that trend. Allegations of
violations of international humanitarian law must be
thoroughly, impartially and effectively investigated.
Similarly, accountability for violations must be ensured
through credible national or international criminal
justice mechanisms. In that regard, we emphasize that
the mission and mandate of the International Criminal
Court is as crucial today as ever.
I would like to turn now to counter-terrorism
measures and sanctions, which are vital tools to
address threats to international peace and security.
Sanctions directed at those who violate international
humanitarian law can serve as a deterrent and help
safeguard the humanitarian space. However, concerns
raised by humanitarians about unintended negative
impact of counter-terrorism measures and sanctions
must be taken into consideration. Legal frameworks
should include necessary safeguards and exemptions to
ensure that sanctions and counter-terrorism measures
do not impede the ability of humanitarian organizations
21-19358

16/07/2021

Protection of civilians in armed conflict

to operate in line with their humanitarian mandate and
international humanitarian law.
In that regard, Norway welcomes the recently
adopted resolution 2582 (2021), on the sanctions regime
regarding the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
hope the strengthened text translates into much-needed
protection of humanitarian workers in the field.

S/PV. 8822

Tangible improvements on the ground require
continuous action and commitment. We encourage
all to increase their financial and political support to
principled humanitarian action and to safeguarding the
humanitarian space.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

21-1935823/23
