A /76/PV.34

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

34

th plenary meeting
Monday, 15 November 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 124 (continued)
Strengthening of the United Nations system
Draft resolution (A/76/L.8/Rev.1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.8/Rev.1.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): My delegation thanks
you very much, Mr. President, for convening today’s
meeting for the consideration by the General Assembly
of draft resolution A/76/L.8/Rev.1, entitled “Followup to the report of the Secretary-General entitled ‘Our
Common Agenda’”. I have the honour to introduce the
draft resolution on behalf of a cross-regional group of
countries that forms the core group of sponsors, namely,
Qatar, Denmark, Fiji, Georgia, Mexico, Singapore,
Sweden and my own country, Rwanda. We thank all
155 co-sponsors of the draft resolution and invite all
other Member States to consider sponsoring it from the
floor during this meeting.
We wish to express our sincere appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for your leadership and personal
engagement, which helped us to reach consensus on the
revised draft resolution submitted for action. We also
thank the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia,
Ambassador Abdallah Al-Mouallimi, for his role in
facilitating the discussions to achieve consensus. We are
grateful to all Member States for their constructive and
active engagement on this procedural draft resolution.

We wish to focus our statement on three points:
first, the purpose of the draft resolution; secondly, the
process that led to it; and, thirdly, our hope and promise.
On the purpose, there is one, and only one, purpose
to this draft resolution, that is, to follow up on the report
of the Secretary-General entitled Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982). We believe that it is essential to follow up
on the report for two reasons. First, we believe that the
issues covered in the report are of critical importance to
our countries and peoples. Secondly, we wish to follow
up on the report that we, the Member States, asked the
Secretary-General to prepare and present to us. That
is why we intentionally aimed for, and kept, the draft
resolution procedural.
A few of our colleagues suggested that we wait to
initiate the follow-up process to the Secretary-General’s
report. The report was submitted to us on 10 September,
a few days before the end of the seventy-fifth session of
the General Assembly. Today, in the third month of the
seventy-sixth session, we believe that it is not too early
to start a follow-up process. We also believe that it is
important to devote sufficient time during the seventysixth session to the substantive consideration of the
important proposals and recommendations contained
in the Secretary-General’s report.
We are also mindful that not all our delegations have
the same resources, and we know from experience that
lengthy procedural processes place a heavier burden on
smaller delegations.
On the process, throughout the process that led to
draft resolution A/76/L.8/Rev.1, we were guided by the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-33806 (E)

*2133806*

A/76/PV.34

need to be fully inclusive, while remaining focused
on the purpose of the procedural draft resolution.
As all Member States will recall, we began with an
informal plenary in early October, when we held open,
inclusive consultations and carefully listened to the
proposals and advice of Member States. Thereafter, we
circulated a document entitled “Possible elements for a
draft resolution” to all Member States on 14 October.
That first “zero” draft was circulated in advance of
an open, formal meeting held on 18 October, to which
all Member States were invited. Following further
engagement and discussions, we circulated another
revised draft resolution in response to the views
expressed by Member States at the informal meetings
of the General Assembly, which ran through October to
early November.
Following the informal plenary meetings of the
General Assembly, we circulated yet another revision of
the draft resolution based on additional proposals from
Member States. Throughout the process, we remained
open and continued to engage with all Member States,
while seeking additional clarifications.
We also received from a group of Member States
written proposed amendments to the revised draft
resolution, circulated on 3 November, which were
discussed with the proponent and led to the revised
draft resolution that we are considering this afternoon.
As we said before, in the end we may not agree on
all the recommendations in the report, but we ought to
agree to send a message to the world that we are ready to
work together on our common agenda. We are delighted
that the Assembly, with a consensus adoption, will be
sending the strongest possible signal.
With regard to our hope and promise, it is our
hope that the spirit of constructive engagement,
flexibility and focus on making progress that guided
us throughout the process that led to this consensus
draft resolution will continue to prevail as we embark
on the substantive consideration of the proposals and
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General’s
report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982). As the crossregional core group of sponsors that submitted the draft
resolution, we are committed to remaining actively and
constructively engaged in the follow-up process. We are
determined to work with all Member States to ensure
that the United Nations is able and capable to respond
to all current and future global challenges.
2/7

15/11/2021

The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/76/L.8/Rev.1.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of position, may I remind delegations that explanations
are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): The Pakistan delegation is
willing to join in the consensus adoption of the draft
resolution contained in document A/76/L.8/Rev.1, on
follow-up to the report of the Secretary-General entitled
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
As is known, my delegation, together with some
others, had expressed certain concerns with regard to
the content of the original version of the draft resolution
and the process relating to its consideration. We are most
grateful to you, Mr. President, for convening informal
consultations under your auspices to promote agreement
on the draft resolution. Under your guidance and with
a display of constructive engagement and flexibility on
both sides, we were able to achieve a draft text, which the
Assembly will hopefully be able to adopt by consensus.
I would like in particular to express my appreciation
to my colleague the Permanent Representative of
Singapore, Ambassador Gafoor, for his imaginative and
constructive approach in negotiating the agreed draft
text, and to my brother the Permanent Representative
of Saudi Arabia, Ambassador Al-Mouallimi, for his
mediation efforts and the delicious Arabic coffee,
which fuelled the spirit of compromise.
My delegation expressed its appreciation to the
Secretary-General for the submission of the report on
our common agenda. The draft resolution to be adopted
will enable Member States to give close consideration
to the rich and substantive report submitted by the
Secretary-General in response to the request of the
General Assembly in its seventy-fifth anniversary
declaration (resolution 75/1).
We look forward to being informed by the SecretaryGeneral of the proposals in the report on which he has
mandates within agreed frameworks, such as the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, the Sustainable
Development Goals and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, and to be closely consulted on his endeavour
to accelerate the implementation of those agreed
frameworks, which must remain our highest priority.
We also look forward to working under your
guidance. Mr. President, to give intergovernmental
21-33806

15/11/2021

consideration within the Assembly to the host of
new proposals advanced in the Secretary-General’s
report. We trust that that governmental process will be
organized in ways that enable Member States to closely
consider and decide on each of the report’s proposals.
Effective multilateralism, under the umbrella of an
empowered United Nations system, can be promoted
only if it enjoys the widest possible support among
States Members of the United Nations. Pakistan will
contribute constructively to achieving that objective.
Mr. Takht Ravanchi (Islamic Republic of Iran):
My delegation would like to express its appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for
facilitating the discussions aimed at bridging the gaps
within the different views regarding the adoption of
procedural draft resolution A/76/L.8/Rev.1.
We are grateful to the co-sponsors of the draft
resolution and the like-minded group for their
cooperation and flexibility to reach consensus. I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for the submission
of his forward-looking report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), which encompasses the challenges that
we face and presents a range of recommendations in
order to address them. Since the report’s submission,
Member States have presented different views and
observations regarding the several new concepts and
proposals contained in the report necessitating close
and careful consideration by Member States. We
wish to emphasize that the successful consideration
of the Secretary-General’s report will greatly depend
on the continuation of the spirit of compromise and
understanding. Due to its extensive implications for
the work of the Organization, the report will need to
be considered through timely and in-depth discussions,
and any decision on the recommendations contained in
the report requires negotiations among Member States
within an intergovernmental process.
Bearing in mind the fact that the report contains
a number of proposals that fall within the existing
mandates, we need to avoid duplication and the
imposition of undue budgetary implications on
the Organization.
My delegation is prepared to actively engage
in the consideration of this important report within
the intergovernmental process, and we look forward
to continued engagement with the Secretariat in
that endeavour.

A/76/PV.34

Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): Egypt will join the
consensus and will co-sponsor draft resolution
A/76/L.8/Rev.1, entitled “Follow-up to the report of the
Secretary-General entitled ‘Our Common Agenda’”.
We highly appreciate your kind efforts, Mr. President,
towards achieving consensus on this important draft
resolution. In the same vein, we highly value the
work of the Permanent Representatives of Pakistan
and Singapore to that end. Equally, we of course
also thank my dearest brother Ambassador Abdallah
Al-Mouallimi, Permanent Representative of Saudi
Arabia, and all those who introduced amendments to
the draft resolution so that it was consensual.
During the relevant General Assembly debate
on 27 October, my delegation called for avoiding
polarization in the follow-up process to Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982). The events of the past two weeks
proved that our point was correct. We believe that the
best way to avoid polarization is ensuring transparency,
preserving Member States’ ownership of the follow-up
and implementation processes and working in a spirit
of consensus.
Our Common Agenda requires further consideration
and discussion to make sure that its suggested rich
proposals will be reflected in a form that is acceptable
to all Member States. We look forward to the President
of the General Assembly announcing and shortly
launching an intergovernmental follow-up process that
grants all Member States an opportunity to express
their views, consider the very rich proposals brought
to the table by the Secretary-General and implement
the agreed recommendations efficiently and smoothly.
Only through such a process will we be able to do Our
Common Agenda justice and ensure that it truly is our
common agenda collectively within the United Nations.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position before action is taken on the
draft resolution.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/76/L.8/Rev.1.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/76/L.8/Rev.1 and in addition to the delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have also become

21-338063/7

A/76/PV.34

sponsors of draft resolution A/76/L.8/Rev.1: Armenia,
Bahamas, Bahrain, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Cameroon, Chile, China,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Egypt, Guinea,
Haiti, Indonesia, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, the Marshall Islands, Paraguay,
the Philippines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Solomon Islands, Suriname, Thailand, Trinidad
and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Uganda, the United States
of America, Vanuatu, Yemen, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/76/L.8/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/76/L.8/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 76/6).
The President: Before giving the floor to speakers
in explanation of position after adoption, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by representatives from their seats.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): A year ago, we met to
commemorate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the
United Nations and address the way forward to tackle
the looming challenges ahead of us. In that spirit, we
asked the Secretary-General to report back with his
recommendations to advance our common agenda.
We deeply appreciate the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral in rising to the task and giving us a very
substantial and innovative report as an initial basis
for Member States to work on. The report presented to
Member States references many fundamental concepts
to our societies, such as solidarity, trust, inclusion and
participation. If we want to lead the world in tackling
our current challenges, we should do it also by our own
example, applying those principles in the relationships
among Member States themselves and between them
and the United Nations system.
The report also contains a substantial number
of concrete proposals that will demand a reasonable
amount of time for all members to analyse and consult
with their capitals. That is not intended to slow the
process but to give the Secretary-General’s report the
respect it deserves by subjecting it to detailed analysis
before acting on it.
Those elements of trust, participation and due
consideration are the ones in which Brazil roots its
position on Our Common Agenda (A/75/982). At
4/7

15/11/2021

the same time that we welcome our ability to reach
consensus on a relevant and high-impact resolution
(resolution 76/6), we would like to make a few remarks
with regard to the process that led us here.
The first point I would like to raise concerns the
preparation of the document, which was done through
a process of outreach to other delegations that — wellintentioned as it might have been — is not the same as
engaging in negotiations. The fact that it took substantial
efforts just to hold discussions about the text and to
have our concerns considered is a worrisome sign. We
sincerely hope that will not be the way forward on such
an important issue and that the principles of solidarity,
trust and broad participation stressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report will prevail in the next phase.
Secondly, I would like to emphasize the centrality
of Member State ownership. The United Nations
system is the core of the multilateral system, which
grounds itself in respect for each member’s sovereignty
and interests. Its work should reflect the collective
will of Member States after proper consideration and
negotiation. Consultation among and with Member
States is inescapable, for this is an Organization created
for them to lead and in which they are the ones that
truly understand its political process. We should not
endanger those fundamentals by approving action on
mandates that we do not have clarity or reasonable time
to consult on.
As stated at the beginning, we would like to get this
right. To that end, we need a precise and participative
modality to carry the work forward. We will keep
advocating for that as a way to ensure that all countries
have their interests and concerns heard and incorporated
in the discussions. Unfortunately, that has not always
been the case, as we observed recently in the lead-up to
the United Nations Food Systems Summit.
To conclude, I would like to express my gratitude to
you, Mr. President, for bringing us all together to find
a way towards consensus, as well as to all those who
showed openness to dialogue and worked very hard and
constructively to bridge their differences and achieve a
balanced resolution. Let us be inspired by that spirit of
openness and cooperation in the work ahead of us on
Our Common Agenda.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): As
on previous occasions, we would like at the outset to
highlight our gratitude for the work of the SecretaryGeneral in elaborating his report entitled Our Common
21-33806

15/11/2021

Agenda (A/75/982) as the inspiration for an intense and
ambitious effort that will require the collective work of
all Member States.
We would also like to extend our gratitude to
those countries that resolutely dedicated themselves to
achieving the adoption of resolution 76/6 by consensus
in a way that considers the legitimate concerns and
aspirations of all. Argentina joined that consensus
because we believe it is the only possible way to tackle
matters as pertinent as those contained in the report of
the Secretary-General. Our Common Agenda touches
upon issues of great importance to the international
community. That is why we would once again like
to underscore how vital it is to conclude a process
of in-depth discussion among Member States in the
framework of the General Assembly.
My country would like to emphasize that the
follow-up to the mandate of the document should be
the outcome of an agreement between Member States,
respecting the time frames that each fundamental issue
requires for a comprehensive in-depth discussion. An
intergovernmental dialogue in that regard would make
it possible to incorporate a global vision in the document
that reflects the expectations and needs of all.

A/76/PV.34

We join the Secretary-General in his repeated calls
for strengthening multilateralism and international
solidarity. At the same time, we are convinced that
more robust multilateralism and a more effective
Organization are possible only if we fully respect the
Charter of the United Nations. Therefore, the follow-up
process to the report that is mandated in the resolution
should be based on an unequivocal reaffirmation of
the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter
and the intergovernmental nature of the Organization.
Moreover, that process must be led in a balanced,
transparent and inclusive manner for all Member States.
The Secretary-General’s report includes a broad
raft of initiatives and proposals of various natures, with
implications for the scope of the United Nations and the
mandates and working methods of its organs, as well as
for the role of Member States and the Secretariat and
the involvement of other actors.
As noted in the debate on the report, the
recommendations it contains warrant the full
consideration of Member States. It would therefore be
counterproductive to impose the vision of a certain
group of delegations over others or take a decision
on the implementation of certain recommendations
without consensus in that regard.

Finally, we would like to acknowledge the need
for concerted joint efforts by the Secretary-General
and Member States to conduct discussions and
subsequently achieve implementation as the outcome
of a genuine consensus.

For our part, we reiterate our commitment to be
participate constructively in the intergovernmental
discussions on the proposals in the report in defence
of multilateralism, international law and the Charter of
the United Nations.

Mrs. Guerra Tamayo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation would like to thank you, Mr. President,
and your Office, for your efforts to drive forward the
dialogue and provide the necessary space for discussion
that has allowed for the adoption by consensus of
resolution 76/6.

Ms. Shmat (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): The
Belarusian delegation has always attached great
importance to, and will always support the principles of,
multilateral diplomacy, on which the largest multilateral
Organization in the world, the United Nations, is based.

We are also grateful for the determination to find
compromise-based solutions shown by the lead sponsors
of the resolution, as well as the leadership shown by the
Permanent Representatives of Saudi Arabia, Singapore
and Pakistan to ensure that the intergovernmental
follow-up process to the report of the Secretary-General
entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) gets off to a
good start. The report addresses issues of a particularly
crucial nature that concern all States. Therefore, the
adoption of the resolution without a vote constitutes an
important step forward.

Among the four indivisible and mutually
strengthening principle of the United Nations, we
would like to focus on one particular principle: the
United Nations should be at the heart of agreements for
the actions of States to achieve common goals.
In connection with the adoption of resolution 76/6
and the follow-up process to the report of the SecretaryGeneral entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), we
would like to express Belarus’ position after joining the
consensus on the resolution.
First, we would like to thank the Secretary-General
for preparing such a comprehensive and insightful

21-338065/7

A/76/PV.34

report. We take note of the work that has been done, the
results of which will be used in the future to conduct an
intergovernmental process with the due participation of
Member States.
Secondly, we believe that, given the unifying
nature of that process, the upcoming negotiations must
be conducted in full transparency and without undue
haste. They should take into account the views of all
Member States and be held in strict compliance with
the working methods of the General Assembly.
Thirdly. we note that any future process must be
aimed at mobilizing efforts in the framework of already
existing documents, including the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
Fourthly, we reiterate Belarus’ position on the
inviolable character of the cornerstone document of the
multilateral system, namely, the Charter of the United
Nations. We should also like to recall that all Member
States have undertaken the obligation to strictly adhere
to the provisions of the Charter, which prevail over all
other obligations derived from any other international
agreements and treaties.
Mrs. Maitra (India): India is pleased to join
the consensus on the adoption of resolution 76/6.
We appreciate the presentation of the report of the
Secretary-General entitled Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) in response to the mandate given by our
leaders in the Declaration on the Commemoration of
the Seventy-fifth Anniversary of the United Nations.
We also deeply appreciate the role that you played,
Mr. President, in facilitating the consultations on the
text of the resolution that led to its consensual adoption.
We support the remarks delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Brazil concerning the process leading
up to today’s adoption and going forward.
We view the resolution as a procedural first step
in the process of Member State-led considerations of
the various proposals contained in the report. It is our
understanding that, as we proceed, the approval and
implementation of those proposals will maintain the
Member State-centric character of all United Nations
processes. India will be a constructive and active
participant in any such process.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for seizing upon a moment in history that he
6/7

15/11/2021

himself refers to as “an inflection point”, reminding us
that we have reached a point of no return. However, we
are pleased by the adoption of resolution 76/6.
Conflicts across the planet appear to be becoming
worse. Climate change continues to threaten our very
existence. Millions and millions of people around the
world face poverty and violence, deprived of basic
human necessities such as drinking water, meals to
maintain their bodies and souls and education.
As the Secretary-General puts it, there is no turning
back for us. We have to make just one choice to uphold
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) if we are to survive as
a human race. We have been reminded that the time has
come to bind ourselves together in global solidarity;
renew the social contract between States and subjects;
rally around science and knowledge; look afresh
at performance indicators with regard to economic
prosperity and progress; think in the long term; and
take seriously the intergenerational trust required to
put in place stronger multilateral systems rooted in the
principles of the United Nations.
We have before us a very comprehensive and
ambitious common agenda. May I, however, hasten to
strike a note of caution with regard to a few matters.
We would do well to remember that the adults of
today were the young people of yesterday. We bring
with us intelligence, rich cultures, knowledge and
resources to be handed down to the young people of
today, who will be the adults of tomorrow and enjoy the
benefits of that heritage and legacy.
It is therefore important to acknowledge that the
concept of intergenerational trust must be understood
in its correct perspective. Neither we adults nor young
people can abdicate those roles to either party. We need
each other. We are a seamless extension of life’s own
way of propagating itself. The symbiotic relationship
must be nourished, propagated and preserved in
perpetuity for the sake of the successful execution of
that common agenda.
We would also do well to remember that the current
crisis is nothing but a misadventure of scientific activity
in studies with regard to the gain-of-function research
on pathogens. We must be careful not to abdicate our
right to a dignified human existence — not even to
science. We cannot make science our master, although
we would venture into the uncharted seas of science
21-33806

15/11/2021

in the endeavour to achieve a better life on Earth
for humankind.
I am pleased that we have found consensus today
on resolution 76/6, on the basis of which we recognize
our collective well-being and will endeavour to find a
basis for consultations. We have found a consensus and
requested the Secretary-General to engage and consult
with members. You, Sir, as President of the General
Assembly, will play a vital supervisory role in oversight
to begin inclusive intergovernmental consultations on
the various proposals. Sri Lanka supports that initiative
and assures the Assembly that it will spare no effort to
pursue Our Common Agenda in line with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position after adoption.
I would like to thank all members for demonstrating
our unity of purpose on resolution 76/6. The report of
the Secretary-General entitled Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) offers a vision of a future grounded
in solidarity and common cause, in which global
decision-making is more representative. Our Common
Agenda presents ideas that build on the achievements
of multilateral cooperation and can make a tangible
difference in people’s lives.
I listened carefully to members’ views during the
plenary meetings that I convened on Our Common
Agenda last month. While I heard different opinions
and concerns on the proposals contained in the report,

A/76/PV.34

I also heard a common purpose from Member States to
consider those issues carefully and to go forward hand
in hand.
Thanks to the efforts of all delegations and a
willingness to work together, we are not a divided
house today. I would like to express my gratitude
to all delegations and extend a special mention to
the Permanent Representative of Singapore and the
Permanent Representative of Pakistan.
I would also like to acknowledge in particular
the contribution and efforts of the Permanent
Representative of Saudi Arabia, Ambassador Abdallah
Al-Mouallimi, who agreed, upon my personal request,
to offer his good offices to bring all parties together.
Ambassador Al-Mouallimi has given new meaning to
Arabic coffee diplomacy. I am awaiting an invitation
from him in that regard.
Resolution 76/6, adopted by consensus, provides me
with a mandate to take the next steps. I am committed
to ensuring that the process is open to, and inclusive
of, all Member States. I intend to communicate with
members in the coming days on the next steps in that
regard. Let us work together with a unity of purpose,
for the world is but one family with one agenda: Our
Common Agenda.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 124.
The meeting rose at 3.50 p.m.

21-338067/7
