A /77/PV.39

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-seventh session

39th plenary meeting

Monday, 21 November 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kőrösi  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Hungary)

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Agenda item 127
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
Report of the Secretary-General (A/77/277)
Notes by the Secretary-General (A/77/95/Rev.1
and A/77/158)
(a) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union
(b) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Draft resolution (A/77/L.18)
(c) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Asian-African Legal Consultative
Organization
(d) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States
Draft resolution (A/77/L.17)
(e) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Latin American and Caribbean Economic
System
(f) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of American States
(g) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe

(h) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Caribbean Community
(i) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Cooperation Organization
(j) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie
(k) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/77/L.4)
(l) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Council of Europe
(m) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Economic Community of Central African States
(n) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons
(o) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Black Sea Economic Cooperation Organization
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Pacific Islands Forum
(q) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Draft resolution (A/77/L.12/Rev.1)
(r) Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
Draft resolution (A/77/L.14)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-70328 (E)

*2270328*

A/77/PV.39

(s) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(t) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Collective Security Treaty Organization
Draft resolution (A/77/L.13)
(u) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Central European Initiative
Draft resolution (A/77/L.19)
(v) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM
Draft resolution (A/77/L.15)
(w) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Commonwealth of Independent States
Draft resolution (A/77/L.16)
(x) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Organization for Migration
(y) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.20)
(z) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea
(aa) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD)
Draft resolution (A/77/L.21)
The President: Document A/77/95/Rev.1/Add.1,
containing the prepared statement of the Executive
Secretary of the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization,
will be issued at a later date.
I now give the floor to the representative of Panama
to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.4.
Ms. Concepción Jaramillo (Panama): (spoke in
Spanish): It is an honour for the delegation of Panama to
introduce for the consideration of the States Members
of the United Nations the draft resolution contained in
document A/77/L.4, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”.
2/30

21/11/2022

Panama makes this introduction in its capacity
as Chairman of the Preparatory Commission of the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization,
which meets in Vienna, for the period 2022.
In order to ensure the rapid and effective
establishment of the future Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty Organization, created under
resolution 50/245, the signatory States adopted
resolution CTBT/MSS/Res/1, of 19 November 1996,
which established the Preparatory Commission for the
organization, and requested the Secretary-General,
in accordance with resolution 50/245, “to provide the
services required to initiate the work of the Preparatory
Commission”, thereby establishing the basis of a
cooperation that has borne fruit over time.
That cooperation was formalized on 15 June 2000
with the adoption of resolution 54/280 (see A/54/PV.98),
which established the agreement concerning the relationship between the United Nations and the Preparatory Commission, which constitutes a key support mechanism for the work carried out towards the entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
(CTBT), with the special cooperation of the SecretaryGeneral through the regular convocation of the Conference established in article XIV of the Treaty, which to
date has 186 signatory States, of which 170 have ratified their adherence.
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty has
established a powerful global standard against nuclear
explosions. We take this opportunity to call on States
to refrain from any action that could frustrate or
weaken its objective and purpose. Furthermore, this
is an opportunity to renew our firm determination
to achieve the universality and entry into force
of the CTBT. The Secretary-General’s agenda for
disarmament recognizes that States whose ratifications
are necessary for the Treaty to enter into force have a
special leadership responsibility.
Significant progress has been made in establishing
all elements of the verification regime of the CTBT.
The International Monitoring System is 93 per cent
complete, with 303 of the 337 certified facilities. It
is worth highlighting the advanced capabilities of
the International Data Centre and the elements of
the verification regime through on-site inspection.
Moreover, in a substantial way, the civil and scientific
applications of the data provided by the verification
regime, in addition to complying with the core mandate
22-70328

21/11/2022

of the Treaty, continue showing up in new research in
the fields of climate change, disasters risk reduction
and others.
Of note are the cooperative relations between the
Preparatory Commission and the African Commission
on Nuclear Energy; its dialogues with the Organisation
internationale de la Francophonie and with the
League of Arab States, promoting disarmament
and non-proliferation and identifying ways to build
national capacities in technologies associated with the
verification regime; and the extensive efforts identified
in the report of the Executive Secretary, contained in
document CTBT/ES/2021/5 of 8 April.
For all of the aforementioned reasons, and
recognizing the importance of continued collaboration
between the Commission Preparation for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
with the United Nations, Panama submits for the
consideration of delegations this draft resolution,
which is presented biannually, in which that joint
work is recognized and it is decided that the issue be
included in the provisional agenda of the seventyninth session of the General Assembly, under the item
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations”, the sub-item
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization”.
We thank the delegations that have co-sponsored
the draft resolution, and trust that, as in previous years,
it will be adopted without a vote, which will represent
a strong reaffirmation of the international consensus in
support of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty
and its crucial objectives of a world free from the
dangers of nuclear proliferation, through an effective
global ban on nuclear tests.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Cambodia to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.12/Rev.1.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): On behalf of the 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), I have the honour to introduce the draft
resolution contained in document A/77/L.12/Rev.1,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations”.
This year marks the fifty-fifth anniversary of
ASEAN’s establishment. During that long journey,

A/77/PV.39

ASEAN has remained the modus operandi whereby
ASEAN’s centrality has played a key role in
contributing to regional and global peace, security,
stability and sustainable development. ASEAN is a
successful regional organization and has transformed
the region from a poor economy to a fast-growing
world economy. We have deepened and broadened
cooperation and relations with our external partners.
Since the United Nations became a dialogue partner
of ASEAN in 2011, the two organizations have made
significant progress in many areas of cooperation,
ranging from peacekeeping, political-security and
economy to development, as well as sociocultural and
other cross-sectoral fields.
At the twelfth ASEAN-United Nations Summit,
held on 11 November in Phnom Penh, ASEAN leaders
and the Secretary-General underlined the significance
of the implementation of the Plan of Action to Implement
the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership
between the United Nations and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (2021–2025)and reaffirmed
their commitment to strengthening the comprehensive
partnership between the two organizations.
The resolution on cooperation between the
United Nations and ASEAN is a biennial resolution on
the agenda of the General Assembly, which has been
consensually adopted since 2002. The draft resolution
before the Assembly today seeks the enhancement of
the implementation of the Plan of Action to Implement
the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive Partnership
between the United Nations and ASEAN (2021–
2025), with a view to advancing the implementation
of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and further contributing substantially to
our peoples’ social and economic well-being and living
standards. The draft resolution also reinforces our
collective commitment and underscores the importance
of enhancing cooperation between the regional
organizations and the United Nations, as well as among
Member States in areas of mutual interest.
Through several rounds of consultations,
constructive inputs and comments made by Member
States have been incorporated into the draft resolution
to reflect the progress and development of cooperation
between the two organizations over the past two years.
As a result, the whole text of the draft resolution has
been agreed by all Member States. On behalf of ASEAN
member States, I would like to take this opportunity
to express my heartfelt gratitude to all delegations for

22-703283/30

A/77/PV.39

their constructive engagements in the consultation
and negotiation process to achieve a balanced and
substantive draft resolution.
I would like to thank the delegations that have
co-sponsored the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and ASEAN. I would also
like to invite other delegations present at the meeting
today to kindly co-sponsor the draft resolution by
pressing the microphone button.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Armenia to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.13.
Mr. Knyazyan (Armenia): On behalf of the
States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) — the Republic of Armenia,
the Republic of Belarus, the Republic of Kazakhstan,
the Kyrgyz Republic, the Russian Federation and the
Republic of Tajikistan — I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/77/L.13, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization”.
Strengthening
cooperation
between
the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations is key to addressing challenges to security
and the maintenance of international and regional peace
and security. The draft resolution builds on the efforts
of the States members of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization in attaining aims and objectives consistent
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law, including the
practical contribution of the Collective Security Treaty
Organization in combating terrorism and transnational
organized crime through the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and the Political Declaration and Plan of Action on
International Cooperation towards an Integrated and
Balanced Strategy to Counter the World Drug Problem.
Fostering exchange and interaction between the
United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization can play an important role in supporting
multilateral efforts to better address a wide range
of threats and challenges, such as combating drug
trafficking and other forms of transnational organized
crime, as well as countering international terrorism.
The draft resolution calls for increased collaboration
and coordination among the specialized agencies
and programmes of the United Nations system and
4/30

21/11/2022

the CSTO and encourages the development of direct
contacts in the areas of mutual interest.
The text of the draft resolution represents a
technical update of the resolution 75/276, which was
adopted without vote on 28 April 2021. We call on
Member States to vote in favour of the draft resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Angola to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.14.
Ms. Ferreira (Angola): I am honoured to introduce,
under agenda item 127, draft resolution A/77/L.14,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries”,
on behalf of the members of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries (CPLP), namely,
Angola, Brazil, Cabo Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Equatorial
Guinea, Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe
and Timor-Leste.
The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
is a space united by the common use of the Portuguese
language and gives primacy to peace, democracy and the
rule of law, respect for human rights, social justice and
cultural ties. Today it is a community made up of more
than 300 million people on four continents.
The draft resolution before us highlights the
relevance of the Portuguese language in international
affairs and notes the political commitment of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries to
promoting the Portuguese language in international and
regional organizations, including the United Nations and
its specialized agencies, funds and programmes .
The draft resolution illustrates the work consistently
carried out by the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries in achieving its three major objectives of
diplomatic and political coordination, cooperation in all
areas and the promotion of the Portuguese language, and
recalls the adoption of its New Strategic Vision (20162026) by the eleventh Conference of Heads of State and
Government of the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, held in Brasília from 31 October to the
1 November 2016.
The draft resolution outlines the outcomes of the
Conferences of Heads of State and Government of the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries. It refers
to the thirteenth Conference of Heads of State and
Government, held in Luanda on 17 and 18 July 2021,
on the theme “Building and strengthening a common
and sustainable future”, in which the Community
committed to continuing to promote political dialogue,
22-70328

21/11/2022

exchange experience and cooperate in order to enhance
the commitment and partnership for the promotion and
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development in the States members of the Community,
taking into account enhanced and shared solidarity
focused on the needs of the most vulnerable.
The draft resolution takes note of the admission
of Canada, Côte d’Ivoire, Greece, India, Ireland, Peru,
Qatar, Romania, Spain, the United States of America,
the Ibero-American Conference, the Group of Seven
Plus and the European Public Law Organization as new
associate observers during the thirteenth Conference of
Heads of State and Government of the Community of
Portuguese Speaking Countries.
The draft resolution stresses the importance of
partnership and cooperation between the United Nations
and other relevant organizations, including the
Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, to
improve coordination and cooperation in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping, in accordance with their respective
mandates, to increase synergies and ensure the coherence
and complementarity of such efforts.
Please allow me to make an oral revision to paragraph
14, which should read as follows: “Recalls resolution
73/339 and acknowledges the important role played by
the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission and its
various configurations”. While regretting that, due to
unforeseen delays, it was not possible to hold informal
consultations, we reiterate our commitment to returning
to an inclusive negotiating process in future interactions
on this text.
In conclusion, on behalf of the States members of
the CPLP, allow me to express our appreciation to the
countries that have supported the proposed text and
those that have co-sponsored the draft resolution, and we
invite others to do the same. We request the adoption of
the draft resolution, as orally revised, without a vote.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Moldova to introduce
draft resolution A/77/L.15.
Mr. Leucă (Republic of Moldova): In its capacity
as current Chair of the Organization for Democracy
and Economic Development — GUAM, the Republic
of Moldova has the honour to introduce, on behalf
of its sponsors, draft resolution A/77/L.15, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM”.

A/77/PV.39

As a full-fledged international regional organization,
with the distinct vocation of promoting democracy in
its member States and their economic development,
GUAM attaches great importance to cooperation with
the United Nations. That cooperation began in 2004,
when GUAM obtained observer status in the General
Assembly, pursuant to resolution 58/85. Since its sixtyseventh session, the General Assembly has adopted,
without a vote, five resolutions (resolutions 67/109, of
17 December 2012, 69/271, of 2 April 2015, 71/15, of
21 November 2016, 73/14, of 26 November 2018, and
75/8, of 23 November 2020) on cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for Democracy
and Economic Development — GUAM.
The overall goal of draft resolution A/77/L.15
is to further develop cooperation between the
United Nations and GUAM and to better contribute
to the promotion of the vision and principles set
out in the Charter of the United Nations through a
dynamic and substantive partnership. It acknowledges
the efforts of the Organization for Democracy and
Economic Development — GUAM towards advancing
partnership relations with the United Nations and its
Member States. It also takes note of the activity of the
Organization aimed at promoting regional cooperation
in various areas.
Additionally, the draft resolution emphasizes the
importance of strengthening dialogue, cooperation
and coordination between the United Nations system
and GUAM and invites the specialized agencies,
components, organizations, programmes and funds
of the United Nations to cooperate and develop direct
contacts with GUAM for the joint implementation of
projects aimed at the attainment of common objectives.
The draft resolution has been developed on
the basis of the latest resolution with the same title
(resolution 75/8, of 23 November 2020), adopted at
the seventy-fifth session without a vote. The draft text
submitted for adoption this year contains technical
updates and a few language refinements that reflect
developments in the cooperation between the relevant
United Nations entities, such as the United Nations
Economic Commission for Europe, and the Organization
for Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM,
since its last adoption in 2020. It was discussed in
informal consultations in an open and transparent
manner, during which no comments were received from
Member States.

22-703285/30

A/77/PV.39

21/11/2022

I would like to thank the delegations for their
constructive approach and request their kind support
for the draft resolution. We look forward to the adoption
of the draft resolution contained in document A/77/L.15
without a vote, as has been the case in past years.

the negative economic and humanitarian consequences
of the coronavirus disease pandemic and to promoting
trade, economic cooperation and developing transportcommunication networks have continued to feature on
the agenda of this year’s meetings of the CIS countries.

In conclusion, I would also like to express the
sponsors’ firm belief that once the draft resolution is
adopted, it will further strengthen cooperation between
the United Nations and GUAM, thereby contributing
to the promotion of shared objectives in the area of
international peace and development, including the
Sustainable Development Goals.

The draft resolution before us is a technical
update of a biennial resolution. It is based on previous
General Assembly resolutions and reaffirms the
importance of international cooperation in solving
international problems of an economic, social, cultural
or humanitarian character. Welcoming the commitment
of the Commonwealth of Independent States to
intensifying and deepening its cooperation with the
agencies, programmes and funds of the United Nations
system, the draft resolution invites the specialized
agencies and other organizations, programmes and
funds of the United Nations, as well as international
financial institutions, to develop their cooperation with
the CIS.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.16.
Mr.
Rakhmetullin
(Kazakhstan):
The
delegation of the Republic of Kazakhstan, as Chair
of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS)
in 2022, has the honour to introduce and submit
draft resolution A/77/L.16, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Commonwealth of
Independent States”.
In March 1994, the General Assembly granted
the CIS observer status, which laid a foundation for
advancing close cooperation with the United Nations.
Since then, the Organization has become a practical
mechanism for deepening cooperation among CIS
member States. Today the CIS is a reliable partner
of the United Nations and a participant in all the
major forums convened by the United Nations and its
specialized agencies.
The current crises have demonstrated that all
States and nations are interconnected and that regular
dialogue, trust and close cooperation among us are
extremely important. The CIS continues to serve as
an important platform providing a wide opportunity
for developing mutually acceptable approaches
and practical measures, especially in the areas of
trade, investment, transport, tourism, education and
promoting cultural and humanitarian exchanges and
sustainable development.
In its capacity as Chair of the CIS in 2022,
Kazakhstan hosted the Council of Heads of State of
the Commonwealth in Astana on 14 October. This year,
member States focused on cultural and climate action
efforts, highlighting the importance and urgency of
those issues. In addition, issues related to overcoming
6/30

We firmly believe that advancing cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations, including the CIS, will
make it possible to address a wide range of issues
completely and effectively and to exchange information
on best practices in various fields and bring them into
practical application.
In conclusion, I would like to thank all members
of the CIS for their support during Kazakhstan’s
chairmanship. We hope that the draft resolution will be
adopted by consensus, as has been the case in the past.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.18.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): In my capacity as
Chair of the States members of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in New York, I have the
honour to introduce the draft resolution contained in
document A/77/L.18, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation”. The draft resolution is consistent with
the spirit of resolution 3369 (XXX), which, in 1975,
invited the OIC to participate in the General Assembly
and its subsidiary organs as an observer.
This year’s draft resolution contains technical
updates, with the main notable change reflected
in paragraph 7, which recalls the adoption of
resolution 76/254, sponsored by the Organization
22-70328

21/11/2022

of Islamic Cooperation, designating 15 March as the
International Day to Combat Islamophobia and invites
all Member States to observe the International Day in
an appropriate manner. In its preambular paragraphs,
the draft resolution reaffirms the shared common
goals of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the United Nations in conflict prevention,
confidence-building, peacekeeping, conflict resolution
and post-conflict rehabilitation, mediation and
preventive diplomacy, including conflict situations
involving Muslim communities. The draft resolution
highlights the desire of the two organizations to work
together on shared concerns, including global security,
self-determination, respect for territorial integrity,
decolonization and combating terrorism. It reaffirms
the common goals of the United Nations and OIC in
promoting progress in the Middle East peace process,
combating religious intolerance and preventing violent
extremism. It welcomes initiatives for interfaith
dialogue, including efforts to combat Islamophobia,
by the two Organizations and the existing cooperation
between the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
In its operative paragraphs, the draft resolution
recognizes the continuing cooperation between the OIC
and United Nations entities, including UN-Women,
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights. We underscore that strengthening cooperation
between the United Nations and the OIC has never been
more important than in these challenging times.
Additionally, the draft resolution calls for exploring
innovative means of enhancing cooperation between the
United Nations and the OIC. In that context, we would
like to thank the Secretary-General António Guterres for
his constant engagement with the OIC and its members.
We also appreciate his annual tradition of visiting
Muslim communities during Ramadan to demonstrate
solidarity and exchange views on pressing issues. Such
initiatives reinforce the provisions of the draft resolution.
The OIC also appreciates its cooperation with the High
Representative for the Alliance of Civilizations, His
Excellency Mr. Miguel Ángel Moratinos.
The OIC believes that addressing complex challenges
requires a coordinated and comprehensive multilateral
response that brings countries and international
organizations together. As such, we invite all Member
States to support and adopt draft resolution A/77/L.18
by consensus.

A/77/PV.39

The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Bulgaria to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.19.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): On behalf of the members of
the Central European Initiative (CEI), I have the honour
to introduce draft resolution entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Central European
Initiative”, as contained in document A/77/L.19.
Since it obtained observer status in December 2011,
pursuant to resolution 66/111, the Central European
Initiative has had a remarkable track record of
activities aimed at furthering its cooperation with the
United Nations, based on the promotion and protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy,
the rule of law and the importance of dialogue and
strengthening multilateralism.
The Initiative is firmly committed to further
strengthening this dynamic partnership, as evident in
most of the final documents adopted on the occasion
of the meetings of the Heads of Government or
Foreign Ministers of its member States, the latest of
which was held only two weeks ago held in Sofia on
7 November. In that respect, I would like to highlight
the continued efforts of the Central European Initiative
to contribute to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. The CEI Plan of Action
2021-2023 was defined in line with the 2030 Agenda
in order to contribute to its implementation through
regional processes.
The relationship between the United Nations
and regional organizations has assumed even greater
importance in the context of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, which has demonstrated the necessity of
a collective, coordinated and unified response from
all regions. The commitment to concerted actions
and a decisive and comprehensive approach has been
emphasized through an extensive cooperation with
the World Health Organization Regional Office for
Europe, which continues in a series of topical health
issues. The Central European Initiative will certainly
continue to be a powerful platform that will contribute
to the realization of the goals of the United Nations in
the region.
This draft resolution also reflects a fact that
directly involves and impacts the CEI region, and that
is the ongoing aggression against onе of its member
States — Ukraine. Since the very beginning, the States
members of the Central European Initiative have

22-703287/30

A/77/PV.39

stood together with Ukraine and have been supporting
its sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial
integrity within its internationally recognized borders,
including territorial waters, with unanimous solidarity
and unity.
In that regard, we express our strongest disagreement
with the use of force against the territorial integrity or
political independence of any State, which goes against
Article 2.4 of the Charter of the United Nations. At the
same time, we would like to highlight the importance
of a political vision for peace, confidence, stability
and security through effective multilateralism and
political dialogue, including through enhanced regional
cooperation through intergovernmental multilateral
forums like the Central European Initiative.
As Bulgaria holds the presidency of the Central
European Initiative for 2022, I would like to express
our gratitude to all member States for their excellent
cooperation throughout our tenure.
In concluding, I would like to reiterate that
these biannual resolutions are first and foremost
a demonstration of the international consensus on
the importance of regional cooperation. They have
preserved and enhanced their relevance by adapting to
changing circumstances and by mirroring the dynamics
on the ground, related to the effectiveness of regional
cooperation and multilateralism as a whole.
The draft before the Assembly today is the result of
inclusive and transparent consultations and we would
like to thank all member States for their constructive
engagement. On behalf of the States members of the
Central European Initiative, I would like to thank all
delegations in advance for their support to the text.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Bahrain to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.17.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): In my
capacity as Chair of the Group of Arab States in New
York, and on behalf of the States members of the League
of Arab States — Jordan, the United Arab Emirates,
Bahrain, Tunisia, Algeria, Djibouti, the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the Sudan, Somalia, Iraq, Oman, the
State of Palestine, Qatar, Comoros, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Libya, Egypt, Morocco, Mauritania and Yemen — I
have the honour to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.17,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the League of Arab States” under agenda item 127 (d).
8/30

21/11/2022

The Arab draft resolution before the Assembly
confirms our implementation of one of the most
important and major principles established in the
Charter of the United Nations, namely, the principle of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in areas of common interest, especially
in the field of international peace and security, as
stipulated in Chapter VIII of the Charter. The draft
also faithfully reflects updates concerning the ongoing
cooperation and permanent and fruitful development
between the Arab League and its various institutional
sectors, on the one hand, and the United Nations and
its various subsidiary organs, on the other. It also
strengthens previous consensus resolutions on this
item, most recent of which was resolution 75/11, adopted
on 23 November 2020, and reflects the presidential
statements of the Security Council, the latest of which
S/PRST/2022/1, issued under the presidency of the
United Arab Emirates. The two organizations have
worked hard to develop and promote a well-established
cooperative approach with all major agencies for more
than half a century.
On that basis, the draft resolution’s preambular and
operative paragraphs highlight the clear increase in the
desired level of cooperation between the secretariats of
the United Nations and the League of Arab States at
the institutional and substantive levels, and stress the
unremitting efforts of the general secretariats of both
organizations to improve bilateral cooperation and
consultation at the sectoral level. That was evidenced
in the participation of Secretary-General António
Guterres in the work of the thirty-first session of the
Council of the League of Arab States at the summit
level, held in Algeria on 1 and 2 November, which
established the strong partnership between the League
of Arab States and the United Nations, as underscored
by Mr. Guterres, who emphasized that:
“Cooperation is the only way forward. Regional
organizations like the League of Arab States have
a vital role to play in today’s world. We must work
together to advance the values based on which
the United Nations was born: peace, sustainable
development and human rights.”
There is no doubt that the reopening of the
United Nations Liaison Office to the Arab League in
Cairo in March and the recent appointment of a highlevel official to lead it will contribute to the development
and promotion of that cooperation and to upgrading
it over the years, especially as we prepare together
22-70328

21/11/2022

to deal with many international events related to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the formulation and implementation
of Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
From the perspective of such effective institutional
cooperation, the Arab Group looks forward to the
support and endorsement of all States Members of
the United Nations for draft resolution A/77/L.17,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States”, and to its adoption by
consensus under agenda item 127 (d) at the seventyseventh session of the General Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Canada to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.20.
Ms. Poloz (Canada): On behalf of the main sponsors,
the United Arab Emirates and my own country, Canada,
I have the honour and the privilege to introduce draft
resolution A/77/L.20, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL)”.
(spoke in French)
The history of this draft resolution goes back to
the text’s first adoption by the General Assembly in
2016. Since then, it has been revised every two years
and always agreed by consensus. The basis for the draft
resolution is connection, coordination and cooperation.
Through every revision, its fundamental goals has
remained unchanged.
(spoke in English)
This year’s review further strengthens the objectives
of the draft resolution and reflects the evolving
relationship between the United Nations and INTERPOL
in supporting national efforts and combining the most
prevalent forms of criminality across three global
crime programmes dedicated to counterterrorism,
cybercrime and emerging and organized crime, notably
implementing the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy through information-sharing on
foreign terrorist fighters, including those returning or
relocating, and in particular from terrorist combat or
training areas, and on improvements on border security
and management and on countering and preventing
terrorist travel.

A/77/PV.39

(spoke in French)
We hope that this revision will further strengthen
cooperation between the two organizations and, in
turn, benefit all States Members of the United Nations
that are also members of INTERPOL and, ultimately,
the global law enforcement community and the peoples
they faithfully serve, including those that work in
peacekeeping contexts.
(spoke in English)
The revised draft resolution focuses on key
areas, including innovation and new and emerging
technologies, both as opportunities and challenges for
law enforcement. That includes international efforts
that contribute to raising awareness and preparedness
and that condemn the continued flow of unmanned
aircraft systems and their components to, by and
between terrorist and organized criminal groups to
launch attacks and traffic in drugs and arms as the
technology becomes more accessible. That includes the
United Nations police and the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism, the United Nations Interregional
Crime and Justice Research Institute and INTERPOL
in designing comprehensive policies and guidance to
assist law enforcement entities effectively.
Further, the revision takes particular note of the
joint publication of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, the United Nations Office
of Counter-Terrorism and INTERPOL, entitled The
Protection of Critical Infrastructure against Terrorist
Attacks: Compendium of Good Practices, and also
notes the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum and its
Berlin Memorandum on Good Practices for Countering
Terrorist Use of UAS, as well as other emerging
technologies and methods, such as artificial intelligence
and virtual assets for criminal and terrorist purposes.
Additionally, the revised draft resolution recognizes
the potential for strengthened collaboration between
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and
INTERPOL to combat transnational financial crime
and corruption, and stresses the importance of the use
of notices and diffusions to circulate details of new and
existing crime trends. Those relate to financial crime,
money-laundering and corruption. It also includes the
INTERPOL global stop-payment mechanism using the
I-24/7 global police secure communications system,
and calls on Member States to extend that system
and access to financial intelligence units to further
operationalize its use.

22-703289/30

A/77/PV.39

We are pleased that the new revision also
welcomes in particular the cooperation between the
United Nations Police Division’s specialized police
teams and serious and organized crime teams in the
development of joint programmes and initiatives and
the provision of technical expertise and assistance to
national police and law enforcement.
Further, the revision also calls upon the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and INTERPOL to continue to strengthen
their cooperation and synergies in order to assist
Member States in their efforts to prevent and counter
the unlawful destruction and looting of cultural heritage
and trafficking in cultural property, including through
the INTERPOL Stolen Works of Art Database and IDArt mobile application.
The revised draft resolution also calls upon
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and INTERPOL to enhance coordination and
cooperation on matters related to maritime security.
It encourages law enforcement agencies to make full
use of capabilities made available by INTERPOL and
relevant United Nations entities, including the Global
Maritime Security Database, as well as training,
equipment and capacity-building. It also requires
continued strengthening of cooperation between
the United Nations and INTERPOL in accordance
with applicable international law in preventing and
combating transnational crime, including illicit
maritime activities and in particular transnational
organized crime, including the smuggling of migrants,
trafficking in persons, drug trafficking, piracy and the
illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in small arms
and light weapons and ammunitions.
Further to the most recent review, the revised
draft resolution encourages the United Nations and
INTERPOL to deepen their cooperation in advancing
gender equality in law enforcement, including
through the mainstreaming of gender perspectives in
capacity-building programmes, in order to strengthen
effectiveness and equal opportunities for employment
and leadership opportunities and positions within
law enforcement. That is done with a view to the
empowerment of all women and their full enjoyment of
all human rights.
As in the 2020 review, this revision continues to
acknowledge the unprecedented public health and social
economic damage and the continued impact of the
10/30

21/11/2022

public health crisis caused by the coronavirus disease. It
requires a coordinated international response, including
a law enforcement response, to the vulnerabilities
that drive, enable and perpetuate criminal activity.
The revision emphasizes the importance of enhanced
cooperation between the United Nations, in particular
the World Health Organization, and INTERPOL
through capacity-building and training activities with
a view to strengthening the collaboration between
health and security sectors, further seizing on the
opportunity to encourage Member States to make full
use of INTERPOL’s secure communications channels.
That, of course, includes the INTERPOL BioTracker
to exchange information on biological incidents of a
natural, accidental or deliberate origin, as well as to
make use of lessons learned to address future public
health challenges. It also will help build mechanisms
to detect and disrupt the sale and supply of illicit and
counterfeit pharmaceuticals and medical products.
On behalf of the main sponsors, the United Arab
Emirates and Canada, I would like to thank the
members of the Office of the Special Representative
of INTERPOL at the United Nations for its excellent
provision of technical advice throughout the negotiation
process. Its valuable guidance and support was greatly
appreciated by all delegations. We sincerely value the
presence of the Special Representative of INTERPOL
to the United Nations, Mr. Odd Reidar Humlegård, who
will address the Assembly later today in support of the
draft resolution.
Finally, I take this opportunity to thank the
representatives of all the Member States that have
actively taken part in the consultation process for
their constructive inputs and flexibility. This review
could not and would not have occurred without
their collaboration, cooperation and dedication. To
them, individually and collectively, we express our
humble gratitude.
The President: I now give the floor to the representative of Slovakia to introduce draft resolution A/77/L.21.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/77/L.21, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development”.
Slovakia is pleased to contribute to the long history
of collaboration between these two organizations. It
started with the explicit reference to the purposes of the
22-70328

21/11/2022

United Nations in the Convention on the Organization
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD),
its founding document. Over the past decades, the
OECD has been invited to participate as an observer
first to the Economic and Social Council an then to the
General Assembly. Eventually, the OECD established
its Permanent Observer Office at United Nations
Headquarters to further develop that special partnership.
To formalize this cooperation all the more, in March
2021 the General Assembly adopted its first ever
resolution (resolution 75/269) on cooperation between
those two organizations, and it was my privilege to
introduce it, alongside Spain.

A/77/PV.39

they underscore the importance that they place on
contributing to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, and to enhance the
engagement with the United Nations family. Earlier
this year, OECD ministers under Italy’s chairmanship
adopted roadmaps that will see five United Nations
Member States — Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, Peru and
Romania — embarking on the process of becoming full
members of the OECD. New partnerships have also
been forged with Africa and South-East Asia, while
existing partnerships have been strengthened through
regional and country programmes.

Cooperation between the OECD and the
United Nations system spans across almost every
policy area in the economic, environmental and social
domains. That includes participation in relevant bodies
of the respective organizations, the exchange of data
and analysis between the organizations, and targeted,
joint initiatives in support of developing countries. It is
therefore with great pleasure that Slovakia, on behalf of
all sponsors, presents this biennial draft resolution for
the second time.

Cooperation spans a wide range of topics, such as
health, gender, education, climate and development
cooperation, to name just a few. The impact of that
collaboration is felt in countries around the world.
For example, the OECD’s collaboration with the
United Nations Development Programme on the Tax
Inspectors Without Borders initiative has already
delivered $1.7 billion in extra revenue for developing
countries. The joint OECD-Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations Agricultural Outlook,
now in its eighteenth year, is helping countries around
the world to make sense of agricultural commodity
markets in the face of unprecedented challenges. And
the OECD has joined forces with the United Nations
to support the Effective Development Cooperation
Summit, which, as delegations probably know, will
take place in Geneva next month. We are pleased to see
those developments, and Slovakia is equally honoured
to host the upcoming informal ministerial meeting
of the OECD Development Assistance Committee in
Bratislava next June.

The main purpose of the draft resolution is
to highlight the existing partnership between
United Nations and the OECD and its potential to
address the challenges of the twenty-first century. Each
organization has its own mandates, expertise and place
in the international system, but by bringing OECD
evidence and policy perspectives to the work of the
United Nations, and vice versa, we multiply the impact
of our investment in those institutions.

The draft resolution welcomes the strengthening
of cooperation between the United Nations and the
OECD within their respective mandates and in line
with member States’ priorities, to accelerate the pace of
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. It also emphasizes the
importance of optimal coordination and cooperation
between both organizations to create synergies within
their respective mandates.

In this year’s draft resolution, we have once again
sought to keep the text concise and focused, so that it
provides a useful foundation for both organizations to
promote synergies in their work. We believe that the
draft resolution is streamlined, concise, highly relevant
and institutional in character. Today the partnership
between the two organizations is very much alive at the
country and regional levels, in particular in Geneva,
Nairobi, Vienna, Rome and of course, in Paris, as well
as here in New York.

Mr. Aidid (Malaysia), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
Since the adoption of the first resolution in
2021, OECD ministers have commemorated the
sixtieth anniversary of the organization by launching
a vision statement for the decade ahead. In it,

To conclude, I would like to thank the representatives
of all the Member States that took active part in the
negotiation process for their constructive inputs. Our
thanks go also to the Office of the Special Representative
of the OECD to the United Nations for the advice and
support provided throughout the consultation process.

22-7032811/30

A/77/PV.39

The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia to
introduce draft resolution A/77/L.22.
Mr. Pary Rodríguez (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): I am pleased to introduce
draft resolution A/77/L.22, “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Latin American and Caribbean
Economic System”, and wish to highlight some
important aspects about that regional organization.
The Latin American and Caribbean Economic
System (SELA) is a regional intergovernmental
organization created on 17 October 1975, whose main
task is to promote a consultation and coordination
system to agree on common positions and strategies on
economic issues among countries, groups of nations,
forums and international organizations and to encourage
cooperation and integration among our countries.
Cooperative relations between SELA and the
United Nations system have been very dynamic and
fruitful since the first agreement signed in 1977,
formalizing cooperation agreements with various
agencies and specialized funds of the United Nations: the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
in 1978; the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
and the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization in 1980; the the Pan American Health
Organization/World Health Organization in 1984;
UNESCO in 1988; the United Nations in 1989; the
Regional Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction in the
Americas and the Caribbean in 2011; and with the
World Tourism Organization in 2021.
The SELA Work Programme 2022-2026, approved
by its 24 member countries in October 2021, focuses
on three thematic axes: economic recovery, digitization
and social development. Each is aimed at goals, the
fulfilment of which is supported by specific objectives
defined in a set of programmes. Thus, each proposed
programme will have some multi-year projects, which in
turn are made up of 36 annual activities that contribute
to the achievement of objectives and thus to the
achievement of the goals set through tangible outcomes.
With the Work Programme 2022-2026, SELA
aspires, in collaboration with the different agencies
and organizations of the United Nations system, to
contribute to achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and overcoming the ongoing crisis in the
12/30

21/11/2022

region through an innovative agenda that strengthens
capacities of the countries of our region and by
strengthening resilience and focusing on issues that
generate novel institutional options for better public
policies and good practices.
This text is presented every two years. In that
context, Bolivia introduces the draft resolution in
coordination with the Permanent Secretariat of SELA.
We thank the delegations that have sponsored it and
all those that support it, and we trust that the draft
resolution will be adopted by consensus as it has been
in the past.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
refer to draft resolution A/77/L.4, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization”, which we have co-sponsored.
Argentina has historically been part of the group
of countries that have promoted the prohibition of
nuclear tests. We see the Comprehensive NuclearTest-Ban Treaty (CTBT) as a fundamental instrument
for international peace and security and acceded to it
immediately after its adoption. The entry into force of
the CTBT is also a clear objective of our foreign policy
in the areas of disarmament and non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons. The Treaty has proven to be a
decisive instrument in finally ending nuclear testing
and has the capacity to undertake the surveillance and
monitoring that will be essential if the comprehensive
ban is to continue to be implemented. In that regard,
we appreciate the efforts made by the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization to guarantee, on the one hand, a
complete, robust and sustainable verification system
and, on the other, that all signatory States benefit from
its membership.
In a challenging global context and with exponential
technological transformations, the search for sustainable
solutions to the challenges of the twenty-first century
is a complex task. The exchange of information and
other forms of cooperation are essential tools in facing
cross-border challenges and the global consequences
that they represent. That environment underscores the
importance of the ongoing cooperation between the
United Nations and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization,
with emphasis on the promotion of disarmament and
nuclear non-proliferation and, consequently, on the
22-70328

21/11/2022

contribution to the fulfilment of the purposes and
principles of the United Nations charter.
Based on its firm commitment and active
participation as a Member of the United Nations and
of the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, Argentina
supports the synergies that both organizations have
achieved for mutual benefit and that of the entire
international community, with a view to reinforcing
the essential role of multilateralism in promoting
international peace and security.
Mr. Alajmi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I confirm my delegation’s support for the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative of
the Kingdom of Bahrain on behalf of the Group of Arab
States, as well as the statement made by the Permanent
Delegation of Pakistan on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.
I am pleased to thank the Secretary-General
for his report entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations”,
contained in document A/77/277, and his notes
contained in documents A/77/158 and A/77/95. Those
documents provide an overview of the ongoing
cooperation between the United Nations and 24 regional
and other organizations, stressing the continuity of that
cooperative spirit guided by the common commitment
to maintaining international peace and security,
respecting and protecting human rights, fulfilling
pledges to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), and
achieving the lofty goals and objectives contained in
the Charter of the United Nations.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations has become
inevitable in light of the problems and incidents that
afflict the global situation and related variables and
challenges, in addition to the ever-expanding role
of those organizations in the context of the growing
number of internal and regional conflicts. Emphasizing
the importance of such cooperation, and in order to
address and confront all the challenges of a security,
political, economic, humanitarian and environmental
nature, many regional organizations have sought to
enhance their cooperation and build bridges with the
United Nations based on Chapter VIII of the Charter.
The State of Kuwait is a member of two of the most
important and oldest regional organizations, namely,

A/77/PV.39

the League of Arab States and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, which have enjoyed long-standing
relations with the United Nations over more than three
decades. In that context, we call for deepening the bonds
of existing cooperation and working to strengthen it in
order to achieve peace and security and consolidate
stability in our Arab and Islamic region.
The
cooperative
approach
between
the
United Nations and the League of Arab States has
developed and strengthened in recent years, as evidenced
by the first meeting between the two organizations in
the Security Council (see S/PV.8548) and the subsequent
issuance on 13 June 2019 of the statement contained
in document S/PRST/2019/5 by the President of the
Security Council, under the presidency of the State
of Kuwait. In that presidential statement, the Council
commended the efforts of the League of Arab States
and its contribution to collective endeavours aimed
at settling disputes in the region by peaceful means.
Those meetings continued at the same pace, resulting
in the recent issuance of Security Council presidential
statement S/PRST/2022/1, under the presidency of
the sisterly United Arab Emirates, which reflects the
high level of institutional and substantive coordination
between the two organizations to improve the
mechanisms of bilateral consultation. The reopening of
the United Nations Liaison Office at the Arab League
in Cairo in March was a true translation of the written
texts into concrete actions.
The adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 76/254, designating 15 March of each year
as the International Day to Combat Islamophobia,
was an affirmation of the common goals of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the other
United Nations entities.
In conclusion, we reiterate our conviction that
the objectives and purposes of the United Nations
in maintaining international peace and security,
preventing the outbreak of conflicts and resolving them
by peaceful means can be achieved in an optimal manner
by enhancing cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations in order to activate
early warning mechanisms, preventive diplomacy
and rapid and appropriate response to promote the
multilateral system so as to address any complex and
interlinked challenges, as well as any looming conflict.
Mr. Cheo (Singapore): At the outset, let me
express Singapore’s thanks to the Secretary-General

22-7032813/30

A/77/PV.39

and his team for the useful report on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and other
organizations (A/77/277) for the period September
2020 to August 2022.
As the report rightly puts it, the last two years
were “amongst the most complex and volatile in the
history of the United Nations” (A/77/277, p.3). Among
other factors, the coronavirus disease pandemic,
the war in Ukraine and the triple planetary crisis
of climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution
have created profound disruption. Across the globe,
societies and economies — especially in the developing
world — are struggling to cope. International and
regional organizations are also struggling to maintain
their relevance. Against that backdrop, allow me to
make three points.
First, close and effective cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations
is indispensable to building the networked multilateral
system envisioned in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982).
Be it developing a regional strategy on youth, peace, and
security with the League of Arab States; supporting the
African Union’s flagship Silencing the Guns in Africa
initiative; or partnering with the Caribbean Community
to better address violence against women and girls,
enhanced interaction and coordination between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations
can be a force for good. Singapore is therefore heartened
that the United Nations has continued its proactive
approach to strengthening its network of partners and
welcomes the Secretary-General’s proposed annual
meetings between the United Nations and heads of
regional organizations under Our Common Agenda. We
stand ready to support those endeavours.
Secondly, Singapore welcomes the continued
excellent cooperation between the United Nations
and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), including high-level engagements between
the Secretary-General and our leaders. We were
very glad to welcome, in person for the first time in
three years, the Secretary-General to the ASEANUnited Nations Summit, held in Cambodia just two
weeks ago. We look forward to the adoption of draft
resolution A/77/L.12/Rev.1, which outlines the many
areas of partnership between both organizations,
including in disaster risk reduction and management,
digital economy and cybersecurity, as well as sustainable
development. The draft resolution also reaffirms
the shared commitment for both organizations to do
14/30

21/11/2022

more together under the ambit of the Plan of Action
to Implement the Joint Declaration on Comprehensive
Partnership between the United Nations and ASEAN
(2021-2025). We therefore urge Member States to
co-sponsor and support the draft resolution.
Thirdly and finally, Singapore is pleased to again
co-sponsor draft resolution A/77/L.20, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL). With
criminal networks increasingly operating across
borders, INTERPOL will continue to play a crucial role
in international law enforcement. As the host country
of the INTERPOL Global Complex for Innovation since
2015, Singapore strongly supports INTERPOL’s efforts
to develop and promote innovative ways to combat
technology-enabled and other emerging threats. We are
committed to strengthening the important partnership
between INTERPOL and the United Nations to keep
our societies and peoples safe.
Singapore believes that strengthening the
multilateral system is critical to restoring international
stability in these troubled times. A United Nations
in robust partnership with regional and other
organizations will help develop solutions to current
and emerging challenges across overlapping networks
of multilateralism. Singapore will remain a steadfast
partner in those efforts.
Ms. Skoczek (Poland): Poland would like to
emphasize the importance of cooperation and dialogue
between the only universal global organization, the
United Nations, regional and other international
organizations in order to develop effective and lasting
solutions to global challenges.
We strongly support the work of regional
organizations around the world and welcome their
positive contributions at the intergovernmental,
parliamentary, economic and social levels to the
international peace and security agenda, upholding and
protecting human rights, and promoting sustainable
development — the three pillars of the United Nations.
On many occasions this year, we have argued that
in the face of global challenges of an unprecedented
scale — the post-pandemic crisis with its significant
socioeconomic consequences, climate change and
conflicts around the world — we need to look for
multilateral solutions forged at the regional level,
oftentimes among neighbouring countries, and to test
them on the ground.
22-70328

21/11/2022

Effective partnerships between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations are a
natural choice and a key element in our pursuit to
improve global collective security. In that context, the
ongoing aggression by the Russian Federation against
Ukraine, destabilizing the international order and
security architecture, has highlighted the need for even
closer cooperation and synergies between global and
regional organizations.
Close cooperation, however, does not mean transferring full responsibility to regional and subregional
organizations. The United Nations should resolve conflicts and promote sustainable development in a comprehensive manner, using all available instruments and
creating a global legal and political framework to tackle
global challenges.
Poland strongly believes in the value of the regional
security cooperation. As Chair of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2022,
we are positive that enhanced cooperation with the
United Nations is vital to regional and global stability.
Also, given the changing scope and complex nature of
today’s threats to international peace, we believe that
the OSCE’s unique comprehensive concept of security
is essential to effectively addressing the mixture of
challenges that we face and provide a more holistic
approach to sustaining peace and security.
Let me now refer to the ideas presented in the
Secretary-General’s report (A/77/277).
First of all, Poland supports the proposal set
out in Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) for a more
networked and inclusive multilateralism, with the
United Nations playing a lead role. In that regard, we
welcome the proposal to convene a meeting between the
United Nations and all heads of regional organizations
in 2023 to discuss ways to strengthen cooperation
and share best practices with regional organizations.
We should also more effectively engage civil society,
human rights defenders, media, the private sector,
academia and local Governments.
In regard to the draft resolutions under
consideration today by the General Assembly, I would
like to refer to two of them, relating to cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and
the Central European Initiative (CEI), respectively,
and thank the facilitators of those texts, Slovakia and
Bulgaria respectively, for their work.

A/77/PV.39

I would like to note that in 1998 Poland, on behalf
of the OECD members, submitted resolution 53/6, on
granting an observer status to the OECD. As a member
of the OECD Development Assistance Committee, we
particularly value the work of the United Nations and
OECD focused on global development, and believe that
this cooperation can be further strengthened.
We also strongly support draft resolution A/77/L.19,
on cooperation between the United Nations and the
CEI, and the fact that its text truly reflects the realities
on the ground. Russia’s continued war on Ukraine — a
member of the Initiative — is of immediate relevance
to the region. We once again demand that Russia cease
hostilities, withdraw its troops from the entire territory
of Ukraine and respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine within its internationally
recognized borders. That action is essential to ending a
regional crisis that has grave global implications.
Mr. Segura Aragón (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me to thank the President for convening
this plenary meeting, on which occasion my delegation
will refer to agenda item 127 (y), “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the International Criminal
Police Organization (INTERPOL)”.
El Salvador appreciates the leadership of Canada
and the United Arab Emirates, whose efforts allow
us today to adopt the outcome of the third biennial
review of cooperation between the United Nations
and INTERPOL.
As a member of INTERPOL for more than six
decades and as the host of one of its six regional
offices, El Salvador recognizes its work in promoting
international police cooperation to make the world a
safer place. We commend its work in preventing and
combating transnational organized crime and its efforts
in promoting collaboration and innovation in police
matters. In that context, my country recognizes the
important cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL in providing assistance to Member States
in their responses to transnational organized crime,
the fight against terrorism and its emerging trends,
and cybercrime, as well as in the ongoing creation
and improvement of its capacities to apply the law. We
are therefore pleased that draft resolution A/77/L.20,
which we will adopt today, strengthens and expands
the joint efforts of both organizations, with special
emphasis on preventing and combating transnational
organized crime, including the illicit manufacturing

22-7032815/30

A/77/PV.39

and trafficking of small arms and light weapons, as
well as ammunition.
Considering their decisive contribution to violence
and their serious impact on society, the illicit trafficking
and diversion of arms and ammunition constitutes,
from our perspective, one of the main problems in
terms of citizen security worldwide. We therefore
encourage cooperation between the United Nations
and INTERPOL to be strengthened to support Member
States in significantly reducing the transnational flows
of their illicit traffic.

21/11/2022

we regret that the two paragraphs of the draft resolution
will be voted upon, as the CEI upholds the same values
as the United Nations; promotes cooperation, research
and work in the area of sustainable development and
governance; addresses transnational threats; includes
all stakeholders in particular youth, across the region;
and stands for multilateralism and solidarity. That is
why we hope that this important draft resolution will
be adopted, thereby strengthening cooperation between
the CEI and the United Nations, regional and global
cooperation and multilateralism and global solidarity.

El Salvador firmly believes that police institutions
should aspire to reflect the populations they serve, for
which it is necessary to increase the representation of
women at all levels. Furthermore, we believe that the
mainstreaming of the gender perspective in police
services contributes to substantially improving the
safety of citizens. Bearing in mind that this is, in our
view, a prerequisite for meeting the specific security
needs of the population as a whole, we recognize the
importance of applying the mainstreaming of that
perspective in all areas of cooperation between the
United Nations and INTERPOL.

Mr. Aldhaheri (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): At the outset, I thank Ms. Adriana
Poloz for introducing draft resolution A/77/L.20,
entitled, “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)”, on behalf of its facilitators and sponsors.

Finally, we hope that the implementation of the
draft resolution translates into concrete actions to
broaden cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL in order to strengthen collaboration among
their member States for the prevention and combat of
organized crime worldwide.

The United Arab Emirates reiterates the importance
of the draft resolution, which welcomes the cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL, which
plays an essential role in supporting countries and
facilitating communication among national police
forces through its international network. INTERPOL is
the only international organization that is tasked with
implementing the law worldwide. In order to build upon
the collective achievements realized so far, I would like
to highlight the following main points.

Ms. Zubcevic (Croatia): As an original sponsor
and member of the Central European Initiative (CEI),
Croatia is disappointed that the fourth and sixth
preambular paragraphs and operative paragraph 3
of draft resolution A/77/L.19 will be voted on for the
first time since the CEI obtained observer status in the
General Assembly in December 2011, just because they
state the truth of the current situation in our part of
the world and call attention to the aggression against
and destruction of one of its members, Ukraine, which
not only poses a threat to Central Europe, but also
jeopardizes world security and the global economy,
including energy and food security.
Even more disappointing is the fact that we need
to be aware that, as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development states, there can be no sustainable
development without peace and no peace without
sustainable development. We cannot remain silent when
one of our members is under attack, but at the same time
16/30

I would also like to thank Canada for its participation
in facilitating the consultations on the draft resolution
in cooperation with my country. I thank INTERPOL
and other delegations for supporting the negotiation
process, as well as all sponsors of the draft resolution.

First, INTERPOL plays an important role in the
fight against current and emerging threats, including
threats from terrorist and criminal groups. The
international community should therefore step up its
efforts, in cooperation with INTERPOL, to prevent the
flow of weapons and the spread of technologies that
could fall into the hands of such groups, in addition
to the issue of drones. We are pleased that the draft
resolution addresses that important issue, as new
technologies have become available to terrorists and
organized crime networks which help them to launch
attacks and traffic in drugs. That is why we encourage
the international community to step up its efforts to
prevent the obtention and use of such drones and other
weapons for criminal and terrorist purposes.
22-70328

21/11/2022

Moreover, the United Arab Emirates expresses its
concern regarding the increasing threat of cybercrime
and the use information and communications technology
for criminal purposes. Terrorist and organized crime
groups exploit developments in digital communications
all over the world to target fragile infrastructure. The
United Arab Emirates reiterates the importance of
promoting coordination between the United Nations
and INTERPOL, as well as the Member States, in
fighting cybercrime.
Secondly, we need to establish a comprehensive
response on the part of law enforcement agencies
in order to strengthen maritime security in the face
of many traditional and non-traditional challenges,
including piracy, armed robbery at sea, terrorism and
transnational organized crime which targets ships at
sea. Those challenges also include human and arms
trafficking and crimes against the maritime sector and
fisheries. We encourage law enforcement agencies to
fully benefit from INTERPOL’s capabilities, including
the Global Maritime Security Database, to combat and
prevent illegitimate maritime activities.
Thirdly, it is also important to increase cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL with a
view to establishing and developing joint programmes
and initiatives for maximum coordination and the
enhancement of competencies.
The negative effects of transnational financial
crimes have been felt all over the world and reached an
advanced level as a result of technological development.
We acknowledge in that regard the importance of
using notices and bulletins to raise awareness about
current and emerging financial crimes and the global
international mechanism to stop payments.
Lastly, the international focus on implementing
gender laws is a priority for the United Arab Emirates.
That is why we strongly encourage initiatives that seek
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations
and INTERPOL for promoting and mainstreaming the
gender perspective with regard to law enforcement. We
also support all efforts to increase the number of women
within police forces. In that regard, I am pleased to
announce that the final batch of women trainees under
the Fatima bint Mubarak Initiative for Women, Peace
and Security graduated last week and included women
from Africa, Asia and the Arab region. That initiative
has contributed to strengthening the gender perspective
in all security sectors around the world.

A/77/PV.39

In conclusion, I once again thank all delegations
for their constructive approach, which helped the
co-facilitators to reach consensus on the draft resolution.
That positive result has been achieved due to the
significant efforts that were made, in cooperation with
INTERPOL and in informal discussions, to achieve
a converge of opinions. We believe that the success
achieved demonstrates the conviction of the Member
States in the importance of INTERPOL as a vital
partner of the United Nations in achieving its objective
of creating a safer world. In that context, we hope that
the draft resolution will be adopted unanimously today.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation has always been
committed to cooperation between the United Nations
and
regional
and
subregional
organizations.
Such cooperation is a key element of the current
international agenda. We have traditionally supported
the development of such cooperation on the basis of the
Charter of the United Nations, above all its Chapter VIII.
Regional organizations should complement the efforts
of the United Nations in their areas of responsibility
and within the limits of their mandates. In most cases,
they have a better knowledge of the situation on the
ground and should play the key role in identifying ways
to resolve conflicts. In Eurasia, the Collective Security
Treaty Organization (CSTO) is such an organization.
Over the years of its existence, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization has evolved into an
important factor for regional and international
security. We would like to emphasize the peaceful
and open nature of the CSTO’s work and its readiness
to develop and build up constructive cooperation
with third countries and organizations, including the
United Nations. In that context, we regret the totally
inappropriate letter from the Ukrainian delegation
regarding its plans to vote against the technical
rollover of draft resolution А/77/L.13, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the CSTO. It is a clear
attempt to project our difficult bilateral relations onto
a regional organization that is in no way involved in it.
Such actions damage the reputation of the Ukrainian
delegation above all, since it is well known that the
draft resolution contains no politicized, let alone any
anti-Ukrainian provisions.
We call on all colleagues not to allow themselves to
be led by Ukraine. It is widely known that the General
Assembly has adopted this text by consensus many
times. The draft resolution has no new elements this

22-7032817/30

A/77/PV.39

year. Moreover, putting a technical draft to the vote
will demonstrate that any agreed language in similar
resolutions may easily be reconsidered. In a word, for
the benefit of Ukraine and its Western sponsors, the
United Nations is abandoning more and more rules of
civilized and constructive conduct and becoming an
increasingly politicized political platform.
In order to preclude such a scenario and allow no
violations of the General Assembly’s working methods,
it is important to support the draft resolution on
cooperation between the United Nations and the CSTO.
We call on all colleagues to be guided by common
sense. We also draw attention to the fact that, despite
this unfriendly step by Ukraine, we chose not to put
the technical draft resolution A/77/L.15, “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM”, to
the vote.
Another threat to resolutions on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is posed by attempts to politicize those resolutions.
That is illustrated by another draft resolution to be
considered today — А/77/L.19, “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Central European Initiative”.
Although that document was initially focused on
economic cooperation, absolutely inappropriate
politicized points were added to its sixth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraph 3, injecting
unneeded politicization to regional organizations’
areas of activity and threatening to expand that practice
to other, similar resolutions.
Some delegations expressed such concerns during
the consultations on the draft resolution. However, our
European colleagues preferred to ignore those and,
instead of submitting the traditional depoliticized text,
they packed it full of Russophobic narrative. Specifically
in order to prevent the politicization of draft resolutions
on cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations, we are compelled to request a recorded
vote on the sixth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraph 3 and to vote against their inclusion in the
final text. If those paragraphs are nonetheless retained
following the vote, we will have to insist on putting the
resolution as a whole to the vote and to vote against
it as well. We underscore that the blame for this lies
entirely with the authors of the draft. We expect other
delegations to also speak up against politicizing of
resolutions on cooperation with regional organizations
and to vote against it.
18/30

21/11/2022

We also must comment on the reference in this
meeting’s agenda of the note of the Secretary-General
contained in document A/77/158, dated 13 July 2022,
transmitting the draft report on the work of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on the implementation of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction for 2021. To be frank, we find it
rather surprising that Member States were invited
to consider the note today. This draft report has not
even been considered at the twenty-seventh session
of the Conference of the States Parties that will begin
in The Hague on 28 November. We believe that the
document was circulated and proposed for today’s
discussion prematurely.
Moreover, there is no reference to the fact that at
the 100th session of the OPCW Executive Council,
a number of States, including Russia, dissociated
themselves from consensus on the draft report and its
submission to the Conference of States Parties. We still
have serious issues with the report. The OPCW report
should reflect the activities of the entire Organization
over the reporting period, and not only those of its
Technical Secretariat, and should be strictly factual.
However, the draft report, despite our demands, does
not reflect the position of a range of States regarding
the illegitimacy of the so-called Investigation and
Identification Team, the activities of which run counter
to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
The draft report also fails to mention our numerous
appeals and submissions to the Technical Secretariat,
wherein we state that conveyance of information to
the so-called International, Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011 violates paragraph 34 of
article VIII of the Chemical Weapons Convention.
At the same time, on a far-fetched pretext
and apparently under pressure applied by certain
delegations, the draft report omits any reference to the
participation of the OPCW in the second session of the
Conference on the Establishment of a Middle East Zone
Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass
Destruction. We believe that this process contributes
significantly to making the Convention truly universal.
We regret that the United States continues to minimize
22-70328

21/11/2022

its relevance by ignoring the third session of the
Conference, which convened in New York last week.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this joint General Assembly
debate on cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations. Our delegation would
like to refer in particular to the cooperation between the
United Nations and the Preparatory Commission for the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
(CTBTO). We appreciate the presentation of draft
resolution A/77/L.4 on the subject, which takes note
of the report of the Executive Secretary of the CTBTO
for 2021.
We emphasize the importance of considering
the needs of developing countries in the work of the
Preparatory Commission and in cooperation activities.
We also acknowledge the efforts of the CTBTO
secretariat to overcome the obstacles imposed by the
economic, commercial and financial blockade of the
United States against Cuba, which complicated the
process of establishing a national data centre in our
country. We also appreciate the work of the secretariat
to guarantee Cuba’s participation in capacitybuilding activities.
We acknowledge the participation of the Executive
Secretary of the CTBTO in the commemoration of the
fifty-fifth anniversary of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, in
February, and in the Review Conference of the States
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) in August. We take this opportunity to
reiterate Cuba’s historical position in favour of nuclear
disarmament, which constitutes a principle of our
foreign policy, enshrined at the constitutional level.
Our ratification of the Comprehensive Nuclear-TestBan Treaty (CTBT), in February 2021, was consistent
with our commitment to nuclear disarmament as the
highest priority in the field of disarmament. Political
efforts for the universalization of the CTBT and its
immediate entry into force are crucial to including
that instrument in the international disarmament and
non-proliferation regime, such as the Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, the Treaty of Tlatelolco
and the NPT. We highlight the complementarity between
the legal norm established by the CTBT and the Treaty
for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, which includes
the absolute prohibition of carrying out nuclear tests.
We reaffirm our conviction that the only effective
way to make the terrible impact of nuclear weapons

A/77/PV.39

disappear is their total elimination in a verifiable,
transparent and irreversible manner. To that end, it
is essential to completely and effectively prohibit all
nuclear tests, including those carried out by explosion
and subcritical tests and all those carried out by other
sophisticated methods, as well as the closure and
dismantling of facilities that are used for such purposes
and their associated infrastructure.
Mr. Chindawongse (Thailand): Thailand attaches
great importance to a strong, multilateral regional
interface, specifically between the United Nations
and regional organizations. Cooperation to solve
the common challenges of humankind oftentimes
requires multitracked efforts at all levels — global,
regional, subregional and national — especially if we
seek to promote enduring peace, human security and
sustainable development.
At many times, if not all the time, the regional
perspective provides greater insights into how
sustainable solutions to address a particular regional
challenge should be pursued, so the voices of the
affected region matters. The accumulated generational
wisdom of the region matters. The concerns, shortterm and long-term, of the region matter. At the same
time, the global perspective can be helpful, insightful
and supportive. It is a two-way cooperation. The region
can enhance the global agenda and then the multilateral
system can help support the regional agenda. That
is why cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations is important, especially when
global interests and regional interests align. But even
when they do not converge completely, it is far better for
dialogue and cooperation to be pursued in order to close
gaps and help find an effective way forward together,
rationalize resources and enhance complementarities.
In sum, Thailand hopes that cooperation and
coordination, specifically between the United Nations
and regional organizations, resulting in better
synergies, will continue to be strengthened as we take
forward the work on Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) at
the global level, for example, and advance the mutually
beneficial interests of our peoples at the regional level.
In short, our global community is far stronger with
close partnerships between the United Nations and
regional organizations.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the League of Arab States.

22-7032819/30

A/77/PV.39

Mrs. Elardja Flitti (League of Arab States) (spoke
in Arabic): The General Assembly is today deliberating
one of the most important and oldest standing items on
its agenda, “Cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations and other organizations”. We
are meeting in plenary at a time when the international
system is at an historical turning point that may be the
most dangerous of its kind since the Cold War came
to an end. Indeed, we are witnessing an unprecedented
increase in the intensity of conflicts among global
Powers and over the lands of others, which foretells
highly complex security, political and economic risks
that may exceed the ability of all of us to confront or
address in the midst of existing humanitarian, political
and economic challenges. That requires us to address
them within the international multilateral framework
with greater rationality and deeper wisdom, in the
context of respect for the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the foundations of international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Those lofty principles and solid
foundations were enshrined by the United Nations
more than half a century ago to ensure that we would
all be equal in rights and duties without discrimination.
With the strong will and determination of its Member
States, the League of Arab States has consolidated the
parameters of institutional cooperation between it and
the United Nations within a comprehensive framework
that further deepens the concept of complementarity
between the two organizations in the face of all that
threatens security and peace at the regional and
international levels. More than 70 years have passed
since the signing of the cooperation protocol between
the two organizations, the United Nations and the
League of Arab States, in 1950. Since then, cooperative
relations and mutual coordination processes have
developed between them at all institutional levels and
in all thematic areas.
In order to enhance that mutual and permanent
cooperation, the League of Arab States aligns itself
with the statement delivered by His Excellency
Ambassador Jamal Fares Alrowaiei, Permanent
Representative of the Kingdom of Bahrain, on behalf
of the Group of Arab States in New York, to introduce
draft resolution A/77/L.17, entitled, “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the League of Arab
States”. The League of Arab States attaches special
importance and priority to a number of basic issues
20/30

21/11/2022

to advance the cooperative path to its highest desired
levels, as follows.
First, the Arab League welcomes the reopening and
strengthening of the United Nations Liaison Office in
Cairo in March 2022 and the appointment of a highlevel United Nations official to manage its work so as
to enable it to strengthen its mandate in the context of
the historical relationship between the two secretariats.
The Arab League looks forward to raising the level of
United Nations representation commensurate with its
counterparts at the United Nations offices accredited
to other regional organizations. That would allow us to
strengthen cooperation further in the upcoming years,
especially as the General Assembly is preparing to deal
with many important international events, including
the formulation of the features of Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) and its implementation along with the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Second, the Arab League and its Secretary-General
commend the pioneering role of the United Nations
Secretary-General and his practical vision in periodic
and continuous consultation with the heads of regional
organizations, through official meetings or high-level
retreats, to deepen the foundations of cooperation
in all fields. We also highly appreciate the pivotal
and effective role of the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs in strengthening that bilateral
cooperation, and the resulting practical outcome based
on the outputs of the periodic consultative meetings
between the two organizations.
Third, the League of Arab States hopes to reach
a settlement of all disputes and crises related to the
countries of the Arab region through the effective
implementation of Article 33 of the Charter of the
United Nations. In that regard, the Arab League
affirms its full readiness to play its regional role
as an effective and neutral regional organization to
contribute to maintaining international peace and
security in the Arab region, defend Arab national
security for its member States, and deter threats to its
stability, as guaranteed by the United Nations Charter
and international law, by playing a role complementary
to that of the United Nations in mediation, conciliation,
investigation or negotiation in order to reach the desired
peaceful settlement.
Fourth, the Arab League stresses the importance
of close cooperation and coordination between the two
organizations in addressing the ongoing conflicts that
22-70328

21/11/2022

plague our Arab region, including the Arab-Israeli
conflict, and stresses the consensus of visions between
it and the United Nations on the urgent need to end
the Israeli occupation of Palestine and the occupied
Syrian Arab Golan through the implementation of
United Nations resolutions, international terms of
reference and the Arab Peace Initiative, within the
framework of the genuine activation of the two-State
solution and in a way that achieves Israel’s withdrawal
from all occupied Arab lands to the line of 4 June 1967,
in accordance with the partition resolution 181 (II)
of 1947, and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as its capital, while
ensuring a just solution to the Palestinian refugee
problem, in accordance with resolution 194 (III)
of 1948.
Fifth, within the framework of upgrading the
institutional and social approach of its member States, the
Arab League recommends the continuity of assistance
and coordination between the two organizations
in developing and modernizing Arab societies and
enhancing their own capabilities to implement the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, through
the relevant United Nations agencies and development
funds, especially in the fields of education development,
women’s empowerment, election monitoring, interest
in youth and sustainable development, and programmes
to combat diseases, epidemics and unemployment.
The States members of the Arab League are keen to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, which
have become an integral part of the development plans
of Arab Governments.
Sixth, in connection with disarmament issues, the
Arab League stresses the importance of United Nations
support for the full implementation of decision 73/546
and the ongoing impetus towards establishing a zone
free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction in the Middle East. In that regard, the Arab
League and its Secretary-General congratulate the
Lebanese Republic on the success of the third session
of the Conference on the Establishment of a Middle
East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and other Weapons
of Mass Destruction. However, it warns that if Israeli
nuclear installations remain outside the comprehensive
safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy
Agency, that will inevitably damage the nuclear
non-proliferation system, especially in the absence of
effective international resolve on the part of certain
main parties to deal objectively and impartially with

A/77/PV.39

the Conference on the establishment of the nuclearweapon-free zone. The Arab League also stresses the
need to put an end to all forms of non-peaceful nuclear
ambitions in the region, which threaten the collective
and regional security of its countries, and to stop all
foreign interference in the affairs of Arab countries,
while totally rejecting the illegal presence of any
foreign forces on their lands, which would exacerbate
the crises in our region instead of resolving them.
Seventh, in order to complete the foundations of
constructive cooperation, the Arab League attaches
particular importance to the institutional support
provided by the United Nations in building and
strengthening the capabilities of the League of Arab
States staff in the field of maintaining international
peace and security in the Arab region, including
building, sustaining and making peace. We wish to
benefit from the experience of the United Nations in
establishing mechanisms to settle disputes, raise the
level of coordination and joint cooperation between the
United Nations and the Arab League, and establish a
complementary and expanded partnership between the
two organizations in a way that will lead to a unified
understanding of the reasons for the outbreak and
perpetuation of the crises that continue, unfortunately,
to threaten regional stability. That would lead to more
coordinated work between the two organizations
towards a final settlement and the intensification of
coordination and joint activities between the Arab
League and the United Nations envoys to the region.
Despite the major challenges facing our Arab world
and its member States, be they related to the growing
tension in the international situation and the fear that it
will cast a negative shadow — including disregard by this
international forum for long-standing causes, foremost
among which is the Palestinian question — or those
related to the natural, environmental and humanitarian
repercussions caused by aggravated natural disasters that
are difficult to control at the regional and international
levels. Arab States and Governments continue to
strive, through the international Organization and in
cooperation with other regional and governmental
organizations, to contain all disasters and crises
resulting from climate change.
In that respect, the League of Arab States takes this
opportunity to thank the Arab Republic of Egypt for
its generous hosting of the twenty-seventh Conference
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (COP27) in Sharm

22-7032821/30

A/77/PV.39

El-Sheikh from 6 to 20 November. The convening of
that session in Egypt and of the next session in the
United Arab Emirates confirms, without a doubt,
that the Arab world attaches particular importance to
the issues of climate change, water security and food
security, as reflected in the Algiers Declaration of
the thirty-first ordinary session of the Arab Summit,
held under the auspices of His Excellency President
Abdelmadjid Tebboune. That Declaration was issued
by Presidents, Kings and leaders of States members of
the Arab League, along with other decisions taken by
that pioneering Summit, in the presence and with the
participation of the Secretary-General, who addressed
cooperation between the two organizations in his
speech at the opening of the Summit.
Arab resolve continues to confront many economic
and natural challenges as a result of climate change,
and its repercussions on national and food security.
That underscores the tireless Arab effort to strengthen
the general and international consensus in addressing
fundamental issues that significantly affect the stability
of our Arab region.
In conclusion, the League of Arab States joins
its voice with those of all Arab countries that have
sponsored draft resolution A/77/L.17, submitted by the
Kingdom of Bahrain, and calls on the General Assembly
and all Member States to adopt the draft resolution,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States”, without a vote, as is
customary, and with no additions or deletions.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
have taken the floor to register our position and to seek
a point of clarification about the Secretary-General’s
note on cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), as contained in document A/77/158.
While the OPCW’s report on the implementation
of the Chemical Weapons Convention has not been
adopted by the OPCW and the biennial draft resolution
on cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons has not been submitted or discussed, the
Secretary-General’s note on cooperation between the
United Nations and the OPCW has been distributed.
That raises the question of whether it is correct and
legally defensible if a contested report is received and
action taken in the recipient organization, namely, the
United Nations, when the problem is contested and not
22/30

21/11/2022

finalized in the main original organization, in this case
the OPCW.
Along with our strong observation concerning
the conclusions of such a report, we expect that the
United Nations Legal Office will adequately address
that concern. We also maintain our optimism that this
irregular trend will be reversed and will not happen
again in the future. If it does, it will cast serious doubt
on the legitimacy of any such United Nations action.
The Acting President: I now give the floor
to the observer of the International Criminal
Police Organization.
Mr. Humlegård (International Criminal Police
Organization): I address the General Assembly at a
time when cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) has never been more strong or more
crucial. The complementary missions of our two
organizations ensure that our shared membership is
equipped with the tools needed to confront the most
pressing security issues of today. As illustrated through
the INTERPOL seven Global Policing Goals, launched
in support of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, it is only by working together
and fostering synergies with our partners that we will
most effectively achieve our common goals and face
our collective challenges.
Since the first resolution on cooperation between
the United Nations and INTERPOL was adopted in 2016
(resolution 71/19), the international community has
faced continued challenges related to climate change,
new and emerging technologies and the coronavirus
disease pandemic. As criminal groups and terrorist
networks seek to exploit vulnerabilities, multilateral
efforts such as that displayed here today remain vital
to maintaining peace, upholding the rule of law and
safeguarding our future.
In that regard, I would like to thank the
co-facilitators of draft resolution A/77/L.20, Canada
and the United Arab Emirates, for their tireless
efforts, as well as the United Nations Member States
whose valuable insights made the submission of this
third review possible. With their support, the draft
resolution has been updated to reflect the critical areas
of ongoing cooperation between the United Nations
and INTERPOL, including terrorism, maritime crime,
financial crime and corruption, biological incidents and
the threats posed by new and emerging technologies.
22-70328

21/11/2022

Through their diligence, this third review also expands
on existing language related to our collaboration
with various United Nations entities and specialized
agencies, such as the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime and the United Nations Office of CounterTerrorism, adding references to the essential work
being undertaken by the United Nations police, the
World Health Organization, the International Civil
Aviation Organization and UNESCO.
With the revised draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL being
adopted today, we mark a new milestone in our common
journey towards a safer and more sustainable tomorrow.
In conclusion, INTERPOL expresses its highest
gratitude and appreciation to the General Assembly
for giving us this opportunity, and we look forward
to further strengthening our alliance in the service
of international police cooperation for many years
to come.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on agenda item 127 and its
sub-items (a) to (aa).
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions A/77/L.4, A/77/L.12/Rev.1, A/77/L.13, A/77/L.14
as orally revised, A/77/L.15, A/77/L.16, A/77/L.17,
A/77/L.18, A/77/L.19, A/77/L.20 and A/77/L.21.
Delegations wishing to make a statement in
explanation of vote before the voting on any of the draft
resolutions are invited to do so now in one intervention.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of voting or position, may I remind delegations that
explanations are limited to 10 minutes and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czechia): I would like to deliver
an explanation of vote before the voting on draft
resolution A/77/L.13, “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization”. I have the honour to speak on behalf
of the States members of the European Union (EU).
The following countries align themselves with this
statement: North Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania,
Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Georgia, Iceland,
Liechtenstein and Norway.
I would like to re-emphasize that the EU and
its member States support cooperation between the
United Nations and regional and other organizations
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of

A/77/PV.39

the United Nations, which is an important tool for the
effective settlement of conflicts and the promotion of
peace and security.
The Russian aggression against Ukraine, which we
condemn in the strongest terms, launched in February
with the support of Belarus, is a clear violation of
the United Nations Charter and of the principles of
international law, as confirmed in several resolutions
of the General Assembly. The armed forces of the
Russian Federation form the core of the CSTO. Their
role in the illegal aggression against Ukraine, with all
the atrocities reported on daily basis, has indisputably
stigmatized that entire organization, hampered its
credibility and created an insurmountable obstacle for
its cooperation with the United Nations. Against that
background, we can no longer support cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization, and we invite all United Nations
Member States to consider taking the same approach in
that regard.
Mr.
Kyslytsya
(Ukraine):
Before
the
General Assembly proceeds with action on draft
resolution A/77/L.13, entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization”, I would like to make the
following statement.
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
has been an important tool for the effective settlement
of conflicts and the promotion of peace and security,
humanitarian assistance, development and human
rights across the globe. One could hardly doubt
the need to further enhance cooperation with those
regional organizations whose members are guided in
their activities by the United Nations Charter and do
not violate its core principles.
The CSTO definitely does not belong in that group.
Let me recall that, following the invasion of Ukraine by
Russia, the heart of the CSTO, on 2 March the General
Assembly adopted by an overwhelming majority
resolution ES‑11/1, “Aggression against Ukraine”, in
which it deplored in the strongest terms the Russian
Federation’s aggression against Ukraine, in violation of
paragraph 4 of Article 2 of the United Nations Charter.
We have agreed in this Hall that that aggression is being
conducted by the aggressor army, the armed forces of
the Russian Federation, with the full assistance and

22-7032823/30

A/77/PV.39

support of Belarus, another CSTO member that has
been recognized by the General Assembly as a State
involved in the unlawful use of force against Ukraine.
That is a clear act of aggression and an attack on
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine
within its internationally recognized borders, a brutal
violation of the United Nations Charter and the basic
norms and principles of international law, and a breach
of international peace and security.
In view thereof, on 16 March the International
Court of Justice rendered provisional measures
ordering Russia to immediately suspend its military
action in Ukraine. Despite its legally binding nature,
Russia has not yet implemented the order. On
24 March, the General Assembly adopted resolution
ES-11/2, on the humanitarian consequences of the
aggression against Ukraine, recalling its demand that
Russia immediately, completely and unconditionally
withdraw all of its military forces from the territory of
Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders.
More recently, the General Assembly reiterated its
support for the United Nations Charter following
Russia’s illegal attempted annexation of another part of
Ukraine’s territory, and contributed to efforts to hold
Russia accountable by adopting relevant resolutions
ES-11/4 and ES-11/5 on 12 October and 11 November,
respectively. On 7 April, we were also resolute enough
to suspend the membership rights of the Russian
Federation in the Human Rights Council in order to
protect the credibility of that body.
The United Nations credibility now also requires
our protection. The only correct thing I can do now, from
both the moral and the legal perspectives, is to request
a recorded vote on the draft resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and to inform members that the
delegation of Ukraine will vote against the draft.
The United Nations, established to maintain
international peace and security and to develop
friendly relations among States, should not endorse its
cooperation with the Russian-led military bloc, which
has become a clear example of the destructive policy
tools that Russia employs in the region. Let me clearly
state that the CSTO is an organization that unites
armed forces. The CSTO is basically the armed forces
of the Russian Federation. Ukraine cannot support
cooperation between the United Nations and the armed
forces of the Russian Federation, which are the core
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization and,
24/30

21/11/2022

at this very moment, continue to kill Ukrainians and
destroy our critical infrastructure. We understand that
some representatives might have needed or still need to
consult with their capitals, and that they may not have
instructions for a recorded vote and therefore may not
even be able to take part in the voting. We understand
that, but it also must be clear that pressing the green
button here would definitely be the same as pulling
the trigger of firearms aimed at Ukrainians on the
front line.
Taking that into account, I reiterate that
Ukraine has requested a recorded vote on draft
resolution A/77/L.13. We will vote against the draft and
urge the United Nations Members to do likewise..
Mr. Leucă (Republic of Moldova): I take the floor
to express my delegation’s position before we take action
on draft resolution A/77/L.16, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Commonwealth of
Independent States”.
The Republic of Moldova supports promoting
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in advancing the purposes and principles
of the Charter of United Nations. We understand the
contribution of that partnership to achieving the
respective aims of both organizations. My delegation
takes note of the activities outlined in the report of
the Secretary-General (A/77/277) on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS).
The Republic of Moldova wishes to reiterate
that, due to its reservations over the regulations
concerning the chairmanship of the Commonwealth of
Independent States that were adopted on 10 October
2008, the Republic of Moldova does not recognize
the international legal personality of the CIS. The
General Assembly has also already been informed of
the fact that the basic documents of the CIS — namely,
the Agreement establishing the Commonwealth of
Independent States, the Alma Ata Declaration and the
CIS Charter — do not endow the Commonwealth with
the status of a subject of international law. We therefore
ask that the adoption of draft resolution A/77/L.16 not
be interpreted as a deviation from previously expressed
Moldovan reservations.
Ms. Mustafa (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
takes the floor in reference to the note by the
Secretary-General before the General Assembly in
22-70328

21/11/2022

A/77/PV.39

document A/77/158 and the annexed draft report of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) on the implementation of the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction for 2021.
The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic notes
that the document is still in draft status and that it will
be discussed on 28 November at the Conference of the
State Parties of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons in The Hague. Therefore, we believe
that there is no point in presenting the draft report today
under the item entitled, “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons”. We also would like to note
that we have numerous comments on the draft report,
which we will introduce in the appropriate forum at the
Conference of the States Parties in The Hague.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote or position before action
is taken.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolutions A/77/L.4, A/77/L.12/Rev.1, A/77/L.13,
A/77/L.14 as orally revised, A/77/L.15, A/77/L.16,
A/77/L.17, A/77/L.18, A/77/L.19, A/77/L.20 and
A/77/L.21.
Draft resolution A/77/L.4 is entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/77/L.4: Albania, Algeria, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Canada, Comoros, Costa Rica, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Malta, Mexico,
Monaco, Montenegro, Namibia, Norway, Palau,

Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Türkiye,
Turkmenistan and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.4?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/11).

A/77/L.4

was

adopted

The
Acting
President:
Draft
resolution A/77/L.12/Rev.1 is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/77/L.12/Rev.1: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bulgaria, Cabo Verde, Canada,
China, Comoros, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, the
Dominican Republic, Estonia, Eswatini, Fiji, Finland,
France, the Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Iceland, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, the Niger, Norway, Pakistan, Palau, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan,
Tonga, Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Uganda, the
United Arab Emirates, the United States of America,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan and Zambia.
The Acting President: May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.12/ Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/77/L.12/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 77/12).

22-7032825/30

A/77/PV.39

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/77/L.13
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Collective Security Treaty Organization”.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Bahrain, Belarus,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Ghana, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru,
Qatar, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Serbia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Guatemala, Liberia, Lithuania, Marshall Islands,
North Macedonia, Poland, Ukraine
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Angola, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark,
El Salvador, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Malta, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Philippines,
Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, San Marino, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Trinidad
and Tobago, Türkiye, Uganda, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Draft resolution A/77/L.13 was adopted by 51 votes
to 7, with 70 abstentions (resolution 77/13).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/77/L.14,
as orally revised, is entitled “Cooperation between
the United Nations and the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries”.
26/30

21/11/2022

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/77/L.14, as orally revised: Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Chile, Croatia, Cyprus, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Mauritius, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Namibia, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Qatar,
Romania, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, Türkiye, Uganda, Ukraine, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.14?
Draft resolution A/77/L.14, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 77/14).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/77/L.15
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, Kiribati has also become a sponsor of
draft resolution A/77/L.15.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.15?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/15).

A/77/L.15

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/77/L.16
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Commonwealth of Independent States”.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.16?
22-70328

21/11/2022

Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/16).

A/77/PV.39

A/77/L.16

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/77/L.17
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the League of Arab States”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/77/L.17: Angola and Tajikistan.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.17?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/17).

A/77/L.17

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/77/L.18
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/77/L.18: Angola, Comoros and Guinea.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.18?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/18).

A/77/L.18

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/77/L.19
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Central European Initiative”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/77/L.19: Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Canada, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,

Germany, Iceland, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden and the United States of America.
The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested. A separate, single recorded vote has been
requested on the sixth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 3.
I shall first put to the vote the sixth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraph 3.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius,
Monaco, Montenegro, Myanmar, Netherlands,
New Zealand, North Macedonia, Norway, Oman,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Türkiye, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Yemen
Against:
Belarus, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Eritrea, Nicaragua, Russian Federation,
Syrian Arab Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, China, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Guinea, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Philippines, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Togo, Uganda, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam

22-7032827/30

A/77/PV.39

The sixth preambular paragraph and operative
paragraph 3 were retained by 78 votes to 7, with
40 abstentions.
The Acting President: I shall now put to the vote
draft resolution A/77/L.19 as a whole.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Eswatini, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia,
Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Türkiye, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Yemen
Against:
Belarus, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
Nicaragua, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab
Republic
Abstaining:
Algeria, Angola, Armenia, Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Cuba, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Honduras,
Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar,
Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Namibia, Nepal, South
Africa, Sri Lanka, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Uganda, Uzbekistan
Draft resolution A/77/L.19, as a whole, was
adopted by 102 votes to 5, with 28 abstentions
(resolution 77/19).
28/30

21/11/2022

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/77/L.20
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors
of draft resolution A/77/L.20: Algeria, Andorra,
Australia, Bahrain, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eswatini, France, Georgia, Guinea, Iceland, Indonesia,
Israel, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Marshall Islands, Mexico, the Federated
States of Micronesia, Monaco, Morocco, Namibia,
the Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, the Philippines, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia, Singapore,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, the
United States of America and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.20?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/20).

A/77/L.20

was

adopted

The Acting President: Draft resolution A/77/L.21
is entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD)”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document, the
following countries have also become sponsors of draft
resolution A/77/L.21: Albania, Angola, Cambodia,
Cyprus, Indonesia, Montenegro, the Philippines and
the Republic of Moldova.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/77/L.21?
Draft
resolution
(resolution 77/21).

A/77/L.21

was

adopted

22-70328

21/11/2022

The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of vote or position, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czechia): I would like to deliver
two statements.
First, let me deliver an explanation of position
on resolution 77/18, “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation”, under agenda item 127 (b). I have the
honour to deliver this explanation of position on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States.
The European Union and its member States
continue to support the resolution on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and encourage further
cooperation between both organizations, guided by
a shared commitment to maintaining international
peace and security and respecting human rights, as
well as defending the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.
We recognize that the resolution adopted today
contains limited changes compared to resolution 75/16,
adopted at the seventy-fifth session, and we appreciate
the facilitator’s readiness to take on board our
amendments as regards the operational paragraphs.
That having been said, we need to once again express
our disappointment that, despite strong objections
from several delegations, including those of the EU
and its member States, the reference to the OIC 2025
Programme of Action has been maintained in the text
of the resolution adopted.
The EU reiterates that the language contained in the
2025 Programme of Action is without any endorsement
of declarations, decisions and resolutions adopted by
the OIC forums, which ought to be fully consistent with
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
and in full respect for international law and the Charter
of the United Nations, including notably the principle
contained in Article 2.7. In that regard, we wish to put on
record that the provisions of the OIC 2025 Programme
of Action related to Cyprus are not consistent with
existing Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions as regards the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, and
we therefore disassociate ourselves from the consensus
on that preambular paragraph.

A/77/PV.39

Once again, we reiterate our encouragement to
the OIC to refrain from adopting positions that would
undermine international law and the United Nations
Charter. The EU trusts that its position will be taken
into account in the future so that it can continue to
support the resolution.
As to my second statement, I would like to
deliver an explanation of position on resolution 77/20,
“Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)”. It is my honour to deliver this statement
on behalf of the European Union and its member
States. The following countries align themselves with
this statement: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, the Republic of Moldova and Türkiye.
The European Union would like to extend its
thanks to the delegation of Canada and the United Arab
Emirates for the constructive spirit in which they led
the consultation process on the resolution. Our thanks
go also to the Office of the Special Representative of
INTERPOL to the United Nations for the expertise and
advice it provided in support of the negotiation process.
We welcome the consensual adoption of the resolution
for the third time.
Similarly, as was the case in the past, the resolution
continues to fulfil the following objectives. First,
it acknowledges and takes stock of the existing
institutional relationship between the United Nations and
INTERPOL. Secondly, it strengthens that cooperation
within the respective mandates of both organizations.
Finally, it raises awareness among Member States about
the role of INTERPOL at the United Nations.
This year’s revisions reflect the evolving
cooperation between the United Nations and
INTERPOL, its priorities and activities. We share the
view that, overall, it will positively contribute to the
further development and deepening of that relationship
and to strengthening international police cooperation
and law enforcement efforts worldwide. The current
resolution is an improvement over that adopted in 2020
(resolution 75/10).
In spite of the overall gains of the revised
resolution, there are, however, a couple of important
areas where the final consensus language does not fully
reflect positive developments that have occurred since
2020. In particular, we had hoped for more ambitious
provisions regarding compliance with human rights
and the mainstreaming of a gender perspective and

22-7032829/30

A/77/PV.39

advancing gender equality in law enforcement. It
is unfortunate that the resolution does not take into
account the recently agreed language, for example in
resolution 75/291, “The United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy: seventh review”.
Nonetheless, we were able to join the consensus, as
we understand that the new reference to strengthening
cooperation
in
accordance
with
applicable
international law includes human rights law, even if not
specifically mentioned.
Ms. Jiang Hua (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is a clear requirement of the Charter of
the United Nations. It is China’s consistent position
to support enhanced partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations. We hope
that all Member States will, as per established practice,
adopt by consensus General Assembly resolutions on
the cooperation and activities of regional organizations
with the United Nations over the past year.
Regrettably, during the consultations on resolution 77/19, “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Central European Initiative”, the concerns of
some countries about the text were not properly addressed and certain paragraphs fail to reflect the consensus of all parties. In that light, China abstained in
the voting on the relevant paragraphs of the resolution.
The Ukraine crisis and its spillover effects have
had widespread repercussions on the work of the

30/30

21/11/2022

United Nations at all levels. China has always stood for
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all countries and the peaceful resolution of the Ukraine
crisis. We hope that all parties concerned will create
conditions for an early launch of diplomatic negotiations
and explore the development of a balanced, effective
and sustainable European security architecture on
the basis of accommodating each other’s legitimate
security concerns so as to make joint efforts for peace
and stability on the European continent.
Mr. Ghadirkhomi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I am
taking the floor to explain the position of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on resolution 77/19, “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Central
European Initiative”.
My delegation voted in favour of the resolution
in order to preserve its long-standing support of
that biennial text and ongoing relations between
the United Nations and the members of the Central
European Initiative. Meanwhile, we would like to
disassociate ourselves from the sixth preambular
paragraph and operative paragraph 3. We regret that,
despite the frequent calls of Member States during the
informal meetings, the main sponsors of the resolution
were not able to take those demands into account
and that non-consensual language is reflected in the
final text.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

22-70328
