A /71/PV.35

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-first session

35th plenary meeting

Thursday, 27 October 2016, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Thomson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Fiji)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Zamora Rivas
(El Salvador), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 70 (continued)
Report of the International Court of Justice
Report of the International Court of Justice
(A/71/4)
Report of the Secretary-General (A/71/339)
Ms. Hioureas (Cyprus): It is a particular honour
and pleasure for the Republic of Cyprus to address the
General Assembly on its consideration of the report
of the International Court of Justice (A/71/4). We are
grateful to President Judge Ronny Abraham for his
introduction of the report and for his insightful remarks
on the work and functioning of the Court (see A/71/
PV.34).
Our debate this year has special significance as we
mark the seventieth anniversary of the establishment of
the Court. We welcome the commemorative activities
and initiatives outlined in its report. On this occasion
we wish to commend the Court on its significant work
as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations
and to pay tribute to past and present members of the
Court who have served and who serve the Court with
dedication and distinction. Since its creation in 1946,
the Court has heard more than 160 cases and delivered
121 judgments and 27 advisory opinions, which have
contributed significantly to the maintenance of peace

and security and to the development of international
law.
During the period under review, the International
Court of Justice experienced a high level of judicial
activity, with pending contentious cases involving
States from all continents. That diverse geographical
distribution of cases illustrates the universal character
of the jurisdiction of the principal judicial organ of
the United Nations. The cases submitted to the Court
involve a wide variety of subject matters, including
territorial and maritime disputes, the unlawful use of
force, interference in the domestic affairs of States,
violations of territorial integrity and sovereignty,
economic rights, international humanitarian and
human rights law, genocide, environmental damage and
conservation of living resources, immunities of States
and their officials, and interpretation and application of
international treaties and conventions.
Such diversity of subjects illustrates the general
character of the jurisdiction of the International Court
of Justice. The consistently high workload demonstrates
the confidence placed in the Court and the respect
shown to it by States. It is imperative that the Court
continue to modernize its work as a means to ensure
that its work is carried out as expeditiously as possible
and that it has the necessary means and resources that
will continue to ensure its integrity, impartiality and
independence.
As the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, the International Court of Justice does work of
utmost importance to the promotion of the rule of law,

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-34742 (E)

*1634742*

A/71/PV.35

friendly relations among States and international peace
and security. The Court’s jurisdiction over disputes has
influenced and shaped international law through the
peaceful settlement of disputes.
With trust in the Court’s capacity to deliver justice,
in 2002 the Republic of Cyprus made a declaration
for recognizing compulsory jurisdiction of the Court.
To date, we are one of only 72 countries in the world
to have done so. We call upon States to recognize the
jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with Article 36 of
the Statute of the International Court of Justice, thereby
promoting and facilitating the ability of the Court to
maintain and promote the rule of law throughout the
world.
Mr. Xu Hong (China) (spoke in Chinese): It gives me
great pleasure to speak under the agenda item “Report
of the International Court of Justice”. At the outset,
please allow me, on behalf of the Chinese delegation,
to express my appreciation to President Abraham of the
International Court of Justice for his presentation (see
A/71/PV.34). My thanks also go to all the judges and
staff of the Court for their hard work over the past year.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of
the inaugural sitting of the International Court of
Justice. Over the past 70 years, the Court, in faithfully
implementing its mandate in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and its own Statute, has
delivered over 120 judgments and issued close to 30
advisory opinions. It has played an important role in the
interpretation, application and development of the rules
of international law and in the peaceful settlement of
international disputes, thus making its due contribution
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
The performance of the Court may not be perfect, but
undoubtedly, as one of the six principal organs and the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations, the Court
has authority and influence that cannot be replaced or
matched by any other international judicial body.
Reviewing the past, we can see that it is no
coincidence that the International Court of Justice
has been successful in exercising its jurisdiction. It
has always acted prudently and has strictly abided
by the principle of the consent of States. The Court’s
judges, who represent major cultures and the principal
legal systems of the world, have maintained a high
level of professionalism, a responsible attitude and a
balanced judicial approach. The judges and internal
administrative organs, such as the Registry, have always
2/13

27/10/2016

kept their independence and been free from external
interference and influence by reporting to the General
Assembly and the Security Council periodically and by
listening to the views and comments of Member States.
The Court has, to a certain extent, made it possible for
the international community to exercise oversight of the
Court’s work. All the above have laid a solid foundation
for the Court to carry out its high-quality judicial
activities on the basis of objectivity and fairness.
After a journey of 70 years, the International
Court of Justice now stands at a new starting point. Its
workload has been rising, a fact that reflects the trust and
expectation of the international community, especially
disputing parties. The international community and
the United Nations should continue to provide strong
support to the Court for it to implement its mandate,
and such support should be in response to the appeal
and the concerns of the Court. That includes ensuring
human and financial resources at a level commensurate
with its responsibilities and status.
As a responsible member of the international
community, China has always actively promoted
the peaceful settlement of disputes through friendly
consultations. We will continue to safeguard the
international order, which is based on the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, and to
maintain and promote the rule of law at the international
level. We are confident that an international Court
that faithfully carries out its mandate according to
the Charter and its own Statute will continue to be the
model and guide for other international judicial bodies,
and will further contribute to the peaceful settlement
of disputes and the maintenance of international peace
and security.
Mr. Elshenawy (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Ronny Abraham,
President of the International Court of Justice, for
presenting the report of the Court (A/71/4) on its work
and activities from 1 August 2015 to 31 July 2016 (see
A/71/PV.34).
We align ourselves with the statements delivered
respectively by the representatives of Iran on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and of South
Africa on behalf of the Group of African States (see
A/71/PV.34).
Egypt strongly believes in the important role of
the International Court of Justice as the main judicial
organ of the United Nations. We believe that since the
16-34742

27/10/2016

inception of the Court in June 1945 and the beginning
of its activities in April 1946, the legal and political
landscape has changed. That has reaffirmed the role
of the Court in the peaceful settlement of conflicts
among countries, as set out in the Charter of the United
Nations, and in advancing and strengthening the rule
of law.
The number of cases before the Court and the
number of advisory opinions issued by it have increased.
Currently, there are diverse cases before it, including
from countries on all continents. That underscores the
universal aspect of the Court and the absolute trust in it
and its judges, who are all respected and valued by the
international community. That is why we need to respect
and implement its decisions and advisory opinions.
Nevertheless, and at a time when we are witnessing
an increase in the number of cases before the Court, in
the past year the Court did not receive any request for an
advisory opinion, in accordance with Article 96 of the
Charter of the United Nations. In that regard, we would
like to stress how important it is to benefit from the
role played by the Court and its advisory opinions, as
set out in the Charter, especially on issues that include
legal disputes. We encourage countries to accept the
mandate of the Court, in accordance with Article 36 of
its Statute, as requested by the General Assembly in its
resolution 70/118, on the rule of law at the national and
international levels.
Egypt believes that it is important for the General
Assembly to provide the financial resources the Court
needs without making any reduction, so that it can
deliver its message in the best possible way, as the main
judicial organ of the United Nations. The Assembly
must take into consideration the unprecedented
level of activities and that Member States have
repeatedly stressed the need to provide the requisite
financial resources to the Court for its independent
administration.The delegation of Egypt will make sure
that this will be realized through the Fifth Committee of
the General Assembly. To assist countries to settle their
disputes through the International Court of Justice, we
urge countries, especially those who can afford to do
so, to provide financial contributions to the trust fund
that was established by the Secretary-General in 1989
for that purpose.
In conclusion, Egypt again thanks the International
Court of Justice and its President, and emphasizes that
it will continue to support the Court.

A/71/PV.35

Mr. Elias-Fatile (Nigeria): I thank you, SIr, for
convening this important meeting to consider the
report of the International Court of Justice (A/71/4).
Nigeria is grateful to the President of the Court, Judge
Ronny Abraham, for his comprehensive briefing and
insightful remarks earlier this morning (see A/71/
PV.34). We congratulate the Court on the celebration
of the seventieth anniversary of its inaugural sitting on
20 April.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of South Africa on behalf of the
Group of African States (see A/71/PV.34).
The International Court of Justice is an integral
part of the mechanisms of the United Nations for the
promotion of the rule of law and international peace
and security through the administration of international
justice. There is no gainsaying the fact that the Court has
made tremendous contributions to the promotion of and
respect for the rule of law at the international level. In
addition, over the years, the Court has continued to play
a vital role in the maintenance of international peace
and security through its rulings and judicial notices.
It has also contributed significantly to the corpus of
international jurisprudence. It is remarkable that the
Court’s judgments, judicial opinions and notices have
had salutary effects on the maintenance of peace and
security in all regions of the world.
We have studiously reviewed the Court’s report
for the period 1 August 2015 to 31 July 2016. We have
taken note of its judicial and other activities during the
reporting period, and we commend the Court for the
measures that it has taken in recent years to enhance
its efficiency, which has facilitated the effective
management of its steadily increasing workload. In
particular, we noted that, during the period under
review, the Court experienced a high level of judicial
activity, which included rulings on two cases between
Costa Rica and Nicaragua, public hearings and other
pending contentious cases involving States from all
continents — six from the Americas, five from Africa,
four from Europe, three from Asia and one from
Oceania. The diverse geographical distribution of those
cases is truly illustrative of the universal character of
the jurisdiction of the Court.
Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the cases
submitted to the Court involve a wide variety of
subject matters, including territorial and maritime
disputes, the unlawful use of force, interference

16-347423/13

A/71/PV.35

in the domestic affairs of States, violations of
territorial integrity and sovereignty, economic rights,
international humanitarian and human rights law,
genocide, environmental damage and the conservation
of living resources, the immunities of States and their
representatives, and the interpretation and application
of international treaties and conventions.
Significantly, we also noted in the report that
the cases that States have entrusted to the Court for
settlement are growing in factual and legal complexity.
Indeed, the diversity of those issues illustrates the
general character of the jurisdiction of the Court and
attests to the increasing relevance of the Court, both
as a principal organ of the United Nations and as an
instrument for the peaceful settlement of disputes.
We note with appreciation that the Court has
continued to publicize its decisions through modern
information and communications technology. We
also welcome the Court’s ongoing engagement with
the public. Those efforts serve to promote greater
transparency in its activities. Nevertheless, we observed
that, during the period under review, no request for
an advisory opinion was submitted to the Court. The
importance of advisory opinions on legal questions
referred to the Court in the pursuit of the peaceful
settlement of disputes cannot be overemphasized. We
therefore encourage more use of the Court for advisory
opinions on sundry issues.
Under the provision of Article 36, paragraphs 2
and 5, of the Statute of the Court, States are expected
to make declarations recognizing the compulsory
jurisdiction of the Court. Nigeria notes with concern
that, of the 193 Member States, only 72 have so far
made declarations recognizing the jurisdiction of the
Court. That represents less than half of the membership
of the United Nations. We would like to see more
countries accept the compulsory jurisdiction of the
Court, in consonance with resolution 69/123. We
encourage Member States that have yet to subscribe to
the compulsory jurisdiction of the Court to endeavour
to do so. That, we believe, would further strengthen the
Court’s role and ability to promote international justice
and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
I would like to assure the Assembly that Nigeria
will continue to abide by its commitments to the
promotion of international justice and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, as a State party to the Statute
of the International Court of Justice. Having made the
4/13

27/10/2016

declaration recognizing the jurisdiction of the Court as
compulsory, our acceptance of the ruling of the Court
on the border dispute between Nigeria and Cameroon
demonstrates our conviction and commitment to the
precepts and principle of the International Court of
Justice. We shall continue to support the Court, where
three illustrious Nigerians had served meritoriously as
judges. Therefore, we encourage all Member States to
continue to offer their support to the activities of the
Court to promote international justice and the rule
of law.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of Bolivia
has taken note of the report of the International Court
of Justice for the period 1 August 2015 to 31 July 2016
(A/71/4). We would also like to thank the President
of the International Court of Justice, Judge Ronny
Abraham, for his briefing to the Assembly (see A/71/
PV.34).
As a peaceful nation, Bolivia complies with the
criteria enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and adheres to the principles of the International Court of
Justice, its jurisdiction and its call for ongoing dialogue
between neighbouring nations and brothers. The Court,
its purposes and principles provide new opportunities
to resolve our differences. The Plurinational State of
Bolivia is convinced that the International Court of
Justice constitutes one of the best paths to the peaceful
resolution of disputes between States. Bolivia urges
all States to adhere in good faith to its jurisdiction
and its decisions, in keeping with the Charter of the
United Nations.
This year is of particular interest, given the increase
in the number of cases submitted to and resolved by the
Court on a diversity of matters, which is a reflection
of the general nature of the competence of the main
judicial body of the United Nations, as well as of the
fact that States put their trust in it. We take note of
the effectiveness and efficiency of the Court’s efforts
to make use of new technologies. They contribute to
better performance, given the limited time frames and
the complex cases before it.
Without a doubt, it is the quality of the Court’s
rulings, its proven independence and its adherence
to international law, to the evidence presented and to
judicial reasoning that represent the main contribution
of great value to the international community of nations.
The positive evaluation of the Court by the Assembly
16-34742

27/10/2016

corresponds to the trust that we, the States, also place
in it for fair procedures and rulings that endure through
time. Humankind and our countries have taken a
qualitative, extraordinary leap in maintaining peace,
strengthening the rule of law, bolstering respect for
basic rights and improving the quality of life on our
planet by establishing and supporting the Court. Its
decisions and advisory opinions over the past 71 years
are convincingtestimony to its peaceful and practical
nature and its ability to peacefully resolve conflicts.
Bolivia wishes to highlight that the Court still has
a long way to go on its path towards great achievements.
Peoples and States bring cases to The Hague with hope
for justice and reparations, and for reasonable and
fitting agreements, as they search for opportunities for
all parties — opportunities that war, violence and their
consequences deny the peoples The International Court
of Justice represents, then, a space of hope for peace
and justice.
Bolivia understands the scope of the budgetary
requirements presented in the Court’s report and will
support the necessary decisions to meet those needs.
Bolivia agrees with the Court in two cases, one as
an applicant and the other as a respondent, both against
the Republic of Chile. We accept and respect the Court’s
jurisdiction and trust that its decisions will contribute
to positively resolving the disputes that separate our
two neighbouring and brother nations. As President
Evo Morales said, Bolivia once again declares that there
is only one way to resolve pending issues, and that is
through negotiations and peaceful means as established
by international law,
Lastly, Bolivia reaffirms its inclination towards
the peaceful resolution of conflicts and reiterates its
adherence to the principles of international law and the
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations.
It is not force that brings about law. It is the reason of
the law that repairs injustices.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): My delegation would
like to thank the International Court of Justice for its
detailed report on its work (A/71/4). The Court has
indeed had a very busy and productive year. We would
also like to extend our warm congratulations to the
Court on the occasion of the seventieth anniversary of
its inaugural sitting. We have every confidence that the
Court will continue to grow from strength to strength.

A/71/PV.35

Singapore attaches great importance to the
principle of the rule of law at both the national and the
international levels. For small States like Singapore, the
principle of the rule of law is not an academic notion. It
is a critical precondition for our survival and continued
existence as independent, sovereign States.
An integral and indivisible part of the rule of law
is the settlement of international disputes by peaceful
means. The Court plays a crucial role in that regard
by providing an effective, established and objective
mechanism for States to resolve their disputes in
accordance with international law. The Court’s role
in resolving disputes and maintaining international
peace and stability cannot be overemphasized. The
International Court of Justice is the only international
court of universal character with general jurisdiction.
The Court therefore occupies a special position within
the international community, from which it is well
placed to uphold and promote the rule of law. Singapore
has been and will continue to be supportive of the Court.
Singapore notes that the Court’s workload has
grown considerably over the past 20 years and that the
number of cases brought before it has been increasing.
The Court has done its best to meet that challenge
through the use of new technologies, as well as by
setting a highly demanding schedule of hearings and
deliberations. We commend the Court on the level of
commitment and professionalism with which the Court,
its judges and the Registry discharge their functions.
We also express our appreciation for their dedicated
service to the global community.
Singapore also notes the concerns raised by the
Court in its report regarding the final budget approved
by the General Assembly for the biennium 2016-2017.
As the principal judicial organ in the United Nations
system and one that has discharged its function
responsibly, the Court should, inour view, enjoy the
full support of Member States. It is therefore vital that
Member States demonstrate their support by ensuring
that the Court is given adequate resources to discharge
its role efficiently and effectively.
Let me conclude by saying that Singapore has
always supported and will continue to support the work
of the Court. We will also continue to monitor with
great interest every decision and opinion of the Court.
We wish the Court every success in the coming year.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to express its appreciation to

16-347425/13

A/71/PV.35

Judge Abraham for his able leadership as the President
of the International Court of Justice. We also wish
to thank him for his detailed report on the Court’s
activities of the past year (see A/71/PV.34).
The Court remains highly active, with 14 pending
cases on its docket. Over the period under consideration,
the Court has handed down 11 orders and examined two
joint cases. It also held public hearings in five instances
and took on three new contentious cases. The Court
covers a broad range of issues involving States from all
continents.
Here we wish to commend the Court for its
remarkable efforts in the efficient management
of its cases, which involve many procedural steps
with growing factual and judicial complexity in the
background. This year, new cases have been submitted
to the Court relating to the shared use of waters,
diplomatic immunity and sovereignty. That underlines
the varied nature of the cases heard and testifies to the
universal character of the Court.
Thailand has been following with particular
interest the activity of the Court in various cases,
such as boundary disputes, maritime delineation
and the interpretation of treaties and judgments. The
Court’s latest ruling regarding the two joint cases,
concerning Certain Activities carried out by Nicaragua
in the Border Area (Costa Rica v. Nicaragua) and
Construction of a Road in Costa Rica along the San
Juan River (Nicaragua v. Costa Rica), is of particular
interest to us.
Regarding international environmental law, the
Court has confirmed and extended its previous rulings
on the obligations of States with respect to activities in
their territories that could have a negative impact on the
territory of a neighbouring State. We should note that
the Court has made reference to obligations stemming
from international customary law and international
general law, without drawing a clear distinction between
the two nor suggesting that they overlap. However, it
would perhaps be useful to understand the reasoning
behind the reference to such different sources of law.
(spoke in English)
The Kingdom of Thailand wishes to join the
international community in congratulating the
International Court of Justice on its seventieth
anniversary. We value the Court’s unique role as
the principle judicial organ of the United Nations in
6/13

27/10/2016

safeguarding the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and the enormous contribution
that the Court’s impressive jurisprudence has made
to international law. On behalf of the Royal Thai
Government, I would like to take this opportunity to
pay tribute to all the judges, the Registrar and the staff
of the Court for their dedication and commitment.
International law is powerless if States refuse
to uphold it. Over the years, the Court’s intellectual
authority has greatly contributed to ensuring
compliance with its judgments. We commend the
Court’s rigorous process in conducting its deliberations
and reaching its decisions. That has led to increased
confidence in the Court and in the judicial and peaceful
settlement of disputes in general. We commend the
Court for duly taking into account the jurisprudence
of other international courts and tribunals and for
making efforts to align its rulings with the decisions of
those bodies, thus ensuring coherence in international
law. Accordingly, the Court has played a key role
in strengthening respect for the rule of law at the
international level.
It is essential to preserve the integrity of the Court
by appointing qualified and competent judges and
ensuring their absolute independence. My delegation
therefore wishes to stress the need to avoid adopting
a pension scheme for judges of the Court that might
discourage the most highly qualified individuals from
standing for election.
Finally, we wish to comment on budgetary issues.
While we recognize the necessity of budget cuts,
we are of the view that the Assembly should give
due consideration to the situation of the Court. Its
budgetary requests have already been modest, and its
proper functioning should not be constrained because
of inadequate funding. We hope that a satisfactory
solution will soon be found and sufficient support
provided to that important organ of the United Nations.
Mr. Remaoun (Algeria): The International Court
of Justice remains the only jurisdiction that enjoys
universality. It acts as a World Court. The Court is
enshrined in the United Nations Charter as its principal
judicial organ. I recall that the document that was
signed in 1945 in San Francisco is entitled “Charter
of the United Nations and Statute of the International
Court of Justice”. It therefore enjoys a unique status in
the international legal framework.
16-34742

27/10/2016

The Court’s work has grown significantly in factual
and legal complexity over the past seventy years.
The Court has been entrusted with resolving many
contentious cases from all over the world, involving
a wide range of subjects, such as territorial disputes,
environmental damage, violations of territorial
integrity, and the right to self-determination of peoples
under colonial rule or foreign occupation. Moreover,
despite the increasing complexity of the cases and the
considerable growth in the workload of the Registry
over the past twenty years, Algeria commends the
Court for its efficient response to those new challenges
and encourages the Court to pursue its efforts to further
strengthen measures already taken.
In that regard, Algeria reiterates its full support for
the Court’s key role in ensuring the implementation of
the provisions of international law, adjudicating disputes
between States and providing advisory opinions to
United Nations organs and specialized agencies.
Accordingly, it is important for the United Nations,
particularly the Security Council, to request advisory
opinions from the Court on legal issues. The high moral
and legal value of the Court’s advisory opinions could
contribute tremendously to strengthening international
peace and security and the rule of law.
As Algeria is chairing the First Committee, on
disarmament and international security, during the
current session of the General Assembly, my delegation
would like to reaffirm, as stated this morning by the
representative of the Group of African States (see
A/71/PV.34), the importance of the Court’s advisory
opinion of 8 July 1996 on the Legality of the Threat or
Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued under the presidency
of the Algerian judge, Mr. Mohammed Bedjaoui. In
that advisory opinion, the Court’s judges concluded
unanimously that
“There exists an obligation to pursue in good
faith and bring to a conclusion negotiations leading
to nuclear disarmament in all its aspects under
strict and effective international control.”
Therefore, Algeria calls upon all Member States
to meet that obligation to carry out the process of
nuclear disarmament.
Finally, Algeria would like to underscore that, at
its 2016 session, the Special Committee on the Charter
of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of the
Role of the Organization recommended that the General
Assembly mark the seventieth anniversary of the

A/71/PV.35

International Court of Justice through a commemorative
draft resolution to be adopted during the current
session. Algeria is honoured to have contributed to that
process in its capacity as Vice-Chair of the Special
Committee and looks forward to the adoption of that
highly symbolic draft resolution (A/C.6/71/L.16).
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Let me start by thanking His Excellency
Judge Abraham for his report (see A/71/PV.34). It is an
honour for me to participate once again in the annual
meeting of the General Assembly to consider the report
on the work of the International Court of Justice, the
only international court of a universal character with
general jurisdiction and the principal judicial organ of
the United Nations.
During the reporting period, the work of the
Court was once again very intensive. It handed down
judgments in two cases — in which, moreover, Costa
Rica was a party — handed down 11 orders, held five
public hearings, was seized of three new contentious
cases, and followed up on 14 pending proceedings. We
highlight the fact that cases originate in every continent
and are of the most diverse nature., That is evidence
of the universal character of the Court’s jurisdiction
and the importance that the membership attach to
its decisions.
As the peaceful settlement of international disputes
is a vital objective of the United Nations, the role of
the Court in the maintenance of international peace
and security and the promotion of the rule of law at the
international level is a key one, hence the responsibility
of the United Nations and its Member States to support
the Court in the fulfilment of its tasks. That support
calls for the Organization to ensure that the Court is
able to deal efficiently and objectively, with complete
procedural and judicial independence, with the cases
submitted to it. It is therefore vitally urgent to ensure
that it receives the necessary budgetary resources to
fulfil its mandate, taking its workload into account.
As a democracy that disbanded its armed forces
in 1948, Costa Rica recognizes international law and,
in particular, the International Court of Justice and
respect for the rule of law at the international level,
as tools necessary for survival. For my country, it is
of the utmost importance that all States comply with
their international obligations vis-à-vis other States,
including, of course, the decisions of the Court. We

16-347427/13

A/71/PV.35

advocate that such compliance in all cases be complete
and in good faith, thereby ensuring peace and justice.
In that regard, it is important for my delegation to
reiterate how important it is for the United Nations to
consider options for ensuring follow up on the judicial
rulings, with a view to preventing irregular situations
that might violate the rule of law.
The International Court of Justice plays a
fundamental role in promoting the rule of law at the
international level. Through its advisory opinions and
judgments, as well as through various activities in
which it participates — publicity, easy-access diffusion
of its proceedings through its electronic portal and
various academic programmes — the Court also
contributes to the development of international law.
Moreover, we recognize the role that the Court can play
in meeting the Sustainable Development Goals as an
organ able to prevent the use of force, defend the right
of peoples seeking self-determination, advocate for the
protection of the environment and recognize human
rights violations.
My delegation welcomes the Court’s seventieth
anniversary of its inaugural meeting on 20 April. Costa
Rica accepted the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction in
1973 and respectfully invites States that have not yet
done so to consider making use of the mechanism
provided for in Article 36 of the Court’s Statute and to
accept its jurisdiction.
Today, following the commemoration of its
seventieth anniversary, we are confident that the
Court will continue to work diligently with a view to
resolving the disputes brought before it in an impartial
and fair manner, in accordance with the mission
entrusted to it by Member States through the Charter
of the United Nations. In that regard and in keeping
with our tradition of respect for the instruments and
bodies of international law, we reiterate once again our
commitment to abiding faithfully by all decisions of the
Court, and we reaffirm our full confidence that it will
continue to strengthen peace and justice through the
objective performance of its tasks.
Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, allow me to thank Judge Ronny Abraham,
President of the International Court of Justice, for the
Court’s comprehensive report, contained in document
A/71/4, covering the Court’s activities for the period
from 1 August 2015 to 31 July 2016.
8/13

27/10/2016

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and by the representative of
South Africa on behalf of the Group of African States
(see A/71/PV.34), and wishes to make the following
comments in its national capacity.
Our meeting this year coincides with the
seventieth anniversary of the first sitting of the
International Court of Justice, which was celebrated
in April. On this occasion, my delegation would like
to present its warmest congratulations to the Court’s
President, Vice-President, judges and all those who
have contributed to the successful work of the Court.
Established by the Charter of the United Nations in
June 1945 as the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, the Court began its activities in April 1946.
Since then, it has played a very important role in
contributing to the development and interpretation of
the institutional law of the Organization, including the
interpretation of the provisions of the Charter. It has
also contributed to the development of international
law through its advisory opinions and judgments.
Its role and relevance continue to be reaffirmed.
States, in the exercise of their sovereignty and good
will, use the services of the Court for advice in order
to peacefully settle their disputes, be they bilateral or
trilateral. The fact that a number of States have asked
the Court to provide its opinion on a wide range of
subjects testifies to the universal and multidisciplinary
character of the Court. Indeed, the subject matter of the
cases brought before the Court is greatly varied and
includes territorial and maritime disputes, the unlawful
use of force, interference in the internal affairs of States,
violations of States’ territorial integrity and sovereignty,
economic rights, international humanitarian and human
rights law, environmental damage and the conservation
of living resources, the immunity of States and their
representatives, and the interpretation and application
of conventions and treaties.
The Court can also play an important role in offering
incentives for parties to negotiate by administering
transactional justice, which offers them the opportunity
to settle their disputes themselves. It can be said,
therefore, that the Court provides an invaluable service
to the parties to a dispute and performs a valuable role
of facilitation and negotiation.
Moreover, under Article 96, paragraph 1, of the
Charter, the Economic and Social Council, Trusteeship
16-34742

27/10/2016

Council, the Interim Committee of the General
Assembly and the international organizations associated
with them have made use of the Court’s services. As a
result, the International Court of Justice is the judicial
organ par excellence of the United Nations system.
For its part, the Court, as the sole international
jurisdiction of a universal nature, having a double
competence — contentious cases and consultation—
has never refused to issue a judgment or an advisory
opinion, as long as the conditions relating to its
jurisdiction were met. That has made it the most
accessible and in-demand court in terms of settling
disputes among States. It therefore plays an essential
role in the peaceful settlement of disputes and the
promotion of the rule of law worldwide.
As of 31 July, the Court had 14 cases on its docket.
Three new contentious cases were brought before it
by six States from America, five from Africa, four
from Europe, three from Asia and one from Oceania.
That confirms the universality of the Court, given the
diversity of the cases and subject matter, and illustrates
the general nature of its jurisdiction as the principal
judicial organ of the United Nations.
That said, after 70 years of accumulated legal
experience and activity, the Court must now better
equip itself and adapt in order to meet new challenges.
Finally, my delegation appreciates the important
role played by the Court in the peaceful settlement
of disputes and its valuable contribution to the
consolidation and interpretation of the rules of
international law. Hence, it is important to disseminate
the Court’s work by publishing its judgments, advisory
opinions and decisions so as to inculcate among the
larger public the values ​​and principles of the peaceful
settlement of conflicts, contribute to preventive
diplomacy and promote the rule of law.
Mr. Medina Mejías (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela associates
itself with the statement made by the representative of
the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (see A/71/PV.34).
My delegation thanks the Honourable Judge Ronny
Abraham, President of the International Court of
Justice, for presenting the report of the Court (A/71/4).
We value the positive efforts made by that principal
judicial organ of the United Nations to improve its
efficiency and respond to the increased workload. We

A/71/PV.35

stress the importance of publishing the Court’s report
with sufficient time to enable States to prepare their
comments and make contributions in a timely manner.
The delegation of Venezuela reaffirms the
importance of respect for international law, including
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations, as an essential element for maintaining
international peace and security. In that regard,
respect for sovereignty, the right of peoples to selfdetermination, territorial integrity and political
independence, peaceful settlement of disputes and
refraining from the threat or use of force are increasingly
relevant, especially since those principles are the basis
for peaceful coexistence among nations.
Venezuela reiterates its commitment to the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in accordance with
Article 2 and Chapters VI and VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations. Member States have the sovereign
right to choose the most appropriate means of achieving
a peaceful solution to a dispute. Similarly, legal
obligations resulting from accession to international
agreements must also be honoured.
By strengthening international law through its
effective implementation, the International Court of
Justice plays a vital role in promoting the peaceful
settlement of disputes among States, pursuant to Article
33 of the Charter of this multilateral Organization.
Moreover, it is noteworthy that the Court in its historical
evolution has adopted broad advisory opinions on
various issues with political and legal implications in
the area of peace and international justice.
Venezuela regrets that almost 20 years after
the adoption of the advisory opinion on the Legality
of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, there has
been no significant progress in the field of nuclear
disarmament. The use of that category of weapons of
mass destruction is still part of the strategic doctrine
of the military alliances of certain nuclear Powers.
We therefore encourage the international community,
especially the nuclear-weapon States, to pursue their
efforts to negotiate a legally binding instrument
proscribing the threat, use, production and stockpiling
of nuclear weapons.
In conclusion, we urge strengthened interaction
among the Security Council, the General Assembly
and the International Court of Justice, given that,
within the framework of their respective competencies,
the peaceful resolution of disputes in support of

16-347429/13

A/71/PV.35

27/10/2016

international peace and security is a common objective,
in keeping with the fundamental purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations and the desire of humankind.

I would like to take this opportunity to again
express to the Court and all of its States members and
staff, on behalf of France, our gratitude for its work.

In that connection, we believe it would be useful
for the General Assembly, other United Nations bodies
and duly authorized specialized agencies if they were
to more frequently request advisory opinions from the
Court concerning the issues on their agendas with legal
implications.

Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh thanks
the President of the International Court of Justice for
the Court’s comprehensive report (A/71/4) detailing
the pending and increased workload before the
Court and the measures taken to ensure the Court’s
enhanced efficiency and visibility. We wish to take this
opportunity to once again express our appreciation to
the Court on the commemoration, in April this year, of
the seventieth anniversary of its formal seating. That
solemn occasion was a reminder of the crucial role
played by the Court in promoting the pacific settlement
of international disputes, as stipulated by the Charter of
the United Nations.

Mr. Alabrune (France) (spoke in French): The
delegation of France wishes to thank the President
of the International Court of Justice, Judge Ronny
Abraham, for his introduction of the Court’s annual
report (A/71/4). The report is excellent and helpful
and confirms the Court’s importance in the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States. As highlighted
in the list of cases on the docket, the Court has indeed
seen its litigation activity increase over recent decades,
thus demonstrating States’ confidence in the institution
of the Court.
The decisions of the Court contribute to the easing of
relations between States and the quest to settle disputes
where other means have failed. If the Court’s decisions
are binding on the parties because of the authority of
the res judicata attached to them, States’ respect for
and willingness to comply with them are a function of
their high quality, as references to the Court’s case law
by other national and international courts attest. France
therefore reiterates its commitment to and support of the
Court, especially in view of its seventieth anniversary.
That support is manifested through a contribution to
the Court’s resources and contributions to the Court’s
work on the part of French lawyers from the beginning.
France may be subject to the Court’s jurisdiction by
way of the many treaties to which it is party. It is also
the only State to have accepted the Court’s jurisdiction
under article 38, paragraph 5, of the Rules of Court, at
the request of another State.
Next year will mark the renewal of one third of the
judges of the Court. In that regard, France would like to
stress the importance of the Court’s composition. The
representation of various world cultures and languages
greatly improves the quality of the Court’s decisions.
A true balance of the various legal systems forming
the basis of international law is obtained by way of the
languages represented.
10/13

The photographic display inaugurated at United
Nations Headquarters last week provides a vivid
account of the Court’s contributions over the years,
as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations,
in upholding the rule of law at the international level
and in the maintenance of international peace, security
and justice.
Bangladesh believes that the sustained confidence
in the Court felt by the international community is
manifested through the broad range of subjects and
cases invoked under its general jurisdiction. It is further
reinforced by the Court’s jurisdiction ratione materiae
in the resolution of disputes among the States that are
party to the more than 300 bilateral and multilateral
treaties and conventions. The 121 judgments and 27
advisory opinions that the Court has delivered to date
constitute a seminal contribution in the development of
international law.
As a nation with an unequivocal commitment
to the peaceful settlement of disputes, including
through recourse to international law, Bangladesh
duly acknowledges the Court’s judgments, advisory
opinions and ongoing work concerning territorial
integrity and sovereignty, unlawful use of force and
interference in the domestic affairs of States, among
other issues. Given our history of resolving outstanding
maritime and land boundary delimitation issues with
our neighbours through legal and peaceful means,
we continue to follow with interest the Court’s work
on territorial and maritime disputes, as well as on the
conservation of natural and living resources.
16-34742

27/10/2016

As part of our unremitting advocacy for a
peaceful, just and viable solution to the political and
humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories, Bangladesh attaches great importance to the
Court’s advisory opinion on the Legal Consequences of
the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem,
which continues to pose a formidable obstacle to the
meaningful resumption of the peace process.
Every year Bangladesh co-sponsors the General
Assembly draft resolution entitled “Follow-up to the
advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
on the legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons”,
as we underscore the importance of commencing
negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament on a
comprehensive convention addressing all aspects of the
prohibition and elimination of nuclear weapons.
We expect that in the course of its judicial and
advisory work on environmental issues, the Court
will give due consideration to the issues of climate
justice and loss and damage, as recognized by the Paris
Agreement on Climate Change. The Court’s opinions
on those issues could be useful for climate-vulnerable
countries as they continue to seek appropriate responses
to climate-change threats and impacts through effective
adaptation and mitigation measures.
Bangladesh recognizes the Court’s need for
adequate resources for ensuring its proper functioning
and urges all Member States to give due consideration
to the Court’s submissions in that regard. We note
with appreciation the efforts being made to further
upgrade the Court’s visibility online, including through
its website, and to enhance the use of information
and communications technology in tandem with the
growing complexity of its work.
Bangladesh remains mindful of the General
Assembly’s call upon States to accept the Court’s
jurisdiction, in accordance with its Statute. We
thank those Member States that have made voluntary
contributions this year to the Secretary-General’s
Trust Fund to assist States in bearing the expenses
incurred during the settlement of disputes through the
International Court of Justice.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to express my warm
congratulations to the President of the International
Court of Justice for his very detailed presentation this
morning in the General Assembly (see A/71/PV.34)

A/71/PV.35

of the report of the Court on its activities (A/71/4).
Its work, much like its work last year, has consisted
of the holding of public hearings on cases and the
publication of its judgments and rulings. Moreover, the
types of cases brought before the Court have broadened
and are now extremely varied in subject matter,
such as territorial and maritime disputes, genocide,
environmental damage, the preservation of biological
resources, the interpretation and implementation of
international conventions and treaties, and violations
of territorial integrity, sovereignty, international
humanitarian law and human rights. The vitality of the
Court is commendable.
I also pay tribute to the States that have chosen
the judicial option to settle their disputes. In doing
so, they have opted for the peaceful settlement of
disputes, instead of resorting to force, thereby placing
the International Court of Justice at the heart of the
quest for and strengthening of international peace and
cooperation.
As a beneficiary of the United Nations judical
path, Cameroon can boast of being a model to follow,
as is evidenced by the 10 October 2002 Court ruling
regarding the land and maritime boundary between
Cameroon and Nigeria. The implementation of that
decision is now in its final stage and has resulted in
greater solidarity between the peoples of Cameroon and
Nigeria. I take this opportunity to congratulate once
again and thank our bilateral and multilateral partners,
who have worked tirelessly to help us implement that
judgment. That is proof that resort to international law
is the most appropriate path if we are to achieve lasting
peace among nations. I therefore urge all Member
States that are seeking a legal settlement for their
intergovernmental disputes and conflicts to be inspired
by our success.
President Paul Biya has always supported that
method of settling disputes. Achieving peace through
law, as he has advocated, is possible as long as force
yields to law and States recognize the primacy of
international law and the preponderant role of the
United Nations in that regard.
The celebration of the seventieth anniversary of the
International Court of Justice on 20 April 2016 was a
significant occasion for States and the Court to honour
the primacy of international law as the best manner of
settling international disputes.

16-3474211/13

A/71/PV.35

Following that celebration, Cameroon commends
how the Court has worked to adapt to recent
developments in international relations. It had
previously focused almost exclusively on border issues
and now has been able to make the necessary changes
to be able to grapple with new types of matters, such as
contentious cases related to environmental protection
and property rights.
The Court’s role is more important than ever
before. Indeed, considering the increasing complexity
of legal matters submitted to it, the judges are now
called on to advance international law in all areas
of the activities of our States. Cameroon takes this
opportunity to commend the efforts to modernize the
principal judicial organ of the United Nations so as to
enable it to contribute to the attainment of lasting peace
and stability amongst States.
In conclusion, I would like to call upon the
Court, following its anniversary, to envision a reform
mechanism aimed at optimizing its performance. Such a
reform could include increasing the consideration given
to African principles and values in order to enrich and
broaden the customary sources of international law.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): We have
heard the last speaker in the debate on this item.
May I take it that the General Assembly takes note
of the report of the International Court of Justice?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): May I
take it that it is the wish of the General Assembly to
conclude its consideration of agenda item 70?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Second report of the General Committee
(A/71/250/Add.1)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
paragraph (a) of its report, the General Committee
recommends to the General Assembly that an
additional item, entitled “Observer status for the
Central American Bank for Economic Integration in
the General Assembly” be included in the agenda of
12/13

27/10/2016

the current session under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters).
May I take it that the General Assembly decides to
include this item in the agenda of the current session,
under heading I?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): In
paragraph (b) of its report, the General Committee
further recommends that the new item be allocated to
the Sixth Committee.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides to
allocate this item to the Sixth Committee?
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
inform members that the agenda item entitled “Observer
status of the Central American Bank for Economic
Integration in the General Assembly” becomes agenda
item 174 of the agenda of the current session. The Chair
of the Sixth Committee will be informed of the decision
just taken by the General Assembly.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): If there
is no proposal under rule 66 of the rules of procedure,
I shall take it the Assembly decides not to discuss the
reports of the Fifth Committee which are before it
today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
Statements will therefore be limited to explanations of
vote or position. The positions of delegations regarding
the recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in that Committee and are reflected in the
relevant official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that:
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once; that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Main Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
16-34742

27/10/2016

explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to take decisions in the same manner as
was done in the Fifth Committee, unless otherwise
notified in advance.
Agenda item 135
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/545)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
Assembly has before it a draft resolution recommended
by the Fifth Committee in paragraph 6 of its report. The
Fifth Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly would like to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 71/6).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 135.

A/71/PV.35

Agenda items 133 and 144
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report on the activities of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/71/548)
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish): The
General Assembly will now take a decision on the
draft resolution entitled “Report on the activities of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services: report of the Fifth
Committee”, recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth Committee
adopted it without a vote. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 71/7).
The Acting President (spoke in Spanish):
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda items 133 and 144.
The meeting rose at 4.30 p.m.

16-3474213/13
