S/PRST/2007/19

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 June 2007
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5695th meeting of the Security Council, held on 14 June 2007, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Somalia”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its previous resolutions and Presidential
Statements on Somalia, in particular its resolution 1744 (2007) and
Presidential Statement S/PRST/2007/13, adopted on 30 April 2007.
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the National
Reconciliation Congress as a mechanism for much-needed political dialogue
and reconciliation in Somalia. The Security Council calls on the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG) and the National Governance and Reconciliation
Committee to ensure that the Congress convenes as soon as practicable. The
Security Council appreciates the efforts of Member States and partners to
support the early convening of the Congress and calls for further support. The
Security Council underscores the importance of the Congress:
–

addressing in a comprehensive and meaningful manner issues of
political reconciliation, including representation in the Transitional
Federal Institutions, and

–

agreeing a roadmap for the remainder of the transitional political
process, in line with the Transitional Federal Charter and as laid out
in the Roadmap to Governance, National Dialogue, and Reconciliation
in Somalia of 14 March 2007.

“The Security Council expresses its grave concern regarding the recent
pattern of attacks by extremist elements in Somalia, including the increased
use of explosive devices, and condemns all attempts to use violence to
undermine the political process and prevent the early convening of the
National Reconciliation Congress. The Security Council calls on all Member
States to cease immediately any further support for extremist elements or those
who seek to block progress by violent means, and to support the ongoing
efforts towards inclusive political dialogue. The Security Council recalls its
readiness, as set out in its resolution 1744 (2007), to consider measures against
those who block progress in the political process and threaten the Transitional
Federal Institutions.

07-38285 (E) 140607

*0738285*

S/PRST/2007/19

“The Security Council condemns the attack on the Prime Minister on
3 June 2007 and the attack on the forces of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) in Mogadishu on 16 May 2007. The Security Council
expresses its deepest sympathies to the families of the victims.
“The Security Council underlines its appreciation for the efforts of the
Ugandan forces currently deployed in Mogadishu under AMISOM and
Uganda’s invaluable contribution to peace and stability in Somalia. The
Security Council reiterates its call on Member States of the African Union to
contribute troops for AMISOM, and on other States and partners to provide
financial, technical and logistical support for this effort.
“The Security Council emphasizes the urgent need for appropriate
contingency planning for a possible United Nations mission, to be deployed in
Somalia if the Security Council decided to authorize such a mission. The
Security Council looks forward to receiving the report from the SecretaryGeneral regarding progress in this regard by mid-June.
“The Security Council emphasizes again the need for strengthened efforts
to provide humanitarian relief assistance to Somalia, including assistance to
the hundreds of thousands of displaced persons, urges Member States to
support generously such operations, and demands that all parties ensure
unfettered access for humanitarian assistance.”

2

07-38285
