UNITED
NATIONS

AS
General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
A/51/930
S/1997/488
24 June 1997
ORIGINAL:

GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Fifty-first session
Agenda item 110
HUMAN RIGHTS QUESTIONS

ENGLISH

SECURITY COUNCIL
Fifty-second year

Identical letters dated 23 June 1997 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and to the
President of the Security Council

I attach a letter dated 21 June 1997 which I have received from the two
Prime Ministers of the Royal Government of Cambodia in which they "ask for the
assistance of the United Nations and the international community in bringing to
justice those persons responsible for the genocide and crimes against humanity
during the rule of the Khmer Rouge from 1975 to 1979" (see annex).
The facts which gave rise to the request remain unclear. The Office of my
Representative in Cambodia is presently seeking to clarify the situation, while
the Secretariat is examining the legal and institutional issues involved. The
letter is brought to your attention for any action which may be deemed
appropriate.

(Signed)

97-17055 (E)

240697

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

A/51/930
S/1997/488
English
Page 2

ANNEX
Letter dated 21 June 1997 from the First and Second
Prime Ministers of Cambodia addressed to the
Secretary-General

On behalf of the Government and people of Cambodia, we write to you to ask
for the assistance of the United Nations and the international community in
bringing to justice those persons responsible for the genocide and crimes
against humanity during the rule of the Khmer Rouge from 1975 to 1979.
In its resolution 1997/49 of April 1997 on Cambodia, the Commission on
Human Rights requested:
"the Secretary-General, through his Special Representative, in
collaboration with the Centre for Human Rights, to examine any request by
Cambodia for assistance in responding to past serious violations of
Cambodian and international law as a means of bringing about national
reconciliation, strengthening democracy and addressing the issue of
individual accountability."
Cambodia does not have the resources or expertise to conduct this very
important procedure. Thus, we believe it is necessary to ask for the assistance
of the United Nations. We are aware of similar efforts to respond to the
genocide and crimes against humanity in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, and
ask that similar assistance be given to Cambodia.
We believe that crimes of this magnitude are of concern to all persons in
the world, as they greatly diminish respect for the most basic human right, the
right to life. We hope that the United Nations and the international community
can assist the Cambodian people in establishing the truth about this period and
bringing those responsible to justice. Only in this way can this tragedy be
brought to a full and final conclusion.

(Signed)

Prince NORODOM Ranariddh
First Prime Minister

(Signed) HUN Sen
Second Prime Minister

-----
