S/PRST/2009/25

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 September 2009
Original: English/French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 6193rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 September 2009, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in Côte
d’Ivoire”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its full support to the Ougadougou political
process and to the electoral timeline endorsed by all the main Ivorian political
actors, leading to the first round of open, free, fair and transparent presidential
elections on 29 November 2009. It commends the Facilitator, President Blaise
Compaore of Burkina Faso, for his continued efforts to support the peace process
in Côte d’Ivoire.
“The Security Council further reiterates its determination to bring its full
support to a credible electoral process and highlights the importance of an
inclusive participation of the Ivorian civil society. It stresses that to this end it has
extended the mandate and has maintained the troop level of the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) in its resolution 1880 (2009). It further
stresses that it expressed in this resolution its intention to authorize the SecretaryGeneral to redeploy troops, as may be needed, between the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) and UNOCI.
“The Security Council expresses its concern at the delay in publication of the
provisional voters list, and highlights that further delays in the publication of the
voters list may put at risk the timeline for open, free, fair and transparent
presidential elections.
“The Security Council reiterates that the Ivorian political actors are bound to
respect the electoral timeline. It urges all Ivorian actors to comply fully with their
commitments, in order for the voters list to be published as soon as possible in the
framework of a transparent and inclusive process. It recalls that the Special
Representative of the Secretary General will certify the voters list explicitly.
“The Security Council will review the situation by 15 October 2009. It
expresses its intention to react as appropriate, consistent with its resolution 1880
(2009), towards those who would block the progress of the electoral process.
“The Security Council further expresses its intention to start considering the
future direction of UNOCI by reviewing by 15 October its mandate and the
benchmarks for a possible drawdown of the operation, in particular in light of the
progress of the electoral process.”
09-53210 (E) 290909

*0953210*
