UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1999/1086
23 October 1999
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 22 OCTOBER 1999 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

In several of my reports to the Security Council on the humanitarian
programme in Iraq pursuant to resolution 986 (1995), including my latest report
(S/1999/896 and Corr. 1), I have expressed concern about delays in the approval
of applications submitted to the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 661 (1990). In particular, I have referred to the growing number
of holds placed on applications and the resultant serious implications for the
implementation of the humanitarian programme.
In this connection, I attach, for the information of the members of the
Security Council, a note addressed to me by the Executive Director of the Iraq
Programme. As indicated in that note, the number of holds placed on
applications by the Security Council Committee has continued to increase in the
two-month period that has passed since the submission of my last report to the
Council, on 19 August 1999.
To enable the Iraq Programme to meet the humanitarian objectives set forth
in resolutions 986 (1995) and 1153 (1998) it is highly desirable to find a
prompt solution to this problem. To this effect, I believe it would be very
helpful if the Committee could undertake an early review of all applications
currently on hold with a view to expediting a decision, as appropriate, in each
case.

(Signed)

99-30968 (E)

231099

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1999/1086
English
Page 2

Annex
Note dated 22 October 1999 addressed to the Secretary-General
by the Executive Director of the Iraq Programme

Holds on applications
In your most recent report to the Security Council on the humanitarian
programme in Iraq pursuant to Security Council resolution 986 (1995), submitted
on 19 August 1999, you stated that there had been a significant increase in the
number of holds being placed on applications, with serious implications for the
implementation of the humanitarian programme; you also recommended that an allout effort be made to review further all the holds concerned and to expedite the
approval of applications, in order to ensure the timely and effective
implementation of the programme (S/1999/896 and Corr.1, para. 101).
While some effort has been made recently by members of the Security Council
Committee established by resolution 661 (1990) in lifting holds on droughtrelated applications, as well as for applications related to water and
sanitation and oil spare parts, the number of holds overall continues to
increase. Since your report to the Security Council of 19 August 1999, the
number of holds on applications has increased from 475 (total value about
$500 million) to 572 (total value about $700 million). As at 12 October 1999,
for example, 23.7 per cent of applications circulated under phase V had been
placed on hold. There is a high level of holds on applications circulated under
phase V for telecommunications (100 per cent), electricity (65.5 per cent),
water and sanitation (53.4 per cent) and oil spare parts and equipment
(43 per cent). It is also noted that the time required by members of the
Committee to review holds is becoming longer, on average 34 days.
It is, of course, well understood that with large-scale and complex
contracts, in particular those involving infrastructure, more time is needed by
members of the Committee to consult with their authorities and to review
applications circulated by the Office of the Iraq Programme for their
consideration and approval.
Nonetheless, unless immediate measures are taken by all concerned,
including both the Committee and the Government of Iraq, the serious
difficulties already being experienced in the implementation of the programme
will be exacerbated.
Accordingly, the Office of the Iraq Programme has further intensified its
efforts to assist the Committee in carrying out its responsibilities for a
thorough and timely review of applications circulated. The information the
Office seeks to provide, in consultation with all concerned parties, includes
priorities, interrelated and time-sensitive applications, required delivery
dates, potential dual-use items and spare parts and any additional information
which might be useful to the Committee in its consideration of applications.
As requests by members of the Committee for additional technical details
account for almost half the applications placed on hold, we have just finalized
/...

S/1999/1086
English
Page 3

guidelines to assist applicants in providing more details prior to circulation
and consideration of applications by the Committee. Early provision of detailed
technical information by the Government of Iraq and its suppliers could
contribute to reducing the number and duration of holds.
The second most common reason given for holds relates to concerns about end
users. In accordance with the purposes set out in paragraph 4 of resolution
1153 (1998), we have sought to deploy the United Nations observers in Iraq in
such a way as to provide, to the extent possible, the required assurances to the
Committee that all supplies authorized for procurement, including potential
dual-use items, are indeed utilized for the purpose for which they have been
authorized. In addition to keeping the Committee fully informed on a regular
basis of the status of holds on applications, we have arranged briefings by
experts in order to provide additional clarifications and/or technical advice.
Another serious issue occurs when an application or a number of
interrelated or complementary applications have been approved by the Committee,
and the related supplies and spare parts or equipment have arrived in Iraq but
are then kept in storage for an extended period because another interrelated or
complementary application is on hold. The absence of a single item of
equipment, sometimes insignificant in size or value, can be sufficient to
prevent the completion of an entire project.
In consultation with the Government of Iraq, the United Nations Office of
the Humanitarian Coordinator in Iraq and the United Nations agencies and
programmes concerned, we have been reviewing the inventory of supplies and
equipment in government warehouses, provided under the programme, in order to
identify items that have arrived in Iraq but cannot be utilized because of holds
on complementary inputs, thus causing delays in the implementation of specific
activities or projects.
It is evident that efforts by the members of the Security Council Committee
and the Secretariat alone will not be sufficient to resolve the difficulties
being experienced at present. A special effort is also needed on the part of
the Government of Iraq as well as its suppliers in providing the detailed
information required by the Committee in a timely manner.
We will continue to consult with the Government of Iraq with a view to
presenting requirements on the basis of interlinked projects rather than general
allocations for each sector. This was the approach proposed in your
supplementary report to the Security Council of 1 February 1998 (S/1998/90) and
subsequently endorsed in paragraph 5 of resolution 1153 (1998). As noted in
paragraph 23 of the report, in many sectors the underlying procurement framework
of the distribution plans has not fostered an approach where humanitarian
problems have been addressed by a corresponding project to target appropriate
resources.
In this context, I have requested the Government to inform the Office of
the Iraq Programme as soon as interrelated contracts relating to the same
project are concluded between the Government and its suppliers so that the
Office can present those applications to the Committee in a manner which makes
clear the linkages between the different items being procured.
/...

S/1999/1086
English
Page 4

I have also requested that the Office of the Humanitarian Coordinator in
Iraq, in consultation with the Government of Iraq and the United Nations
agencies and programmes, provide the Office of the Iraq Programme, on a regular
basis, with detailed reports on the impact of holds on the implementation of the
programme. This has been requested in the past but takes on particular urgency
and importance given the current level of holds. The Office of the Iraq
Programme will submit those reports to the Committee.
While remaining realistic about the prospects for significant improvement
in the current situation, I believe it would be important for the Security
Council and its Committee to keep under constant review, in as flexible and
pragmatic a manner as possible, all procedures and activities regarding the
implementation of the programme, in order to resolve any difficulties faced in
the implementation process.

Benon V. SEVAN
Executive Director
Office of the Iraq Programme

(Signed)

-----
