General Aaaembly-Twenty-third Seuion

32

United Nations bodies to maintain and further expand

their activities on a continuing basis.
1745th plenary meeting,
17 December 1968.

2416 (XXIII). lncrease in the production and use
of edible protein
The General Assembly,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1257 (XLIII) of 2 August 1967 and General Assembly
resolution 2319 (XXII) of 15 December 1967 on an
increase in the production and use of edible protein,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the protein problem, 38
N oting with appreciation the comments on the Secretary-General' s report by the Advisory Committee on
the Application of Science and Technology to Development,39 by the Directors-General of the World Health
0rganization and the Food and Agriculture 0rganization of 1:he U nited N ations 40 and by the Protein
Advisory Group of the Food and Agriculture 0rganization of the United Nations, the World Health Organization and the United Nations Children's Fund, 41
Concerned at the continuing gravity and the growing
dimensions of the protein problem in the developing
countries, affecting the well-being of mankind,
Stressing the urgent need to increase public awareness, at the national and international levels, of the
damage caused by protein malnutrition and to give
wide support to the activities aimed at alleviating this
problem,
Believing that, in order to achieve positive and lasting results in solving the protein problem, sustained
and concerted national and international efforts are
required on the part of Governments, scientists, institutions and indurtry-hoth public and private-and
private foundations, in both developecl and developing
countries,
Considering the need of the developing countries to
have, in the most economical manner, access to the
latest technological advances for protein enrichment
of their foods,
Recog11izing the complexities involved in, and the
long-term nature of, the protein problem in the context of development,
Believing that further and fresh efforts are necessary
for dealing with the protein problem, the solution of
which requires an integrated approach involving economic, managerial, social and scientific considerations,
l. Takes note with satisfaction of the Secretary-General's report on the protein problem;
2. Takes note also of the comments 011 this subject
made at the resumecl forty-fifth session of the Economic
and Social Council ;42
3. Considers that the momentum generated by the
report of the Advisory Committee 011 the Application of
Science and Technology to Development entitled Feeding the Expandi11g T,Vorld Population: I nl!'rnational
38 Official Records nf the Econo111ic and Social Co,mci/,
Resumed Forty-fifth Sessio11, Anne.rcs, agenda item 4, docu-

ment E/4592.
8 9 E/4592/ Add.2.
40 E/4592/ Add.3, Add.3/Corr.l, and Add.4.
41 E/4592/ Add.1.
42 See Official Records of the General Assenibly, Twent}•·
third Session, Supp/enient No. 3A (A/.7203/Add.1), chapter IV.

Action to Avert the lmpending Protein Crisis43 and by
the action taken by the Secretary-General thereafter
should be sustained and that appropriate national and
international efforts on the protein problem should
be further promoted, inter alia, by:
(a) Finding the means of marshalling the capabilities
and resources of developed countries for solving the
protein problem;
( b) Strengthening links between interestecl institutions in developed ancl developing countries and promoting the exchange of information ancl expertise in
activities aimecl at closing the protein gap;
(e) Mobilizing, in both developed ami cleveloping
countries, the support for concertecl action on the part
of Governments, scientists, institutions and industryboth public and private-ancl prívate foundations ;
( d) Increasing public awareness of the importance
of the protein content of food and the need to adopt
dietary habits based on a sufficient consumption of
protein;
(e) Identifying far each region ancl for as many
countries as possible, on the hasis of the respective
socio-economic conditions a11C! structures and the
availability of human, natura) ancl scientific resources,
critica! sectors deserving immediate and concerted efforts;
(f) Promoting co-operation among developing countries in the protein field and achieving the maximum
utilization of national ancl regional research institutions;
(g) Promoting the adoption of an integratecl approach
to the protein problern at the national leve! in the
developing countries ;
( h) Promoting interna tiona I co-operation 111 the
transfer of technology to developing countries and the
training of personnel in this fielcl ;
(i) Evolving new methods an(\ revising al1Cl improving present methods usecl at the international le.ve! ior
the collection, classification, evaluation and dissemination of information on critic:il aspects of the protein
problem;
( j) Studying, on an interdiscipli1,;. ry has is at the
national and regional levels, the applicatioH of modern
management techniques to the protein problem confrl)nting developing countries ;
4. W elco,nes the action taken by the Food ancl Agriculture 0rganization of the United Nations, the \Vorld
Health 0rganization and the United Nations Children's
Fund in expanding the scope and functions of the Protein Aclvisory Group as endorsed by the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science ancl Technology
to Development:
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with interested organizations in the U nited N ations
system and with the assistance of the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Technology
to Development :
(a) To propase, frorn time to time, appropriate
measures for intensifying action in the areas indicated
in paragraph 3 abovc, as well as for increasing and improving the production ami consumption of protcin
from natural and conventional sources;
. ( b) To continue his efforts aimed at increasing ptthltc awareness of and concern about protein rnalnutrition;
.¡;; Cnited

Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.XIII.2.

Resolutions adopted on the report8 of the Seeond Comm1nee

6. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation

with interested orgauizations in the U nited N ations
system, to prepare and submit, from time to time, to the
General Assemhly-through the Economic and Social
Council-ancl to other interestecl organs, reports 011
the progress being made towards the solution of the
protein problem, thc first such report to be submitted
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fifth session;
7. lwvitcs the Foocl and Agriculture Organization of
the L'nitecl Nations, the World Health Organization,
the Unitecl Nations Children's Funcl, the International
Atomic Energy Agency. the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization and other interested organizations in the United N ations system to include
in their annual reports to the Economic and Social
Council special reference to the work done by their
organizations to increase the procluction ami use of
edihlc protein ;
8. In-vites the Governments of Member States, the
specializecl agencies, the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the regional economic commissions ancl the
Economic ancl Social Office in Beirut to give their full
support and co-operation to international efforts to solve
the protein problem, and to provide the SecretaryGeneral with information for the reports requestecl
in paragraph 6 above;
9. Urges Governmcnts of Memher States to make
use of the expertise ami aclvice of the agencies concerned in formulating their clevelopment plans for implementing as far as possible the specific proposals
contained in the report of the Advisory Committee
011 the Application of Science ami Technology to Development;
10. Invites the specialized agencies concernecl to provide developing countries with the appropriate specialized services required for the preparation and
implementation of development projects aimed at increasing the production and consumption of protein;
11. Invites the interested organizations within the
United Nations system to examine the ways and means
of increasing the resources for expanding their activities
in the protein field;
12. Rcqucsts the Advisory Committee on the Application of Science and Teclmology to Development to
relate its work in the protein field to the preparations
for the Second United Nations Development Decacle
nnd invites other interested organizations of the Unitecl
Nations system, as a contrihution to the Decade, to accelerate their work 011 ohjectives and measures designed
to narrow the protein gap significantly hy the end of
the 1970s.
1745th plcnary meeting.
17 Dccember 1968.
2417 (XXIII). Outflow of trained professional
and technical personnel al ali levels from
the developing to the developed countries,
its causes, its consequences and pri,ctieal
remedies for the problems resulting from it

Thc General Asscmbly,
Rccalling its resolutio11s 2083 (XX) oí 20 December
1965 on the development and utilization of human resources, 2090 (KX) of 20 Deremher 1965 and 2259
(XXII) of 3 Novemher 1967 on training national
technical personnel for the accelerated industrialization
of the developing countries ancl 2320 (XXII) o!

33

15 December 1967 on the outflow of trained personnel
from the developing countries,
RecaJlinr; Economic and Social Council resolutions
1090 A (XXXIX) of 31 July 1965 and 1274 (XLIII)
of 4 August 1967 on the development and utilization of
human resources and taking into account the views
expressed by the Council, at its forty-fifth session, on
the Secretary-General's report on the development and
utilization of human resources in developing countries, 44
in particular the section oí the report dealing with the
migration of highly trained personnel from the developing countries,
N oting with conccrn that highly trained personnel
frorn the cleveloping countries continue to emigrate at an
increasing rate to certain developed countries, which
in sorne c;:;ses may hinder the process of economic and
social development in the developing countries,
Considcring that among the main causes of the
"brain drain" from the developing countries are the
technological and economic gaps existing between them
anrl the developed countries and that there is a need
to take appropriate interim action at both the national
ami international levels, until these gaps have been
hridged, to tackle the problems resulting from the outflow of trained personnel from the developing countries,
N otin_q furthcr that man y developing countries are
not yet technically equipped to assess adequately the
magnitude and characteristics of the outflow of their
trained personnel,
l. Tahes note with intcrest of the report of the Secretary-General on the outflow of trained personnel from
the developing countries 45 and of the important contrihntion made by the United Nations Institute for Training and Research to the preparation of this study ami
invites Memher States to consicler its conclusions and
suggestions;
2. Rciterates its recommendation that the United
Kations, the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, the Unitecl Nations Development Programme, the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency intensify their support for the
efforts of the Governments of developing countries to
create or expand local training institutions;
3. Drmn thc attcntion of the developing countries
to the 11eerl to 1'1011 for:
(a) The •. •··, ,1sion and reorientation, as appropriate,
of education.,l .tnd other facilities for the training of
technical personnel in accordance with their development rec¡uirernents;
( /,) Ensuring the propér utilization of the expertise
and skill of their trainecl personnel ;
4. Recommends that cleveloped countries should coopcrate in taking appropriate measures with a view
to reducing the aclverse effects of the outflow of trained
personnel f rorn the cleveloping countries;
5. Rcqucsts the Secretary-General to undertake, in
consu!tation with Governments of Member States concerned ;mcl taking into account, as appropriate, the
work heing clone by the specializecl agencies, the United
1\' ations I nstitnte for Training and Research and other
interestecl organizations and organs of the United
Nations syste111, selective stuclies of a few cleveloping
countries which are seriously concerned with the "hrain
44 O fficial Records of the Economic and Social C 01mcil,
Forty-fifth Sessio11, Annexes, agenda items 9 and 10, docu-

ments E/4483 and Add.l and 2.
4 G Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Twenly-1/iird
Session, A1111cxes, agenda item 47, document A/7294.
