A /73/PV.105

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

105

th plenary meeting
Tuesday, 10 September 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Ecuador)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 68 (continued)
New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support
(a) New Partnership for Africa’s Development:
progress in implementation and
international support
Draft resolution (A/73/L.96/Rev.1)
Draft amendment (A/73/L.112)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of Palestine,
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, to introduce
draft resolution A/73/L.96/Rev.1.
Mr. Shawesh (Palestine): On behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, I have the honour to introduce to the
General Assembly the draft resolution entitled “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support”, as contained
in document A/73/L.96/Rev.1
The draft resolution highlights the progress
made by African countries in the implementation of
their various programmes and projects, supported by
development partners. This draft resolution on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD)
provides insight into how far Africa has come since
the General Assembly adopted the previous resolution
(resolution 72/310) and places the spotlight squarely on

those areas that need support in the implementation of
the Sustainable Development Goals.
In many ways, it has been a record year in terms
of what Africa is achieving. The draft resolution also
reaffirms the importance of international support and
development. Progress on development and support
for development are two vital aspects that ensure the
implementation of the ambitious objectives of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development. They are also
linked to the African Union’s Agenda 2063: The Africa
We Want. We believe it will ultimately empower our
continent and its people to end poverty. May I take
this opportunity to recall that the African Union’s
Agenda 2063 sets out the blueprint for development in
Africa until the year 2063 and is divided into 10-year
implementation plans. NEPAD and the draft resolution
speak directly to that development nexus.
During the drafting of the text this year, we saw
greater openness to streamlining the text and rendering
it more focused. Furthermore, the Group was interested
in reflecting the most important updates, including
the decision of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union in November 2018 to
change the name of the New Partnership Planning and
Coordinating Agency to the African Union Development
Agency-New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
and the entry into force, on 30 May, of the agreement
on the African Continental Free Trade Area.
A strengthened and positive balance between
action by African Governments and the support of the
international community was maintained in the draft

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-27401 (E)

*1927401*

A/73/PV.105

10/09/2019

resolution. In that regard, there is a need to stress the
role of the international community in addressing the
special development needs of the continent. Instead of
support for that important balance, unfortunately, we
have seen what can be regarded only as a deliberate
attempt to significantly weaken this draft resolution,
which was adopted by consensus from 2002 until last
year. The Group believes that such an approach is
contrary to the sentiment outlined in the 2030 Agenda,
which perfectly complemented the African Union’s
Agenda 2063. The draft resolution seeks to accentuate
the coherent and coordinated implementation of both
Agendas, which must be viewed within a single context.

silence procedure by the facilitator, the representative
from Algeria. The editor lightly modified that part of
the text, which was subject to sensitive negotiation and
careful drafting.

I would like to add, however, that we would have
liked to see more on the concerns related to official
development assistance to Africa, and in particular
about Africa’s disproportionately low share of global
trade volume. Another area that has been highlighted
are explicit examples of progress, in particular through
collaboration among African countries to promote
innovative public-private partnerships to finance
infrastructure projects. We hope that this aspect will
not be watered-down in future draft resolutions. The
Group hopes to see the strengthening of such examples,
which prove that Africa as a whole is on the right track.

Mr. Tanner (Finland): I have the honour to take
the floor on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States to introduce draft amendment
A/73/L.112 to draft resolution A/73/L.96/Rev.1, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”.

The Group’s fundamental objective on this
draft resolution, as with others, is to be able to reach
consensus. The Group is gravely concerned that this
draft resolution, which aims at enhancing African
sustainable development and demonstrates the progress
being made in Africa, is being subjected to a vote in
the General Assembly. We call on all Member States to
vote in favour of the draft resolution.

I also wish to express my thanks to all delegations
for their constructive commitment, partnership and
participation, as well as to the Office of the Special
Adviser on Africa for its support throughout the entire
consultation process.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland to introduce draft
amendment A/73/L.112.

The EU and its member States would like to call for
the deletion of operative paragraph 42, to be replaced
by the language put forward by the EU and its member
States. Throughout the negotiations — in fact, already
last year — the EU and its member States, supported
by several other delegations, consistently voiced
their concerns regarding the use of the formulation
“win-win cooperation”. Win-win cooperation stands
for an approach that focuses on economic gains, often
at the expense of the sustainable developmental needs
of people and local communities.

I wish to take this opportunity to express my thanks
to the representatives from Benin, Egypt and Sierra
Leone for their commendable role as coordinators on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China. I would also like
to thank the representative from Algeria for his role in
facilitating the consultations on the draft resolution and
his outstanding outreach to present a well-balanced text
to be considered for adoption.

In contrast, the EU and its States members truly
believe in the vision outlined in the African Union
Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want — the vision of
an Africa of good governance, democracy, respect for
human rights, justice and the rule of law; the vision of
an Africa whose development is people-driven, relying
on the potential of African people, especially its women
and youth; and the vision that all the citizens of Africa
will be actively involved in decision-making in all
aspects of development, including social, economic,
political and environmental ones.

Before I conclude, allow me to make an oral
revision of paragraph 46 of the draft resolution. In
the sixth line, after “national priorities and plans”, the
comma should be replaced by a semi-colon. The phrase
“and that”, before “South-South cooperation”, should
also be deleted. This oral revision is made to adhere
to the exact language of the text submitted under the

As was outlined in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the needs of partner countries should be
placed at the heart of development cooperation policy.
As such, we are not in a position to support a model
of development cooperation that eschews the universal
rules we have all agreed on. We call on all Member
States to support the proposed amendment.

2/29

19-27401

10/09/2019

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/73/L.96/Rev.1, entitled “New Partnership for
Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and
international support”, as orally corrected.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/73/L.96/Rev.1, Turkey has also become a sponsor of
draft resolution A/72/L.96/Rev.1.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before we proceed
to take action on draft resolution A/73/L.96/Rev.1, as
orally corrected, in accordance with rule 90 of the rules
of procedure, the Assembly will first take a decision on
draft amendment A/73/L.112. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania,
San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
Against:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia,
Ghana, Guatemala, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Libya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,

A/73/PV.105

Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, United Arab
Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Brazil, Norway
Draft amendment A/73/L.112 was rejected by 45
votes to 96, with 2 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We will now
take action on draft resolution A/73/L.96/Rev.1, as
orally revised. A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan,
Algeria,
Angola,
Argentina,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon,
Madagascar,
Malawi,
Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Russian
Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela

19-274013/29

A/73/PV.105

(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Montenegro, Netherlands,
North Macedonia, Poland, Portugal, Romania, San
Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/73/L.96/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted by 110 votes to 1, with 38
abstentions (resolution 73/335).
[Subsequently, the delegations of Turkey and Costa
Rica informed the Secretariat that it had intended
to vote against.]
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now call on the
observer of the Observer State of Palestine on a point
of order.
Mr. Shawesh (Palestine): On behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, we would like to know which of our
partners called for a vote on the resolution.
The President: In response to the question from the
observer of the Observer Palestine, the United States of
America requested the vote on the resolution.
(spoke in Spanish)
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation of
vote after the voting on resolution 73/335, may I remind
delegations that explanations are limited to 10 minutes
and should be made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Tanner (Finland): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries the
Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania,
the country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Ukraine, align themselves with this statement.
At the outset, please allow me to commend the
work of Mr. Dewanou Narcisse Houenouvo Tognissou,
of the Permanent Mission of Benin, and Mr. Ahmed
Mohamed Ismail Elmahs, of the Permanent Mission
4/29

10/09/2019

of Egypt, as coordinators on behalf of the Group of
77 and China. I would also like to thank Mr. Mehdi
Remaoun, of the Permanent Mission of Algeria, for his
role as facilitator.
The European Union and its member States have
aspired to put African countries at the centre of their
development efforts, and we will continue to do so. The
European Union and its member States provide more
than half of global official development assistance. The
European Union and its member States invested more
than €85 billion in official development cooperation in
2017, of which a large part went to Africa, in support
of projects and initiatives at the national, regional and
continental levels. With regard to trade, economic
partnership agreements have been designed to promote
trade and development. Under the Everything but Arms
programme, least developed African countries benefit
from enhanced market access. The European External
Investment Plan, adopted in September 2017, is also a
testament to that. The EU is further enhancing the scale
of its support to African countries and its neighbourhood
by crowding investments from financial institutions and
the private sector through a €1.5 billion guarantee and
blending fund, complemented by technical assistance
and support aimed at improving the investment climate.
In addition to the existing investment facilities of
€2.6 billion, this is expected to leverage more than
€44 billion in investments by 2020.
All this illustrates how close the cooperation
between Africa and Europe is — cooperation that
is based on principles such as national ownership,
transparency, inclusiveness and respect of human
rights, as evidenced by the Joint Africa-Europe Strategy
and the African Union-European Union Summits. It is
because of those close ties between our neighbouring
continents and the great importance we attach to
sustainable development in Africa that we are deeply
disappointed at the unwillingness of the Group of 77
and China to accommodate our concerns regarding the
reference to “win-win cooperation”. The reason that we
dissociate ourselves from resolution 73/335 is purely
due to the fact that we cannot accept any reference to
a concept that ignores internationally agreed principles
of development cooperation and undermines the
people-centred approach outlined in both the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union’s Agenda 2063: The Africa We Want.
We made our position on its inclusion clear
from the beginning of negotiations and proposed
19-27401

10/09/2019

alternative language to build on discussions from last
year’s negotiation and on several other resolutions.
We expressed our disagreement last year through a
clear explanation of position (see A/72/PV.113). We
nevertheless joined the consensus because we trusted in
the Group of 77 and China’s constructive cooperation
in future. Unfortunately, our concerns were ignored
again this year. That is why, for the first time in the
history of this resolution, we did not join the consensus.
We call on the Group of 77 and China to reconsider
its approach and refrain from including “win-win
cooperation” in future draft resolutions, starting with
the upcoming session of the Second Committee, in
order to avoid similar situations in which we may not
merely abstain but may have no other choice but to
consider voting against draft resolutions. The EU and
its member States will always engage constructively
in negotiations because we value consensus. However,
consensus should strengthen, rather than erode, the
universal rules we have all agreed on.
In conclusion, let me reassure the Assembly of
our ongoing and unwavering support for the Group
of African States. The EU and its member States will
continue to work towards enhanced and strengthened
support to our African partner countries.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): Before
I deliver this explanation of vote on behalf of the
delegation of the United States, I would first like to
extend, on behalf of the United States, condolences
to all those in the Bahamas who have lost loved ones
and to the communities affected by the devastation
of Hurricane Dorian. The United States is supporting
the efforts of the Bahamian Government to provide
immediate disaster relief. Appropriate agencies and
departments are supporting technical assessments
of the extent of the damage on the north-west islands
with the Government of the Bahamas and coordinating
appropriate assistance. We stand hand in hand with
our Bahamian friends and partners and have one
shared goal, namely, to assist the victims of one of the
strongest hurricanes ever recorded. Now is the time to
come together and show what partnership means.
With regard to resolution 73/335, on the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD),
which the General Assembly just adopted, throughout
negotiations my delegation was candid about our
concerns regarding the text. However, regretfully, the
United States today had to vote “no” on the resolution,
entitled “New Partnership for Africa’s Development:

A/73/PV.105

progress in implementation and international support”,
due to its repeated elevation of the domestic policy
rhetoric of a single Member State.
The United States applauds the efforts of the
African Union to realize the goals and aspirations of
NEPAD. We support NEPAD’s overall mission to
address the critical challenges that Africa faces, and
the United States shares the goal of the African Union
(AU) for a stable and prosperous Africa. The United
States continues to seek new areas of cooperation
and collaboration with the AU through innovative
initiatives that strengthen sustainable development as
well as trade and investment. The Women’s Global
Development and Prosperity Initiative, for example,
is the first United States whole-of-government effort
to advance global women’s economic empowerment.
Access Africa’s partnership, between the United States
Trade and Development Agency and United States
industry leaders, supports the development of quality
information and secure communication technology
infrastructure across sub-Saharan Africa. Prosper
Africa and the new Continental Free Trade Area both
aim to increase two-way trade and investment between
the United States and Africa.
However, we cannot support the resolution with
the reference to “win-win cooperation” in paragraph
42. That phrase has been promoted by a single Member
State to insert the signature policy agenda of its Head
of State into United Nations documents and does not
reflect the views of all Member States. No Member
should support incorporating language targeted
to a domestic political audience into multilateral
documents. The United States and the United Nations
share a commitment to transparency, good governance,
fiscal responsibility and environmental and social
safeguards. We recognize the important role the United
Nations plays as an effective and neutral platform for
pursuing sustainable development. Language that does
not support sustainable development for all should not
undermine that role.
We must also raise our concerns regarding the
language in paragraph 43 suggesting that the United
Nations is giving directions to multilateral institutions
with respect to Member States trade policies, including
the reference to the importance of facilitating the
accession of developing countries. It is our view that the
United Nations must respect the independent mandates
of other processes and institutions, including trade
negotiations, and must not involve itself in decisions

19-274015/29

A/73/PV.105

and actions in other forums, including the World Trade
Organization. The United Nations is not the appropriate
venue for such discussions and there should be no
expectation or misconception that the United States
would heed decisions made by the Economic and Social
Council or the General Assembly on such issues. That
includes calls that undermine incentives for innovation,
such as technology transfer, that is not voluntary and on
mutually agreed terms.
Next, while the United States acknowledges the fact
that the term “illicit financial flows” is increasingly
utilized within the United Nations system, we continue
to have concerns that the term lacks an agreed
international definition. Without an agreed definition,
the resolution should be clearer about the specific
underlying illegal activities that produce, or contribute
to, the generation and movement of illicit finance, such
as corruption, fraud and money-laundering, and the
need for all Member States to focus more concretely on
preventing and combating those crimes at home.
Furthermore, regarding Agenda 2063, while the
United States supports the overall goals of that vision
and action plan, it contains language that is not aligned
with United States policy. As the largest bilateral donor
of assistance for women’s health and family planning,
we do not recognize abortion as a method of family
planning nor do we support abortion in our foreign
reproductive-health assistance. The United States
cannot accept the terms “sexual and reproductive
health” or “sexual and reproductive health-care
services”, as they do not enjoy international consensus
as to the applied meaning and have accumulated
connotations that suggest the promotion of abortion or
a right to abortion.
With regard to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, the
Paris Agreement and climate change, we addressed
our concerns in our general statement delivered on
8 November 2018. We regret that the language of one
Member State has kept us from joining consensus on
an important text. This is the second year that such
language has been included in the text, and we remain
disappointed in that outcome. We strongly urge our
African friends and partners to work with us going
forward to avoid the same result in the future.
Mr. Rozsa (Hungary): I, too, would like to thank
the co-facilitators for their commitment. Hungary
aligns itself with the explanation of vote made by the
6/29

10/09/2019

representative of Finland, on behalf of the European
Union and its member States, with regard to win-win
cooperation. Hungary remains committed to promoting
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.
In that regard, we see that mitigating challenges
caused by climate change, supporting development
and placing an emphasis on conflict prevention are
highly indispensable in areas suffering from recurring
conflicts in Africa as well as elsewhere. We support
a comprehensive approach to the linkages among
development, climate change, the rule of law and peace
and security.
However, in relation to the twenty-first preambular
paragraph of resolution 73/335, entitled “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in
implementation and international support”, we would
like to put on record the following statement in our
national capacity.
Hungary voted against the endorsement of the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration
(resolution 73/195) by the General Assembly in
December 2018, will not take part in the implementation
of the Global Compact and cannot accept any reference
to it in international documents. We cannot share the
view presented in the Global Compact that migration is
the best solution for the labour market and demographic
problems of countries of destination, nor is it the
solution to problems of countries of origin.
Sustainable solutions can be found only if
development aims are focused on creating livelihood
opportunities for people in their home country.
The Hungarian Government therefore prioritizes
development projects in the countries of origin that
contribute to establishing lasting solutions for those
in need and to improving the living conditions, which
in their current form often generate mass migration
movements. We place an emphasis on strengthening
health care, sanitation, water management and
education infrastructure in African countries.
Mr. Fox-Drummond Gough (Brazil): Brazil has
once again expressed its support for resolution 73/335,
on the follow-up to the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, as we have done every year since the
resolution was first presented in 2002.
Brazil is a long-standing partner of African countries
in the pursuit of their development. In the past 20
years, we have established 6,777 technical cooperation
19-27401

10/09/2019

projects with a wide range of African partners, mainly
in the areas of health care, agriculture, fishing and
education. There are currently 32 technical cooperation
agreements between Brazil and African countries and
78 ongoing projects. A very special interest is devoted
to the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries,
six of its nine members being African countries.
Our South-South cooperation approach focuses
on capacity-building and on developing the immense
pool of talent and potential present on the African
continent. We seek a horizontal relationship, based
on full respect for each country’s sovereignty and
development priorities, in order to foster autonomy and
local solutions to local challenges.
Brazilian foreign direct investment is also very
present in support of Africa’s development, especially
in agriculture, where we want to be part of the
agricultural revolution currently taking place, through
know-how, machinery and technology transfers.
Brazil therefore deeply regrets the inclusion in the
resolution of the twenty-first preambular paragraph,
on the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration.
Unfortunately, the insertion of a preambular
paragraph not directly related to the resolution and that
does not enjoy the support of all Member States has
made consensus impossible.
Brazil disassociated from the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and believes that
migration should be addressed by sovereign States
on the basis of their right to adopt national policies
that address the challenges emerging from their own
realities. Brazil therefore disassociates itself from the
language in the twenty-first preambular paragraph and
considers it not to be a basis for any future negotiation.
Mr. Remaoun (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): I asked
for the floor because my country’s delegation was the
facilitator for resolution 73/335, on the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development (NEPAD). At the outset, I
wish to sincerely thank all delegations that participated
in the consultations, which led to the adoption of the
resolution before us today.
I have two objectives in taking the floor. First, we
are disappointed that a vote was requested. Secondly, the
resolution concerning NEPAD has enjoyed consensus
since it was first adopted by the General Assembly
in 2002. However, last year, for the first time in the

A/73/PV.105

history of the resolution, we saw its adoption through a
vote. Today’s vote a short while ago is the second one
on this extremely important resolution for Africa.
We quite understand the concerns of some
delegations with regard to one phrase in the text. Even
years before last year, some delegations had concerns
but they never requested that the resolution be put to a
vote. They used different means to express their specific
positions, namely, through their explanations of vote,
asking for clarifications, disassociating themselves
from certain paragraphs or expressing reservations on
paragraphs of concern.
We hope that next year the resolution will once
again find consensus, particularly because this is an
extremely important resolution for States members of
the African Union.
Finally, we urge all development partners and
those stakeholders associated with NEPAD, including
the private sector and civil society, to broaden their
contributions so that we can improve the standard of
living of all Africans.
Ms. González Carrillo (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile is not a party to the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration, and therefore its
content is not binding on us in any way. Chile therefore
dissociates itself from the twenty-first preambular
paragraph of resolution 73/335.
Mr. Annakou (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Despite
the importance of resolution 73/335 and of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, on whose content
we agree, we were, regrettably, compelled to abstain in
the voting due to the twenty-first preambular paragraph,
which makes reference to the adoption of Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration. We
have an absolute reservation with regard to the Compact
because it does not take into consideration our concerns
as a transit country and equates the responsibilities of
transit, origin and destination countries. It also mixes
up legal and illegal migration and makes Libya, a victim
of such migration, shoulder responsibilities that cannot
be discharged.
We ask that this explanation of vote be included in
the record of the meeting.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.

19-274017/29

A/73/PV.105

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (a)
of agenda item 68?
It was so decided.
(b) Causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa
Draft resolution (A/73/L.97/Rev.1)
Draft amendment (A/73/L.113)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Observer State of Palestine
to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.97/Rev.1.
Mr. Shawesh (Palestine): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 (G-77) and
China to introduce draft resolution A/73/L.97/Rev.1,
entitled “Implementation of the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa”.
This draft resolution continues to be a key platform
for Member States to emphasize the importance
of taking concrete steps to address the root causes
of conflict in Africa, in particular those related to
poverty, weak State institutions, climate change, the
illicit trade in, and the proliferation of, arms, especially
small arms and light weapons, as well as the illicit
exploitation of, and trafficking and trade in, high-value
natural resources.
The Group is concerned that, unless those root
causes are satisfactorily addressed, Africa will likely
be unable to meet the first of the 17 Sustainable
Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development — to eradicate poverty in all of its
forms and dimensions, including extreme poverty.
We are pleased that the text before us acknowledges
the imperative to engender sustainable peace in the
continent and underscores the need to strengthen the
capacity of Africa and Africans to resolve conflict
in a peaceful manner. In that regard, the Group of 77
and China acknowledges positive trends and advances
in ensuring durable peace in Africa and would like to
emphasize the need to create the conditions required
for durable peace as a prerequisite for sustainable
development on the continent.
The Group recalls that African countries have
taken numerous steps to address peace and security
8/29

10/09/2019

challenges at national and regional levels, including in
dealing with terrorism and instability, by establishing
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel and the
Multinational Joint Task Force, among other security
and peace initiatives established and implemented by
Africa. The Group is certain that it was the continent’s
belief that adherence to the rule of law and good
governance is necessary to sustaining peace that led
the African Union to establish the African Peer Review
Mechanism as a unique and innovative framework
for promoting good governance, durable peace and
sustainable development across the continent.
That commendable effort, despite the limited
capacity and resources, underscores African
determination to find solutions to its own security
challenges. Nevertheless, the need for African partners
to enhance their support for African peace and security
activities in order to help build the continent’s own
capacity to prevent and resolve its internal conflicts
cannot be overemphasized. In that connection, the G-77
and China encourages the international community and
development partners to continue supporting African
countries in their efforts to develop their human and
institutional capacities, in particular in countries
emerging from conflict. We recommend that any
assistance in that regard should focus on the means
of implementation, in particular financial resources,
technology transfer and capacity-building.
Considering that aid remains an important source of
development financing for most developing countries,
including those in Africa, we encourage developed
countries to fulfil their commitments to the Addis
Ababa Action Agenda, including with regard to official
development assistance.
The G-77 and China also avails itself of this
opportunity to commend and, indeed, reiterate support
for the long-standing and exemplary partnership
between the United Nations and Africa, including
the existing cooperation between the African Union
Peace and Security Council and the United Nations
Security Council.
This year’s draft resolution brings in new
elements to advance Africa’s efforts as a crucial
element for reducing conflict on the continent. The
text underlines the importance of the comprehensive
approach to sustaining peace and preventing conflict
by addressing its root causes, promoting sustained
economic growth, eradicating poverty and promoting
19-27401

10/09/2019

reconciliation and unity at the national level. It also
reaffirms the unwavering commitment of Member
States to strengthening international cooperation so
as to prevent and combat terrorism in all of its forms
and manifestations and emphasizes that all acts of
terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless
of their motivation, wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever committed. The draft resolution also notes
the consequences of conflict in Africa and underscores
the importance of addressing the particular needs of
forcibly displaced persons in Africa.
The Group further appreciates that the text
reiterates the call for the international community and
development partners to fulfil their commitment to take
further action to support areas critical to socioeconomic
development on the African continent.
The text also underlines the adverse impact of
climate change and natural disasters on the development
of African Member States. In that context, the draft
resolution welcomes the endorsement by African Heads
of State and Government of the Inter-Basin Water
Transfer initiative, as a pan-African project to restore
the Lake Chad basin and encourages relevant United
Nations entities and development partners to support
such African-oriented initiatives for stabilization,
recovery and climate resilience.
It is the view of the G-77 and China that if this
important resolution is to be implemented in a manner
that would be considered beneficial for the African
continent, partners will have to show more flexibility in
supporting the request of the international system — a
system to be operated in a manner that creates a shared
future for all. In this regard, we urge all Member States
to advocate for African engagement with the rest of the
world to be ensured in a timely, mutually beneficial
manner. The principle of win-win cooperation is
encapsulated in paragraph 18 of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, to which all United Nations
Member States have subscribed.
In conclusion, I would like to inform the Assembly
that certain minor mistakes and omissions were
inadvertently made in paragraph 44 of the text before
us. Since no one broke silence on the omitted word
during the informal and silent procedure, I would like
to propose that we reflect the exact wording that was
agreed during the informal procedure and that the text
should read as follows:

A/73/PV.105

“Notes with concern the tragic plight of
children in conflict situations in Africa, in
particular the phenomena of the recruitment and
use of children by parties to armed conflicts, sexual
exploitation and abuse, as well as other violations
and abuses committed against children, and in this
regard takes note of efforts aimed at promoting
education and the right to education and facilitating
the continuation of education in situations of armed
conflict and protected crises, stresses the need
for the protection of children in armed conflicts
and for ensuring that the protection and rights of
children in armed conflicts are integrated into all
peace processes, also stresses the need for postconflict reintegration, rehabilitation and education,
with due regard for the relevant resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council,
and encourages the relevant parts of the United
Nations system to assist the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict in the implementation of her mandate,
including in Africa”.
Let me take this opportunity to extend the G-77
and China’s thanks to the representatives of Nigeria and
Djibouti for their commendable role in coordinating the
draft resolution on behalf of the G-77 and China. I also
wish to thank the representatives of Bangladesh and
Zimbabwe for facilitating consultations on the draft
resolution and for their outstanding endeavour to present
a well-balanced text for consideration and adoption.
The G-77 and China considers it rather unfortunate
that the draft resolution, which focuses on providing
assistance to African countries in addressing the
causes of conflict on the continent, is being subjected
to a recorded vote by countries that have most directly
benefited from their relations with that continent.
Such an affront clearly shows that foreign interests
and interference in African affairs are also causes of
conflict on the continent.
We seize this opportunity to express appreciation
to all the Member States that have shown the necessary
flexibility throughout the negotiation process. The
Group also expresses its appreciation to the Office
of the Special Adviser on Africa for its support in its
capacity as secretariat for the draft resolution. We
look forward to working closely with all development
partners, on the basis of mutual trust and good faith, to
implement the key deliverables in the draft resolution.

19-274019/29

A/73/PV.105

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland to introduce, on
behalf of the European Union, the draft amendment
contained in A/73/L.113.
Mr. Tanner (Finland): I have the honour to take
the floor on behalf of the European Union (EU) and
its member States to introduce this amendment to draft
resolution A/73/L97/Rev.1, on the implementation of
the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa (A/73/273).
The EU and its member States would like to
call for the deletion of the current paragraph 8, to be
replaced by the language put forward by the EU and its
member States.
Throughout the negotiations — and in fact already
last year — the EU and its member States, supported
by several other delegations, have consistently voiced
their concern about the use of the formulation “win-win
cooperation”. “Win-win cooperation” stands for an
approach that focuses on economic gains, often at the
expense of the sustainable development needs of people
and local communities. In contrast, the EU and its
member States truly believe in the vision outlined in
the Agenda 2063 of the African Union — namely, the
vision of “[a]n Africa of good governance, democracy,
respect for human rights, justice and the rule of law”;
the vision of
“[a]n Africa whose development is people-driven,
relying on the potential of African people,
especially its women and youth”;
and the vision that
“[a]ll the citizens of Africa will be actively
involved in decision-making in all aspects of
development, including social, economic, political
and environmental”.
As is outlined in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the needs of partner countries should be
placed at the heart of development cooperation policy;
therefore, we are not in a position to support a model
of development cooperation that eschews the universal
rules we have all agreed on.
We call on all member States to support the
proposed amendment.
10/29

10/09/2019

The President (spoke in Spanish): The General
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/73/L.97/Rev.1, entitled “Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa”, as orally corrected.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Ms. Ochalik (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/73/L.97/Rev.1, Turkey has also become a sponsor of
the draft resolution.
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before we proceed
to take action on draft resolution A/73/L.97/Rev.1, as
orally corrected, in accordance with rule 90 of the rules
of procedure, the Assembly shall first take a decision on
the draft amendment issued as document A/73/L.113. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria,
Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia,
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, North Macedonia,
Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal,
Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
19-27401

10/09/2019

Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania,
Mauritius,
Mexico,
Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Russian Federation,
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent
and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa,
South Sudan, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Brazil, Kazakhstan
Draft amendment A/73/L.113 was rejected by 107
votes to 47, with 2 abstentions.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We shall now
proceed to take action on draft resolution A/73/L.96/
Rev.1, as orally corrected. A recorded vote has been
requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan,
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gambia, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana,
Honduras, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nepal, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea,

A/73/PV.105

Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea,
Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, South Sudan,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Switzerland, Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, United Arab Emirates,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, North Macedonia, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland
Draft resolution A/73/L.97/Rev.1, as orally
corrected, was adopted by 115 votes to 1, with 40
abstentions (resolution 73/336).
The President (spoke in Spanish): Before giving
the floor for explanations of vote after the vote, may I
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Tanner (Finland): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the European Union (EU)
and its member States. The candidate countries the
Republic of North Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania;
the country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine, align themselves with this explanation
of vote.
At the outset, let me express the EU’s gratitude
to the representatives of Bangladesh and Nigeria
as co-facilitators of the process of negotiations on
resolution 73/336, on the causes of conflicts and
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa, and the State of Palestine as
Chair of the Group of 77 (G-77) and China, as well as

19-2740111/29

A/73/PV.105

10/09/2019

colleagues representing groups and Member States that
participated in informal consultations. The EU and its
member States were engaged constructively throughout
the negotiation of this text.

interplay between climate, environmental degradation
and security is not an abstract, theoretical risk. Failing
to build resilience to these challenges already threatens
lives, livelihoods and economies across the world.

The European Union and its member States have
aspired to put African countries at the centre of their
development efforts and will continue to do so. The
EU and its member States provide more than half of
global official development assistance. In 2017, the EU
and its member States invested more than €85 billion
in official development cooperation, of which a large
part went to Africa to support projects and initiatives at
the national, regional and continental levels. As regards
trade, economic partnership agreements have been
designed to promote trade and development. Leastdeveloped African countries benefit from enhanced
market access under the Everything but Arms
programme. The European External Investment Plan,
adopted in September 2017, is also a testament to this.

The EU and its member States have been staunch
supporters of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change
and the importance of climate action for security and
prosperity. The General Assembly should take into
account all risks, including climate and environmentrelated security risks, particularly if we are to build
resilience. The upcoming United Nations Climate
Action Summit will be an important opportunity to
underline our joint commitment to ambitious climate
action. We commend the Secretary-General for his
efforts in that regard.

All this demonstrates how close the cooperation
between Africa and Europe is. It is a cooperation based
on principles such as national ownership, transparency,
inclusiveness and respect for human rights, as evidenced
by the Joint Africa-European Union Strategy and the
African Union-EU summits.
It is because of these close ties between our
neighbouring continents and the great importance we
attach to sustainable development in Africa that we are
deeply disappointed by the unwillingness of the G-77
and China to accommodate our concerns regarding the
reference to “win-win cooperation”. The reason why we
abstained in the voting on this resolution was purely
due to the fact that we cannot accept any reference to
a concept that ignores internationally agreed principles
of development cooperation and undermines the
people-centred approach outlined in both the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African
Union Agenda 2063. We have made our position on its
inclusion clear from the very beginning and proposed
alternative language to build on discussions from last
year’s negotiation and in several other resolutions.
Unfortunately, our concerns have been ignored again
this year.
The EU attaches high importance to conflict
prevention and underlines the critical need to address
the root causes of conflicts. In order for the resolution
to accurately reflect all causes of conflict, we wish to
highlight climate and environment-related threats. The
12/29

The President (spoke in Spanish): I call on the
observer of Palestine on a point of order.
Mr. Shawesh (Palestine): On behalf of the Group
of 77 and China, I would like to enquire as to which
delegation called for a recorded vote on resolution
73/336.
The President (spoke in Spanish): In response to
the question of the representative of the Observer State
of Palestine, the United States of America requested a
recorded vote on resolution 73/336.
Ms. Nemroff (United States of America):
Throughout negotiations, the United States was
candid about our issues regarding the text of
resolution 73/336. However, regretfully, we had to
vote against the resolution, entitled “Implementation
of the recommendations contained in the report
of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa”, due to its repeated elevation of
the domestic policy rhetoric of a single Member State.
The United States applauds the efforts of the
African Union (AU) to realize the goals and aspirations
of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD). We support NEPAD’s overall mission to
address the critical challenges that Africa faces and
the United States shares the AU goal of a stable and
prosperous Africa.
The United States continues to seek new areas of
cooperation and collaboration with the AU through
innovative initiatives geared towards strengthening
sustainable development, as well as trade and
investment. The Women’s Global Development and
19-27401

10/09/2019

Prosperity Initiative, for example, is the first whole-ofGovernment effort to advance global women’s economic
empowerment. The Access Africa partnership between
the United States Trade and Development Agency and
United States industry leaders supports the development
of quality information and secure communication
technology infrastructure across sub-Saharan Africa.
Prosper Africa and the new continental free trade area
both aim to increase two-way trade and investment
between the United States and Africa.
However, we cannot support the resolution with
the reference to “win-win cooperation” in paragraph 8.
This phrase has been promoted by a single Member
State to insert the signature policy agenda of its Head
of State into United Nations documents and does not
reflect the views of all Member States.
No Member should support incorporating language
to target a domestic political audience into multilateral
documents. The United States and the United Nations
share a commitment to transparency, good government,
respect for human rights, accountability, fiscal
responsibility and environmental and social safeguards.
We recognize the important role that the United Nations
plays as an effective and neutral platform for pursuing
sustainable development, and language that does not
support sustainable development for all should not
undermine that role.
With regard to Agenda 2063, while the United
States supports the overall goals of that vision and
action plan, it contains language promoting abortion
that is not aligned with United States policy. Over the
years and among many United Nations agencies, the
phrases “sexual and reproductive health”, “healthcare services” and “health services” have acquired
connotations that promote abortion and attempt to
create a claimed right to abortion. We do not accept these
terms, as they often encompass abortion as a method
of planning. The United States is a stalwart defender
and funder of programmes to improve the health, life,
dignity and well-being of women and children, and will
never waver on that support.
We regret that the language of one State Member
has kept us from joining the consensus on an important
text. This is the second year that this language has
been included in the text, and we remain disappointed
in this outcome. We strongly urge our African friends
and partners to work with us going forward to avoid the
same result in the future.

A/73/PV.105

Mr. Rozsa (Hungary): I would like to thank the
co-facilitators once again for their commitment.
Hungary aligns itself with the explanation of vote
delivered by the representative of Finland on behalf of
the European Union, concerning win-win cooperation.
Hungary remains committed to promoting durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa. In that regard,
we see that mitigating challenges caused by climate
change, supporting development and placing emphasis
on conflict prevention are highly indispensable in
areas suffering from recurring conflicts in Africa and
elsewhere. We support the comprehensive approach to
the linkages connecting development, climate change,
the rule of law and peace and security.
Additionally, with regard to paragraph 19
of resolution 73/336, “Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and
the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa”, we would like to make the
following statement in our national capacity.
Hungary voted against resolution 73/195, on
the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration, in December 2018, will not take part in
the implementation of the Compact and cannot accept
any reference to it in international documents. We
cannot share the view presented in the Compact that
migration is the best solution to the labour market
and demographic problems of countries of destination
or that it is the solution to the problems of countries
of origin.
Sustainable solutions can be found only if
development aims are concentrated on creating
livelihood opportunities for people in their home
country. The Hungarian Government is therefore
prioritizing development projects in countries of
origin, which can contribute to establishing lasting
solutions for those in need and improving the living
conditions, which, in their current form, often generate
movements of mass migration. We are placing emphasis
on building health-care, sanitation, water-management
and education infrastructure in African countries.
Mr. Fox-Drummond Gough (Brazil): Once again,
Brazil expressed its support for the resolution on the
causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace
and sustainable development in Africa, as it has done
since the very first time the annual resolution was
presented in 1998.

19-2740113/29

A/73/PV.105

Without repeating the facts and figures of our
intervention after the vote on resolution 73/335, on the
New Partnership for Africa’s Development, allow me to
reaffirm that our relation with African partners and our
commitment to African development constitute a longstanding priority of Brazilian foreign policy, speaking
also to how Brazilian society perceives its national
identity and its place in the world.
In a growing number of debates at the United
Nations, we are finding overwhelming support for an
important innovation in our collective contribution to
peace efforts in Africa — a shift from a crisis-oriented
approach to more continuous engagement in longerterm efforts to build lasting peace. The increasing
attention accorded to resolution 73/336 is a reflection
of that trend.
We are confident that the new focus on the longterm can prove instrumental to really contributing
to the definitive silencing of the guns in Africa. We
strongly encourage all Member States and the relevant
United Nations agencies to redouble their efforts in
assisting African countries in implementing their own
priorities in terms of peace and development.
Brazil therefore regrets the addition of language
on the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular
Migration — an initiative that is not directly related to
the resolution and that does not enjoy the consensual
support of all Member States. Brazil does not adhere
to the Global Compact and reiterates its position that
migration issues should be addressed by individual
Member States under their sovereign prerogatives to
rule over their own territories and adopt policies that
speak for their unique national realities and priorities.
Brazil therefore disassociates itself from the language
in paragraph 19 and does not consider it as the basis for
future negotiations on this subject.
Mr. Nakano (Japan): I would like to deliver an
explanation of vote on resolution 73/335, entitled
“New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress
in implementation and international support”,
and resolution 73/336, “Implementation of the
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa”.
At the outset, Japan would like to thank the
delegations of Algeria and Bangladesh in their capacity
as co-facilitators of the negotiations; Nigeria and Benin
14/29

10/09/2019

in their capacity as co-facilitators of the Group of 77 and
China; and colleagues representing the Group’s member
States that participated in the informal consultations.
Japan aligns itself with the explanations of vote
delivered by the representative of the United States
and the representative of Finland, on behalf of the
European Union, with regard to the references to
“‘win-win’ cooperation”, in paragraph 42 of resolution
73/335, and to “the spirit of win-win cooperation and
to create a shared future”, in paragraph 8 of resolution
73/336. Japan regrets that the amendment proposal of
the European Union was not adopted.
As reiterated at the seventh Tokyo International
Conference on African Development held last
month, Japan reaffirms its commitment to living up
to its ambitions and responsibilities towards future
generations of African countries through its full
support for the African Union Agenda 2063, as well as
all peace and stability efforts on the continent.
Ms. González Carrillo (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile does not subscribe to the Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration as its language
precludes debate. For that reason, Chile disassociates
itself from paragraph 19 of resolution 73/336.
Mr. Annakou (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Despite
the importance of resolution 73/336, on the causes
of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, and the fact that we
agree with most of its provisions, we were regrettably
compelled to abstain in the voting, owing to paragraph
19, which welcomes the adoption of the Global Compact
for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration.
My country, Libya, has reservations concerning
the entire Compact, which conflates legal and illegal
migration and fails to properly define the two issues.
It also ascribes equal responsibilities to countries of
origin, transit and destination, and makes my country,
which is a victim of large illegal migration flows,
shoulder responsibilities that it cannot discharge.
Mr. Xu Zhongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
In 2015, the United Nations Sustainable Development
Summit adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, which was a major commitment on
the part of world leaders to standing as one behind
multilateralism and to supporting the status of the
United Nations and the role it plays in firmly advancing
humankind’s course of sustainable development. The
19-27401

10/09/2019

2030 Agenda sounds a clarion call, in no uncertain
terms, that all parties work together through win-win
cooperation so that the benefits of development can
accrue to all countries in all parts of the world.
Pursuing win-win cooperation is a consensus
reached and a solemn pledge made by Member States in
the 2030 Agenda. It is also an important cornerstone for
the effort to enable all parties to close development gaps
and help developing countries, in particular African
countries and countries in special situations, to achieve
development and realize the Sustainable Development
Goals. It is also a basic principle guiding the process.
At present, unilateralism and protectionism are on
the rise around the world and the rules and institutions
of multilateralism are under attack, much to the
detriment of the interests of some countries engaged
in international cooperation and trade. That fact is a
case in point. It shows us the importance and value of
upholding the concept of win-win cooperation.
We find it unacceptable that a small minority of
countries deliberately misrepresents the concept of
win-win cooperation and goes so far as to water down
and undermine it under all manner of pretexts. It
is a total departure from the 2030 Agenda and other
international consensus. Who is placing their national
interests above international interests? The answer is
self-evident. In time, history will prove that not only
will that practice fail to promote multilateralism and
international cooperation, but will also harm their
own interests.
China firmly supports the New Partnership for
Africa’s Development, the realization of durable peace,
development and prosperity on the African continent,
and the adoption of resolutions 73/335 and 73/336 by
consensus in the General Assembly. We deeply regret
that recorded votes were requested on them.
China has always been supportive of African
countries in developing new partnerships with all
parties. We have consistently adhered to the principles
of sincerity, practical results, affinity and good faith
and the concept of upholding the greater good, while
pursuing shared interests. China has stood in solidarity
and unity of purpose with African countries to pull
together and forge ahead, hand in hand.
In September 2018, China and African countries
jointly held the Beijing Summit of the Forum on the
China-Africa Cooperation. At the Summit, whose

A/73/PV.105

theme was “China and Africa: Toward an Even Stronger
Community with a Shared Future through Win-Win
Cooperation”, Chinese and African leaders held
in-depth exchanges, consulted with each other on major
cooperation plans and decided to jointly implement
eight major actions in the areas of the promotion of
industry, infrastructure, connectivity, trade facilitation,
green development, capacity-building, health care,
cultural and people-to-people exchange, and peace
and security. They agreed to bring the Belt and Road
Initiative in close alignment with the 2030 Agenda and
the Agenda 2063 of the African Union and the national
development strategies of African countries, thereby
injecting a new impetus into win-win cooperation and
shared development between China and Africa.
At the Beijing Summit, President Xi Jinping said
that China respects, loves and supports Africa. That
is our long-standing position and sentiment. We are
consistently committed to the five noes: no interference
in African countries’ pursuit of development paths that
cater to their national realities; no interference in the
internal affairs of African countries; no imposition
of our will on African countries; no attachment of
political strings to assistance to Africa; and no seeking
of political self-interest in investment and financing
cooperation with Africa. It is China’s hope that other
countries will also follow the principle of the five noes
in their interaction with Africa. They should support
African countries in following the development
paths of their choice, which cater to their national
realities and priorities, while achieving autonomous
development and help the people of Africa lead a happy
and better life.
The President (spoke in Spanish): We have heard
the last speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-item (b)
of agenda item 68 and agenda item 68, as a whole?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 114
Notification by the Secretary-General under
Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the
United Nations
Note by the Secretary-General (A/73/300)
The President (spoke in Spanish): As members are
aware, in accordance with the provisions of Article 12,

19-2740115/29

A/73/PV.105

paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations and
with the consent of the Security Council, the SecretaryGeneral is mandated to notify the General Assembly
of matters relative to the maintenance of international
peace and security that are being dealt with by the
Security Council and of matters with which the Council
has ceased to deal.
In that connection, the General Assembly has
before it a note by the Secretary-General circulated in
document A/73/300. May I take it that the Assembly
takes note of the note by the Secretary-General
contained in document A/73/300?
It was so decided.
The President (spoke in Spanish): May I take it
that it is the wish of the General Assembly to conclude
its consideration of agenda item 114?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 31
Report of the Security Council
Report of the Security Council (A/73/2)
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the President of the Security Council, His
Excellency Mr. Vassily Nebenzia, to introduce the
report of the Security Council.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation), President of
the Security Council: Let me begin by thanking you,
Madam President, on behalf of all members of the
Security Council, for your service as President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-third session and for
arranging today’s meeting.
As President of the Security Council for the month
of September, Russia has the honour to introduce the
annual report of the Council (A/73/2), which covers the
period from 1 January to 31 December 2018.
The Charter of the United Nations entrusts the
Security Council with the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Over the past year, with the support of the United
Nations membership, the Security Council has sought
to discharge its responsibilities actively, while urging
the peaceful resolution of conflicts and undertaking a
series of peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities all
over the world.
16/29

10/09/2019

In keeping with recent trends, the activity of
the Security Council increased during the reporting
period. During the period under review, the Council
held 288 formal meetings, of which 275 were public.
The Council adopted 54 resolutions and 21 presidential
statements and issued 87 statements to the press.
During the reporting period, the Council conducted
three missions.
In 2018 the Council continued to focus on a number
of serious unresolved conflicts, in particular in the
Middle East and Africa. The impact of those conflicts
on civilians was severe. Large-scale humanitarian
crises persisted, and in some cases worsened, and large
flows of displaced people, within and across borders,
continued as a result of conflict. Divisions in the
Council prevented it from taking effective action on
some key conflicts. However, there were also several
positive developments in 2018.
In Africa, countries of the Horn of Africa were able
to make progress in resolving long-standing bilateral
disputes, the United Nations Mission in Liberia
concluded its work, and a peace agreement was signed in
South Sudan. In Asia, the level of tension on the Korean
peninsula decreased as a result of dialogue between the
parties. In the Middle East, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, also known as Da’esh, was driven out
of Iraq and lost control of most of the territory that it
held in the Syrian Arab Republic. Progress was made in
the peace process in Colombia, and elections in various
countries, including Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Iraq and Lebanon, made
important contributions to political stability.
The Council remained convinced of the vital role
that the United Nations and the multilateral system
should play in preventing and resolving conflicts
on its agenda, as set out by all Council members
during an open debate on the subject in November
(see S/PV.8395). The Council took advantage of a
wide range of tools to that end, including mediation,
the deployment of peacekeeping and special political
missions, and the use of targeted sanctions and arms
embargoes. Some Council members consistently
underlined the importance of taking action at every
stage in the conflict cycle and focusing on sustaining
peace. Council members also stressed the need to
respect international law and maintain the international
non-proliferation regime.
19-27401

10/09/2019

Throughout 2018, Council members continued to
focus on the implementation of the Council’s thematic
resolutions in the context of the conflicts on its agenda,
including the need to consider the role of women in
preventing and resolving conflict. At the end of 2018,
almost 90,000 peacekeepers were deployed in 14
missions in support of Council mandates. A total of 98
peacekeepers were killed in 2018. Council members
note with appreciation the contribution of United
Nations peacekeepers to supporting international peace
and security and pay tribute to the 98 peacekeepers who
sacrificed their lives in 2018.
In conclusion, consistent with usual practice, the
introduction to the report was prepared by the delegation
of the United Kingdom, which held the presidency
of the Security Council in August 2018. Members of
the Council also contributed to the preparation of the
report. I extend thanks to the Secretariat for compiling
the report and to all those involved in producing. I look
forward to this morning’s discussion of the report by
Member States and will convey the views of members
of the General Assembly to my colleagues in the
Security Council.
Mr. Favre (Switzerland): I am pleased to take
the floor on behalf of members of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, namely,
Austria, Chile, Costa Rica, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
Gabon, Ghana, Hungary, Ireland, Jordan, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Maldives, New Zealand, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Portugal, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia,
Slovenia, Sweden, Uruguay and my own country,
Switzerland. We welcome the annual report (A/73/2) of
the Security Council to the General Assembly and thank
the Russian presidency of the Council for the month of
September for presenting the report to us today, as well
as the delegation of the United Kingdom for leading the
drafting process of the report’s introduction.
The ACT group promotes a more transparent and
efficient United Nations. Achieving adequate interaction
between the Security Council and the General Assembly
and greater transparency and accountability regarding
the work of the Security Council towards the wider
United Nations membership is a priority of the group.
The Security Council discharges its mandate on behalf
of the United Nations membership, and is therefore
accountable to the Assembly. The submission of the
annual report of the Security Council and its subsequent
transmission to the General Assembly is an obligation
of the Council vis-à-vis the General Assembly under

A/73/PV.105

Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the United
Nations. The consideration of the annual report by the
General Assembly is an equally important exercise for
ensuring adequate transparency and accountability by
offering a thorough overview of the Council’s activity
during the year under review and allowing Member
States to comment on the activities of the Council.
We are disappointed that the process leading
to the consideration of the 2018 annual report of the
Council by the General Assembly has fallen short of
those requirements and objectives. The report was
formally adopted by the Council on 20 August (see
S/PV.8597), and today’s debate is taking place during
the very last days of the current session of the General
Assembly, when Member States are already focused
on the preparation of the upcoming session. It is the
third consecutive year that such a situation has arisen.
We are deeply troubled about the signals that this
unfortunate situation sends regarding how seriously the
Security Council is taking its obligations towards the
General Assembly. We would also like to recall that the
Security Council has committed itself through several
presidential notes, including the most recent note
S/2017/507, to clear deadlines to ensure that the annual
report is presented during the spring of the session
following the reporting year. Failing to respect those
modalities weakens the ability of the wider United
Nations membership to engage in an adequate manner
in the discussion of the report. It risks jeopardizing the
progress achieved over the years towards making this
process more transparent and effective.
Ensuring a substantive discussion in the General
Assembly on the annual report of the Security Council
is a priority for our group. We congratulate delegations
for their active and substantive participation today.
This is a clear sign that, in spite of the challenges, the
membership considers the report and its discussion as
a key driver to guarantee adequate interaction among
relevant United Nations bodies on peace and security
matters. In that respect, the ACT group encourages
the Russian presidency to report back to the Security
Council on the comments and suggestions made during
this debate, in line with paragraph 138 of note 507, and
to make available a summary of the discussions today
in the General Assembly and of the briefing of the
Security Council.
Looking ahead to 2020, we call on the Security
Council to explore ways of strengthening the process
through rigorous adherence to the time frame agreed to

19-2740117/29

A/73/PV.105

by the Council in note 507, starting with the completion
of a draft introduction of the 2019 annual report, under
the lead of the Russian Federation, by 31 January 2020.
We encourage the Russian Federation and the Security
Council members in charge of future annual reports
to make full use of the consultative process envisaged
in paragraph 129 of note 507. We also request that the
President of the General Assembly ensure that the
forthcoming meeting on the 2019 annual report of the
Security Council be held by June 2020, at the latest, and
not rushed to the General Assembly in late summer.
(spoke in French)
Allow me now to make a statement in my
national capacity.
Switzerland welcomes today’s debate on the
annual report of the Security Council for 2018 and the
possibility it provides to all members of the General
Assembly to participate in the work of the Council
in accordance with the obligations enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations. In addition to the
procedural concerns highlighted in the statement that
I delivered earlier on behalf of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group, I would like to
speak on three issues related to the 2018 annual report
that are of particular importance to Switzerland.
First, in 2018, the sustaining peace agenda was
further consolidated, including through the high-level
briefings held in April and December, the adoption by
the General Assembly and the Security Council of a
new set of twin resolutions — resolution 72/276 and
resolution 2413 (2018), respectively — as well as several
presidential statements. In that regard, Switzerland
especially welcomes the reiteration that development,
peace and security and human rights are interlinked
and mutually reinforcing.
Switzerland welcomes the fact that the Council
has taken into account human rights parameters and
indicators in its monitoring of country situations and
in the tailoring of its response, for example, in South
Sudan. With respect to Yemen, the Council was able
to swiftly react and endorse the Stockholm Agreement,
with resolution 2451 (2018), and therefore fulfilled
its commitment to enhancing the effectiveness of
the United Nations in supporting conflict resolution
in practical terms. In other situations, however, the
Council regrettably failed to take action, such as in the
case of Syria. The Council did not adopt resolutions
that would have established mechanisms to investigate
18/29

10/09/2019

reports on the use of chemical weapons in the town of
Douma in April 2018 and allocate responsibility.
Secondly, Switzerland also welcomes the significant
developments in the Council’s protection of civilians
agenda in 2018. The unanimous adoption of resolution
2417 (2018), on 24 May 2018, which addresses the link
between armed conflict and violence and conflictinduced food insecurity and the threat of famine, is of
crucial importance. Switzerland, in its role as Chair
of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians,
together with the Netherlands, helped to pave the way
the adoption of that resolution. The majority of the
largest food crises in the world are conflict related; the
issue unfortunately remains highly relevant.
The humanitarian situation, including food security
for civilians and respect of international humanitarian
law, in contexts such as Yemen and South Sudan, are
deeply worrisome and must be further addressed by
the Council as a matter of priority. With respect to its
commitment to the protection of civilians, Switzerland
submitted a proposal to amend the Rome Statute to the
Secretariat last week to designate as a war crime the
starvation of civilians used as a method of warfare,
punishable before the International Criminal Court,
when committed in non-international armed conflicts.
Thirdly, Switzerland welcomes the ongoing efforts
to improve some aspects of the working methods of
the Council and to contribute to the effectiveness and
transparency of its work in 2018. In addition to today’s
discussion, the now annually held open debate on the
working methods of the Council and wrap-up sessions
of its presidencies, even if they are not yet a regular
fixture, are essential tools to enhance the Council’s
interaction with the wider United Nations membership.
However, the current difficult discussions within
the framework of the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions
have shown that challenges remain to be overcome.
Switzerland commends Kuwait and the other elected
members for the positive role that they have played and
will continue to support their progress constructively.
One of our priorities is to strengthen due process
procedures with regard to the Council’s sanctions
regime, on which we can build upon the positive
experiences with the Ombudsperson mechanism,
established 10 years ago.
Lastly, in line with the ACT group statement that I
had the honour of reading out earlier, Switzerland also
19-27401

10/09/2019

looks forward to the 2019 annual process on the report
of the Security Council being marked by rigorous
adherence to the time frame agreed to in the note by the
President of the Security Council of 2017 (S/2017/507).
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): I have the honour of
speaking on behalf of the 10 members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), namely, Brunei
Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Myanmar, the
Philippines, Singapore, Viet Nam and my own country,
Thailand.
The Security Council plays an important role in
maintaining international peace and security on behalf
of all the States Members of the United Nations, as
per Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations.
The annual report of the Security Council (A/73/2) is
therefore an important tool for the Council to uphold
its accountability and transparency towards the wider
membership by keeping them informed of its activities.
In that regard, ASEAN welcomes the report of the
Security Council for 2018. We also note that there were
efforts to improve the narrative of the introduction
of the report, following the issuance of the note by
the President of the Security Council of August 2017
(S/2017/507).
The consideration of the Council’s report by
the General Assembly is a critical exercise. It is a
fundamental aspect of the relationship between the
Security Council and the wider membership. It is an
opportunity for all Member States to examine and
comment on the work of one of the United Nations most
important organs. If done in a meaningful fashion, the
debate on the Council’s report could help strengthen the
credibility of the Security Council and the effectiveness
of the United Nations as a whole.
The preparation of the report took much longer
than required by note 507. Its late adoption pushed the
General Assembly to consider it at the very end of this
session, which is a late stage. For the third year in a row,
we find ourselves discussing the report in September,
just weeks before the closure of the session, although the
period covered by the report is now from 1 January to
31 December, according to note by the President of the
Security Council dated 10 December 2015 (S/2015/944).
It is not credible that an eight- or nine-month gap exists
for the General Assembly to discuss the work of the
Council. More can be done in terms of timeliness in
order to preserve the importance of that report and of

A/73/PV.105

the process. In that vein, ASEAN would like to make
the following suggestions to improve our consideration
of the report.
First, it is important that the Security Council
adhere to the important element of timeliness in note
507, which states that the submission of the report
should take place no later than in the spring. For the
sake of clarity, spring can be defined as no later than
the month of April, which could be made clearer in
note 507.
Secondly, in order to have a meaningful and
substantive debate, Member States should be given
sufficient time to carefully study the report. We note
that the report was initially due to be considered by the
General Assembly on 30 August, barely a week and a
half after the publication of the report. We appreciate that
more time was ultimately given and would appreciate a
window of at least three weeks between the adoption
of the report and the debate on it in future. That would
ensure sufficient time to prepare substantively for
the debate. An informal briefing on the report for the
broader membership prior to its adoption would also be
a valuable complement to the process.
Thirdly, we see the value of incorporating into the
report more regular feedback and assessments on the
work of the Council. The monthly wrap-up sessions
at the end of each Security Council presidency offer a
useful platform in that regard.
It is imperative that the Security Council
maintain the highest standards of accountability and
transparency. It is ASEAN’s hope that the Security
Council and the wider membership continue to ensure
meaningful participation in this debate, and that we
collectively take steps to strengthen the functioning of
the Council.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this meeting. We would
first like to express our appreciation to Ms. Karen
Pierce, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, and her team for preparing the introduction
to the Security Council report for 2018 (A/73/2). We
also thank the Secretariat for producing the factual part
of the annual report of the Security Council.
The report is an excellent reference source for
all the documents that were sent to and from the
Security Council, as well as records of the meetings
held throughout the year. To have all that information

19-2740119/29

A/73/PV.105

compiled in one document is very useful. On the other
hand, the report gives very limited insight into the
substantive nature of the Council’s actual work. For
example, an inexperienced or casual reader will see
what was discussed and when and which documents
were adopted but questions as to why or how it happened
will remain unanswered.
Does the report give an idea of what is happening
on the ground? Does it provide a context as to why a
specific issue is brought to the attention of the Security
Council? Does it provide any explanation as to why a
specific document is adopted or rejected? Those are the
questions against which the value of the report should
also be measured.
We all know that there are agenda items that the
Security Council discusses on a regular basis. There
are also issues about which Council members feel
particularly strongly. They therefore initiate the
respective discussions, usually during the month of
their presidency. In addition, there are requests for
urgent or unplanned meetings in response to concrete
developments in a specific country or a region. Can
one deduce from the report which meeting is which?
That is hardly so, although the distinction may be quite
important and quite telling.
We recognize the effort to give a more analytical
and substantive character to the introductory part.
For example, it is useful to have specific references to
resolutions that were not unanimously adopted. In our
opinion, in such cases it would be even more useful
to have a short explanation as to which aspects of the
proposed documents were viewed differently by the
Council members.
Then there is the issue of draft resolutions that were
not adopted due to the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council or a failure to obtain nine votes
in favour. Apparently, such cases deserve more attention
than just a mere mentioning of voting outcomes without
any details about the substance of issues.
What about procedural votes? Their holding
indicates that Council members attach an extremely
significant importance to the issue at hand. Despite
the fact that there were four instances in 2018 when a
procedural vote was called for, in the introduction we
read about only one such case. In our view, that is rather
a glaring omission.
20/29

10/09/2019

Finally, my delegation considers as utterly
inadequate the presentation in the report the introduction
of the consideration by the Council of the issue of the
Russian-Ukrainian conflict, which formally falls under
the agenda item “Letter dated 28 February 2014 from
the Permanent Representative of Ukraine to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Council
(S/2014/136) and the letter dated 13 April 2014 from the
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Council (S/2014/264)”.
What is the value in giving an account of the
substance of presidential statement S/PRST/2018/12,
while neglecting to mention at least how many open
meetings were held during the year — the number is
four, in case Members are wondering — as well as
who initiated respective discussions and why. After
all, there is no established reporting cycle or agreed
schedule for such meetings, which means that they are
called for only when something extraordinary happens.
How is it that the meeting at which the most
serious escalation of the situation was discussed, held
on 26 November 2018, following an armed attack by
the Russian Navy in international waters on Ukraine’s
three navy vessels, with their subsequent seizure and
the illegal detention of their crews, is not to be found,
even in the footnotes to the introduction?
The answer is rather obvious given the fact that the
introduction has to be agreed by consensus and that, for
a well-known permanent member of the Council, it has
long been a matter of policy to suppress, cover up and
distort publicly important information.
Still quite fresh from its Council membership
in 2016-2017, Ukraine recognizes that all the
above-mentioned shortcomings are not for lack of trying
on the part of the overwhelming majority of Council
members, including permanent ones, but rather the
outcome of institutional deficiencies in the Council’s
composition and established working methods. In that
regard, we encourage Council members to continue to
explore new ways and approaches in order to further
improve the preparation of the annual report to the
General Assembly.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The importance
of today’s debate can hardly be overstated. The annual
report of the Security Council to the General Assembly
(A/73/2) is a key mechanism of accountability
established by the Charter of the United Nations to
19-27401

10/09/2019

A/73/PV.105

govern the relationship between two Charter organs
with carefully crafted mandates and clear provisions for
cooperation. The fact that we hold this debate literally
at the last possible moment, after only little time to
review the report itself, submitted late for the third year
in a row, is not a good sign. It illustrates disrespect by
the Security Council for its own mandate, its working
methods and, most importantly, the Assembly. Like
other speakers, we call on the Security Council to take
its responsibility seriously and to submit its report to
the General Assembly no later than April. We also call
on the President of the General Assembly to set a date
for the report’s consideration that is conducive to the
broadest participation.

in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 (IIIM)
continues to be a lone beacon of hope for justice among
the important steps that individual States have taken to
prosecute war criminals.

The Security Council discharges its mandate
on behalf of the United Nations membership and
is therefore accountable to the Assembly. We elect
States to the Council and expect them to make a
difference there. We applaud the efforts of Kuwait
and the other elected members to improve conditions
in that regard, for example by establishing a system
of co-penholdership and fair burden-sharing in the
chairing of committees. The elected members have
created a positive momentum and initiated healthy
discussions on better working methods within the
Security Council. They can be assured to represent
the collective will of the membership, as numerous
past debates on working methods have shown. At the
same time, we are disappointed by the lack of response
from the permanent members, who should share the
goal of making the Council a more effective body but
are taking a collective defensive stance on working
methods issues.

With regard to Libya, the Council is unable to end
the violence and increasingly lets outside influence
determine the country’s fate, undermining efforts to
unify the country under joint institutions and prospects
for a better future.

The present lack of accountability is compounded
by the fact that the Council falls significantly short of
its Charter mandate to maintain international peace
and security, with the most severe consequences for
the people whom it is supposed to protect. The annual
report is illustrative mainly not in what it says but in
what it leaves out. The Council has continued its long
failure to address the situation in Syria; accountability
is still not part and parcel of the political process
nominally led by the United Nations. There was
no progress towards a referral to the International
Criminal Court, called for by so many States and by the
Secretary-General. The International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed

On Myanmar, the Council, for the most part, even
refused to discuss the situation, let alone take measures
to address and remedy the grave injustice against the
Rohingya people.
On Yemen, a fragile political process has
emerged — one is tempted to say, in spite of Security
Council procrastination. Meaningful and decisive
support for peace efforts would be very much needed to
solidify political progress.

In the Sudan, Liechtenstein welcomes the recently
signed peace agreement. However, the Security Council
risks to let the best opportunity pass to ensure justice
for the victims in Darfur — justice that the Council
itself has mandated the International Criminal Court
to provide yet has consistently failed to support the
Court’s many efforts to that effect.
While the Secretary-General and other authoritative
voices, such as the International Committee of the
Red Cross, report record numbers of violations of
international humanitarian law and failures to protect
civilians, we see today that the Security Council has
very little to report on what it has done to address
and reverse those trends. Most telling are the many
instances where the Council disregards ongoing and
serious violations of its own resolutions, be it on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran or the
Middle East.
Those shortcomings are systemic, to some extent,
and therefore constitute an underlying risk to the
United Nations as a whole, one the Assembly has
a responsibility to address. The Assembly needs to
reaffirm its role, which is narrow in practice, but not
by law. The IIIM is an important case in point for what
the General Assembly can achieve when the Security
Council fails to do its work.
The use of the veto significantly increased over
the past decade. Its paralysing effect of anticipatory
obedience has had enormous negative consequences

19-2740121/29

A/73/PV.105

on the performance of the Security Council. The
veto power must be checked by the membership, in
particular as it is increasingly used in violation of
the very purposes and principles of the Charter. The
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group
code of conduct, now supported by 119 States — and
we would like to thank Armenia for its accession just
yesterday — is an important commitment by a large
majority of Member States against the abuse of the veto
in cases of mass atrocity crimes.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
We need to do more work on the veto. Liechtenstein
is of the view that the General Assembly should discuss
any use of the veto in a formal meeting, as a measure
of accountability. Such a discussion should take
place without prejudice to any possible outcome and
independently of the substance of the draft resolution
subject to a veto. The Council should be invited to
contribute to the discussion in the General Assembly
with a special report, in accordance with Article 24,
paragraph 3, of the Charter. We invite all interested
delegations to work with us to create the basis for
such a discussion here in the Assembly in the coming
weeks. We consider it an important contribution to
strengthening the United Nations as the most important
embodiment of inclusive multilateralism.
An overwhelming majority of States wants the
United Nations to succeed in its mission to bring peace
and security, sustainable development and fundamental
rights and freedoms to the peoples. We will continue to
help strengthen the voice of that majority. The Charter
provides ample ground, and the Security Council report
before us provides ample reason to do that.
Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): I wish to associate myself
with the statement made by the Ambassador of Thailand
on behalf of the 10 member countries of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations.
I also thank the President of the Security Council,
the Ambassador of the Russian Federation, for
presenting the report of the Security Council (A/73/2)
on behalf of all Council members.
Let me begin by saying that this plenary meeting is
one of the most important meetings on the calendar of
the General Assembly. Today members of the General
Assembly have the very important responsibility
of considering the annual report of the Council.
22/29

10/09/2019

As we consider the annual report, a basic question
arises — why is the General Assembly considering
the annual report of the Security Council? The short
answer is that the annual report is a requirement of the
Charter of the United Nations. It is, in fact, the Security
Council’s only clear obligation to the General Assembly
under the Charter. That obligation is highlighted in not
just one, but two, Articles — 15 and 24. Let me cite
Article 15, paragraph 1, which states,
“The General Assembly shall receive and
consider annual and special reports from the
Security Council; these reports shall include an
account of the measures that the Security Council
has decided upon or taken to maintain international
peace and security.”
In addition, Article 24, paragraph 3, states,
“The Security Council shall submit annual and,
when necessary, special reports to the General
Assembly for its consideration.”
In other words, the submission and consideration
of the annual report is about fulfilling a Charter
responsibility. If we are serious about the Charter of the
United Nations, then it is important that every Member
State carefully consider the report of the Security
Council and give its views on the activities of the
Council. I am therefore very pleased to see that many
Member States are inscribed in the list of speakers for
today’s debate.
At the root of today’s debate is a more fundamental
question — what is the relationship between the General
Assembly and the Security Council? In considering the
roles of the General Assembly and the Security Council,
we have to look at Article 24 in its entirety. Paragraph
1 of Article 24 states,
“In order to ensure prompt and effective action
by the United Nations, its Members confer on the
Security Council primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security,
and agree that in carrying out its duties under
this responsibility the Security Council acts on
their behalf.”
It is clear from Article 24 that the Security
Council acts on behalf of all Members. And because
the Security Council acts on behalf of all Members, it
has a corresponding duty and responsibility to report
back to the General Assembly. From that perspective,
the meeting today is fundamentally an exercise in
19-27401

10/09/2019

accountability, transparency and legitimacy. Let me
elaborate on what I mean by transparency, accountability
and legitimacy.
The annual report is one of the means of bringing
greater transparency to the work of the Security
Council. The report catalogues all the documents
and decisions of the Security Council. That makes it
a useful reference document for all Members. More
important, the consideration of the annual report allows
the General Assembly to hold the Security Council
accountable for its actions, or lack of actions. Through
an open discussion here in the General Assembly, the
Security Council gains legitimacy for its work and for
its role as an important organ of the United Nations. That
is the reason that the debate today is fundamentally an
exercise in accountability, transparency and legitimacy
with regard to the Security Council.
I have carefully read the annual report, which
outlines the activities of the Security Council for the
period 1 January to 31 December 2018. I also listened
carefully to the report presented by the President
of the Council earlier this morning. As members of
the General Assembly, each one of us has the duty
to carefully scrutinize the Council’s report and ask
ourselves some basic questions. Did the Security
Council fulfil our expectations? Did the Security
Council act swiftly to resolve international crises, or
was the Security Council too paralysed by politics
to respond to international issues? How many vetoes
were cast by the permanent members, and over what
issues? How did the elected members discharge their
responsibilities in the Council? Those are the kind of
questions that we need to ask ourselves and members of
the Council as we consider the annual report.
In considering the annual report, it is also important
to keep in mind the importance of note S/2017/507,
issued by the President of the Council on 30 August
2017. In the note, the members of the Council expressed
their commitment to implementing a set of measures
to enhance the efficiency and transparency of the
Council’s work. Paragraph 125 states,
“[t]he Security Council will take the necessary
action to ensure the timely submission of its report
to the General Assembly”.
Paragraph 132 states,
“The Secretariat should submit the draft
report to the members of the Council no later

A/73/PV.105

than 15 March, immediately following the period
covered by the report, so that it may be discussed
and thereafter adopted by the Council in time for
consideration by the General Assembly in the
spring of that calendar year.”
I wish to make several observations about both the
content of the report and the process of considering the
report here in the General Assembly.
First, we are disappointed. We are disappointed
that the annual report was submitted very late. In
that sense, we share and echo the earlier expressions
of disappointment made by other delegations. The
report covers the period January to December 2018,
but comes eight months after the period under review.
If the annual report comes after eight months, can we
really say it is timely? Why does it take eight months to
prepare the annual report? We did some research, my
delegation looked at previous reports, and we note that,
in the period from 1993 to 2015, the average time to
produce the annual report was four months. Why does
it take eight months now when it previously took only
four months? From our point of view, there is definitely
room for improvement by Council members in terms
of the timely submission of the annual report to the
General Assembly.
Secondly, we are very disappointed. We are very
disappointed that the Security Council has not made
an effort to respect the timeline in note 507, which
clearly says that the annual report should be adopted
by the Council in time for consideration by the General
Assembly “in the spring of that calendar year”. We are
well past spring, we are well past summer and are into
autumn, the leaves are falling. That raises a related
question. Did the Secretariat submit the draft report to
the Council by March 15, as required under note 507?
If not, why not? I would like that specific question
answered by the Secretariat at some point.
Thirdly, we note that it has become a trend in the
past few years for the annual report to be submitted late
and rushed to the General Assembly in late August or
early September. That does not allow for proper debate
and discussion of the report in the General Assembly. It
is not appropriate to rush through an important report
such as this during the past few days of the session.
In particular, late August is not suitable, as many
mission staff are away from New York. Likewise, early
September is a busy period for missions, because we
are all deep in preparation for the high-level week. We

19-2740123/29

A/73/PV.105

therefore have to take a serious look at changing the
timeline for the consideration of the annual report by
the General Assembly.
Fourthly, I would like to comment on the monthly
assessments referred to on page 78 of the annual report.
The issue of monthly assessment is also addressed in
paragraph 136 of note 507. We are disappointed to note
that in 2018 seven members of the Security Council did
not submit their monthly assessment of their presidency.
Why is that so? In previous years all Council members
submitted their monthly assessment. However, we
note that in recent years more and more of them are
not submitting their monthly assessment. We would
like to know why that is the case. Is it the case that
Council members think that members of the General
Assembly do not consider their monthly assessment
reports to be important? On the contrary, I would like
to underline that all members of the General Assembly
regard the submission of the monthly assessment report
as a very important exercise. I hope the President of the
Security Council will feed that back to the members of
the Council and can also shed some light as to why 10
members of the Council have not yet submitted their
monthly assessment. I also want to say that we will be
waiting for the submission of the remaining 10 reports
in due time.
Fifthly, I note that the preparation of the report
appears to have become a ritual exercise. There has been
little effort at wider consultations. Paragraph 129 of note
507 states that the drafter of the report may consider
“organizing, where appropriate, interactive informal
exchanges of views with the wider membership”.
We understand that the drafter of this report was the
Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom. We have
not seen such consultations in recent years. There
also appears to be a lack of consultation on the report
even within the Council. The only time all 15 Council
members made interventions during the adoption of the
report was in 2002, a long time ago (see S/PV.4616). We
would request that the Council member charged with
drafting the report engage in an exercise to reach out to
members of the General Assembly, before the report is
finalized and submitted to the General Assembly.
Finally, I would like to comment on the content of
the report. The key part of the report is the introduction.
The first-ever introduction to be included was in the
2002 report (A/56/2), and it contained a good, concise
analysis of the Security Council’s work. But the
level of analysis has varied since then. While recent
24/29

10/09/2019

introductions are much improved on those of previous
years, we think there is room for improvement and have
a few specific suggestions with regard to the content of
the report.
First, we think that the annual report should give
a summary of the vetoes used during the year and the
voting positions of Council members on all procedural
and substantive votes taken in the Council during the
period under review.
Secondly, the annual report should give more
details on the issues discussed with regard to improving
the working methods of the Council.
Thirdly, the annual report should provide an
analysis of the statistical trends concerning the
Council’s products or outcomes in terms of statements
or resolutions.
In addition to those three suggestions, my delegation
would like to make three specific requests.
First, we request that all members of the Security
Council fulfil their responsibility under the Charter of
the United Nations by submitting the annual report in a
timely manner, and to do so no later than the month of
April every year.
Secondly, we request all members of the Security
Council to review note 507 as it relates to the annual
report of the Security Council. In particular, we request
that paragraph 132 of note 507 be amended to indicate
clearly that the annual report of the Security Council
should be submitted to the General Assembly no later
than the month of April of the following year.
Thirdly, we request that the President of the General
Assembly give adequate time to delegations to consider
the annual report before scheduling the plenary
meeting thereon. After the submission of the report to
the General Assembly, we think that delegations should
be given three to four weeks to read the report, consult
their capitals and prepare statements. If the report is to
be submitted by April, we think that the meeting of the
General Assembly should be held in the months of May
or June, and certainly not in August or September.
Let me conclude with a few final observations.
The submission of the annual report of the Council
and its consideration by the General Assembly is
an important and serious matter. The timeliness
of the report must be taken seriously. If timeliness
is compromised, then we risk compromising the
19-27401

10/09/2019

transparency, accountability and even legitimacy of the
Security Council.
I am aware that members of the Security Council
face tremendous pressures and have a very demanding
schedule. I have every sympathy for their position,
however, it is important to improve our work and our
way of doing things.
It is equally important for the Security Council and
the General Assembly to work together and to support
each other in order to achieve our common vision of
peace and stability around the world.
It is in that spirit of improving our work and
making the United Nations better that I have made
this statement. I apologize for taking more time than I
should have.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
It will not be easy to address the General Assembly
following the excellent statement just delivered by the
Permanent Representative of Singapore.
I wish to thank the Permanent Representative of
the Russian Federation for presenting the report of the
Security Council for the year 2018 (A/73/2).
Argentina has historically advocated for the
need for ongoing efforts to improve the transparency,
inclusiveness, openness, democratization and efficiency
of the work of the Security Council. In that connection,
we are guided by the conviction that, without affecting
the effectiveness of its decision-making, the Council
can and should be more transparent and democratic
in its relationship with the broader membership, given
that the Charter of the United Nations establishes that
the Council acts on its behalf.
But the Security Council can be transparent and
democratic — a widespread demand not only here in
the Assembly but among civil society and the general
public — only if it honours, at the very least, those
measures of accountability already established in the
Charter and in presidential note S/2017/507, issued
in 2017. Those include the presentation not only of
annual reports but also the Presidents’ monthly reports
of the presidencies and publicizing official meetings.
Therefore, as we understand it, it is of fundamental
importance that the Security Council ensure that it
adopts its annual report by the deadline set out in note
507 in order to allow adequate time for Member States
to study it and formulate observations.

A/73/PV.105

Under Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations, Argentina is in favour of the General Assembly
taking note of the Council’s report and that, in a plenary
meeting, delegations may make statements regarding
the report’s content, even if they cannot intervene in
compiling or editing the report, as that mandate is
entrusted to the Council. Argentina supports a more
effective implementation of the relevant provisions
of the Charter regarding the relationship between the
General Assembly and the Security Council. In that
connection, the General Assembly must exercise its
authority when necessary, including on matters related
to international peace and security. That issue has been
highlighted numerous times within intergovernmental
negotiations on the reform of the Security Council.
Allow me to now refer to the report itself. With regard
to procedures, we regret that the timelines established
in note 507 were not complied with yet again, although
we understand that efforts were made to improve when
it comes to the date on which the report is presented
to the Assembly. Although the compiled material,
spanning pages 23 to 225, is extremely extensive — and
despite the fact that those documents were published
in a timely manner by the Secretariat — their thematic
order invites us to consider them all with fresh eyes.
However, we consider it necessary for the introduction
to include more analytical content.
Furthermore, we would like to draw attention to
a statement made in the introduction to the report.
In paragraph 2, it is stated that, “[d]ivisions in the
Council prevented it from taking effective action on
some key conflicts.” We believe that assertion, which
is a welcome act of sincerity, fully reflects one of the
greatest challenges facing the Security Council, namely,
the credibility of the Organization and multilateralism
in general.
Under the item “The situation of the Middle East”,
one of the issues identified in the report as being
central to the work of the Council in 2018, we found
that three draft resolutions did not garner the majority
of votes required for their adoption, while another
three were vetoed by two permanent members. In cases
that concern both chemical weapons in Syria and the
Palestinian question, it seems that the Council is unable
to find a way to reach a compromise solution that would
break the deadlock it is currently experiencing. The
broader membership of the Organization, on behalf of
which the Council is expected to act, often does not
feel represented in terms of the way those conflicts are

19-2740125/29

A/73/PV.105

managed. The highly complex international context
demands that we do not stand idly by but instead
support proposals that can reverse such a situation, for
example, the suggestion made by the representative of
Liechtenstein that the Assembly hold a debate every
time a permanent member uses its veto.
Argentina is convinced that the veto restricts,
curtails and limits the action of the Council. We are
therefore in favour of its abolition. Inasmuch as that is not
yet possible, Argentina adheres to the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct
regarding Security Council action in cases of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes, as well as the
Franco-Mexican initiative on restraint in the use of the
veto. Furthermore, we in the Uniting for the Consensus
group are convinced that a future increase in members
of the Security Council in the non-permanent category
alone could further discourage the use of the veto,
as well as increase the representation of currently
underrepresented regions, enrich the debate and provide
a wider variety of perspectives on conflict resolution.
I would like to conclude my statement by
reiterating my country’s commitment to achieving a
more transparent, inclusive, democratic and efficient
Security Council. We believe that this morning’s
meeting confirms that we must not stray from that goal.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Uruguay attaches great importance to the
annual report (A/73/2) of the Security Council to the
General Assembly, which provides information on the
activities carried out during a year of intensive work.
The report before us today covers the year 2018. It is the
most recent report since the end of Uruguay’s term on
the Council during the period from 2016 to 2017.
Unfortunately, as in the past, the annual report was
not presented in a timely manner, despite the clearly
established timeline in the latest version of the note by
the President of the Security Council (S/2017/507), of
August 2017, on the methods of work of the Security
Council. In future, the provision for presenting it in the
spring of every calendar year must be respected — that
is, before 21 June — which, moreover, already provides
ample time for its preparation.
Furthermore, it does not seem appropriate that, as
today is the last week of the seventy-third session of
the General Assembly and as all the delegations are
currently preparing for the opening of the seventyfourth session in several days’ time and the subsequent
26/29

10/09/2019

high-level week, we are only now getting around to
discussing the report. It also does not seem reasonable
or realistic that the membership should dedicate a
special meeting of the General Assembly to considering
a report that includes and lists situations and activities
from 2018, nine months since the end of that year. Most
of what is reported has either been resolved or is no
longer relevant.
For that reason, although my country believes that
all the issues listed in the report are important, its
discussion will briefly focus on only a few of them,
while providing the necessary updates to ensure that
this meeting is more realistic and meaningful.
As we participated in several Security Council
missions, we highlight their importance with regard to
the various States on the Council’s agenda. That practice
must be continued, given the possibility of access to
quality information through direct contact with the
authorities and civil society and the opportunity that
such missions provide on the ground in terms of a better
understanding of the situations under consideration and
decision-making.
With regard to Yemen, it is imperative to strengthen
channels for dialogue, comply with the fragile
agreements that have been reached and minimize or
eliminate neighbouring countries’ intervention in the
conflict. The suffering of Yemeni citizens has already
passed the critical point.
With regard to Haiti, as a Latin American State,
Uruguay would like to see the strengthening of Haitian
institutions and the country return to the path leading
towards progress. It is worthwhile to recognize the
progress made during the mandates of the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti to realize
a society marked by less tension. We highlight the
work of the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the
Economic and Social Council and its potential to work
in cooperation with the Security Council. We hope that
President Moïse will able to enjoy the full spectrum of
governance that he deserves.
We appreciate the host resolutions and measures
adopted by the Security Council in three priority areas
for Uruguay, namely, children and armed conflict, the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, and women
and peace and security. The protection of women,
children and, in general, all civilians deserves special
attention by the Security Council. No one should be
19-27401

10/09/2019

A/73/PV.105

targeted in conflicts, and, whenever they are involved
in conflicts, we must support the work of Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the relevant
humanitarian agencies working to alleviate physical
suffering, hunger and adverse psychological effects.
Concerning Myanmar, in relation to what I said
earlier, on a human scale, we must strive to find a
solution for the hundreds of thousands of Rohingya
refugees and guarantee that they enjoy their right to
nationality and identity.
With regard to the situation in Libya, it is probably
the Security Council agenda item that enjoys the
least amount of unity, but it is the use of doublespeak
that is most troubling. Some Member States say that
they support the process of a political solution and
negotiations supported by the United Nations and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, but
lack resolve with regard to condemning the actions
of a military rebel leader who is adding to increased
political, economic and social chaos in the country.
It is imperative to lift Libya out of the social
deterioration that it is experiencing. Chaos and
insecurity provide fertile ground for mafia-like groups,
who are profiting from selling humans — the slave trade
of the twenty-first century. And the dream of exhausted
migrants looking to move to Europe to restart their lives
is fading. The Security Council should provide unified
and water-tight support for the Government of National
Accord in Tripoli. The military rebel, in our view, is
nothing more than a warlord vis-à-vis the countries of
sub-Saharan Africa.
Concerning the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, although we shall
be brief, we would be remiss if we did not take this
opportunity to reaffirm our support for the work of
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
Mladenov. It is necessary that both parties adopt
concrete measures to de-escalate tensions and, in the
short- and medium-term, help establish forums for
carrying out direct negotiations. We continue to believe
that the two-State solution is the best one, and we offer
our good offices to bring together both parties for
its achievement.
Ms. Ioannou
the Chair.

(Cyprus),

Vice-President,

took

In conclusion, we believe that, given its inherent
value, the peacekeeping system at our disposal today

must receive the Security Council’s necessary attention
through the timely renewal of the mandates of its
missions. We welcome the progress made in 2018 with
regard to the Action for Peacekeeping initiative. We
will continue to promote fulfilling its commitments
and implementation, as well as the triangular dialogue
among the Security Council, the Secretariat and the
troop-contributing countries.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): Let me start by
thanking the members of the Security Council and
the Secretariat for producing the annual report of the
security Council (A/73/2). I also thank the President
of the Security Council, the Permanent Representative
of the Russian Federation, for presenting the report
this morning.
The Charter of the United Nations — in Articles
15 and 24, to be specific — provides for this important
opportunity for the General assembly to consider the
work that the Security Council has accomplished in a
given year. Therefore, Rwanda reaffirms the importance
of the essential task of the General Assembly to have an
occasion to comment on, and review the work of, the
Security Council.
It is a vital exercise in ensuring the transparency,
accountability — and I will add — legitimacy of
the Security Council. It can enhance the symbiotic
relationship between the General Assembly and the
Security Council if exercised effectively and seriously.
For that to be possible, the timely submission of the
annual report is essential to allow Member States
adequate time to study it and prepare and deliver
substantive feedback.
The current report was made available to all of us
on 22 August, leaving us very little time to go through
the 200-plus-page document and prepare our reaction
and contribution. That has been the trend for a number
of years now. It does a disservice to Member States
and to the Security Council itself, which could gain
beneficial feedback. My delegation therefore calls on
the members of the Security Council and the President
of the General Assembly to work together and ensure the
timely submission of the report and better scheduling
of the plenary meeting to consider the annual report. In
particular, we request the Security Council to adhere
to its own provisions in presidential note S/2017/507 to
submit its annual report to the General Assembly in the
spring of a given calendar year.

19-2740127/29

A/73/PV.105

We would like to emphasize the need to improve
the content of the annual report, taking it from a
purely activity-based report to also include analytical
elements. Given the broad range of important topics
covered by the Security Council, it would be beneficial
to have an analytical assessment of the manner in which
the Council handled the issues in a given year.
With regard to specific issues covered in the
annual report of the Security Council for 2018, let
me touch on a few important thematic issues for my
delegation. With regard to the issue of strengthening
peace and security in Africa, let me express Rwanda’s
appreciation for the Council’s continued support for
enhanced partnerships between the United Nations
and the African Union. Partnerships between the
United Nations and regional organizations, as well
as regional economic communities and mechanisms,
have become an increasingly important avenue for
addressing complex peace and security challenges. We
saw the impact of such partnerships in 2018 and earlier
this year.
In 2017, the United Nations and the African Union
signed the Joint Framework for Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security, which provides the basis for
enhanced organization and cooperation in conflict
analysis, preventive diplomacy and mediation and in
conducting peace operations and peacebuilding. The
United Nations-African Union Partnership Framework
should capitalize on regional peace frameworks and
mobilize further support for regionally led peace
processes and initiatives. We will encourage candid and
sustained cooperation in that direction going forward.
We also take note of and commend the Council’s work
on highlighting issues of strengthening performance
and accountability in peacekeeping operations. That is
one of the key themes of the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative. We would like to see the Council focus a bit
more and share with us its candid assessment of the
impact of funding shortages and unpredictable funding
on the performance of peacekeeping operations.
We appreciate that the Council reflected in its report
the importance of the women and peace and security
agenda. It is a very important agenda for moving from
exclusive to democratic decision-making, from gender
inequality to gender justice and from conflict and
violence to sustainable peace.
My last specific point will be on the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We take
28/29

10/09/2019

note of the positive step by the Council in recognizing
a number of delegations’ concerns with regard to the
Mechanism’s approach to the early release of persons
convicted by tribunals, including recommending that
the Mechanism find an appropriate solution, such
as putting in place conditions for early release. Such
measures will ensure that the Mechanism, in which we
invested so much, does not lose credibility.
Finally, Rwanda emphasizes the importance of
today’s meeting in fulfilling the Security Council’s
obligations of accountability and transparency to the
General Assembly, under the Charter of the United
Nations. It is only by fulfilling those obligations,
seriously and in a timely manner, that the Security
Council will strengthen the legitimacy of the mandate
it serves on behalf of all Members.
Mr. Kickert (Austria): We thank the members of
the Security Council for providing us with its annual
report (A/73/2). We would also like to express our
appreciation for the work of the Secretariat in providing
all the relevant statistical information and lists of
documents contained in the report.
Austria aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency (ACT)
group. We would like to add the following remarks.
First, we take note of the introduction to the report,
which provides an overview of key developments on the
regional and thematic issues discussed at the Security
Council during the reporting period. We encourage
the members of the Security Council to make further
good use of that introductory section and strengthen its
analytical character.
Secondly, like other delegations, we also note
that part 1, section XIV, of the annual report provides
an overview of the monthly assessments by former
Presidents of the work of the Security Council. We
are surprised that only five out of 12 such reports
have been submitted for 2018 so far. We encourage
Security Council members to make all of those monthly
assessments available to the wider membership as soon
as possible.
As we all know, the submission of the annual report
is an obligation that the Security Council needs to fulfil
to the General Assembly under Article 24, paragraph
3, of the Charter of the United Nations. It is therefore
an instrument of accountability, which, in our view,
19-27401

10/09/2019

deserves substantive discussion. We regret that, year
after year, the General Assembly is faced with a situation
that the annual report is finalized and circulated very
late in the summer, thereby seriously restricting the
opportunity for a sensible and constructive interaction
with Member States. That not only ignores repeated
calls by Member States, including those of the ACT
group, it also contradicts the commitment made by the
Security Council itself in its presidential note 507.
Note 507, as already cited by the representative of
Singapore, states clearly that
“[t]he introduction shall be completed no later than
31 January” (S/2017/507, para.130)
and that it should be
“discussed and thereafter adopted by the Council in
time for consideration by the General Assembly in
the spring of that calendar year.” (Ibid., para. 132)
We are concerned about the implication that
non-fulfilment of the relevant deadlines has for the
state of the relationship between the Security Council
and the wider United Nations membership. Moreover,
we also regret the signal it sends with regard to
Security Council’s dedication to improving its working
methods. We call on Security Council members to fully
implement all measures laid out in presidential note 507
and explore new ways of making the work of the Security
Council more accountable, more coherent and more
transparent. In that context, we commend the work done
by Kuwait as the Chair of the Informal Working Group
on Documentation and Other Procedural Questions in
the elaboration of a series of draft presidential notes
on various topics connected to the working methods of
the Council. We hope that substantive progress on those
issues can be made in the near future.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item for this meeting. We
shall hear the remaining speakers on the morning of

A/73/PV.105

Thursday, 12 September, here in the Hall, following
our consideration of the items already scheduled for
that meeting.
The exercise of the right of reply has been requested.
May I remind members that statements in the exercise
of the right of reply and limited to 10 minutes for the
first intervention and to five minutes for the second
intervention and should be made by the delegations
from the seats.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Russian Federation.
Mr. Boguslavskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Honestly, today’s discussion of the report
(A/73/2) of the Security Council has given us a strange
feeling. Rather than talking about the substance and
content of the document, some colleagues, especially
from the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, focused on the calendar for preparing the
report. The timing, from the very beginning, for the
discussion of the report was planned for 30 August,
and we postponed it to today at their request. Now
they are saying that today’s date is also not suitable
for them either. We are not quite clear, then, on what
they really want to see happen. Perhaps such meetings
are only to be used as an opportunity to criticize the
Security Council?
We accept their wish to say that it would have been
optimal to provide the report earlier. We will endeavour
to do so. But, to speak frankly, three weeks seems
excessive for reading a document of 12 pages in length.
The majority is in the introduction of the document. All
of the rest of the information it contains is open access
and easy to find. I would like to call on colleagues to
take a constructive approach in their work on such
important topics as the relationship between Security
Council and General Assembly.
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

19-2740129/29
