S/2016/552*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 June 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering
the period from 1 April to 3 June 2016)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2252
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 31 July 2016 and requested me to report on the
implementation of the mandate every 60 days. It covers developments from 1 April
to 3 June 2016 and contains recommendations for the renewal of the mandate.

II. Political and economic developments
Peace process
2.
Since my most recent report (S/2016/341), noticeable progress has been made
towards the implementation of the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
the Republic of South Sudan. On 26 April, after a week of intense negotiations over
his security detail, the Chair of the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in
Opposition (SPLM/A in Opposition), Riek Machar, returned to Juba and was sworn
in as the First Vice-President of South Sudan. The swearing-in ceremony was
witnessed by government officials, religious and community leaders and
representatives of the international community. In his remarks, the First Vice President outlined the immediate challenges facing the country, including the
stabilization of the security situation and the economy, the provision of
humanitarian relief to those in need in rural and urban settings, and ensuring
national reconciliation and healing. For his part, the President, Salva Kiir, hailed the
return of Mr. Machar as marking the end of the civil war and the return of peace and
stability. He also apologized to the people for the suffering caused by the war and
pledged to resolve all outstanding issues relating to the peace agreement amicably.
3.
In addition to the First Vice-President, several other key leaders of SPLM/A in
Opposition returned to Juba, including the Deputy Chair, Alfred Ladu Gore, and the
Chief of the General Staff, Simon Gatwech Dual. Their return was preceded by the
completion of the first phase of the transitional security arrangements, which
included the arrival of 1,370 security personnel of SPLM/A in Opposition, including
representatives of the Joint Integrated Police and the Strategic Defence and Security
* Reissued for technical reasons on 27 June 2016.

16-09891* (E)

280616

*1609891*

S/2016/552

Review Board, and the redeployment of forces of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Army (SPLA) 25 km outside Juba. However, the verification of the redeployment,
including troop numbers and locations, continues to pose a challenge for the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism.
4.
On 28 April, the President issued Decree No. 222/2016, appointing
30 ministers and eight deputy ministers to constitute the transitional Government of
National Unity, in accordance with the peace agreement. The transitional
Government was subsequently inaugurated on 29 April, beginning the 30 -month
transitional period. In accordance with the power-sharing formula contained in the
peace agreement, the Government, which was allotted 53 per cent of the ministerial
posts in the transitional Government, appointed 16 ministers, including those of
Finance, Commerce and Economic Planning, Defence and Veterans ’ Affairs, and
National Security, while SPLM/A in Opposition, with 33 per cent of the allocated
ministries, appointed 10 ministers, including those of Petroleum, Mining and
Industries and for the Interior and Wildlife Conservation. The other political parties
and the former detainees, each allocated 7 per cent, appointed two ministers each:
the other political parties the Ministers for Cabinet Affairs and for Agriculture,
Forestry, Tourism, Animal Resources and Fisheries and the former detainees those
for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation and Transport, Roads and Bridges.
Only the Government met the 25 per cent requirement for r epresentation of women,
as stipulated in the peace agreement, nominating four women. SPLM/A in
Opposition nominated two women, while no women were nominated by either the
other political parties or the former detainees.
5.
During meetings of the Presidency (consisting of the President, the First VicePresident and Vice-President James Wani Igga) on 31 May, 1 June and 3 June, a
number of issues were discussed in order to move the implementation of the peace
agreement forward. They included the lifting of the state of emergency, the release
of political detainees and prisoners of war, the cantonment of forces, the
appointment of presidential advisers and the formation of the transitional National
Legislative Assembly. The Presidency endorsed the decision of 27 May of the
Council of Ministers to establish cantonment areas in the greater Equatoria and
greater Bahr el-Ghazal regions, in addition to greater Upper Nile. The Joint Military
Ceasefire Commission was tasked with developing identification criteria for th e
sites in greater Equatoria and verification of the presence of SPLM/A in Opposition
forces in greater Bahr el-Ghazal. It was also agreed that the Ceasefire and
Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism would complete the
verification of the demilitarization of Juba.
6.
In response to the discontent of the parties over the President ’s unilateral
appointment of 10 presidential advisers on 4 May, with portfolios including military
affairs, local government, security, education, economic affair s, legal affairs,
agriculture, religious affairs and special affairs, as well as a special adviser to the
President and Presidential Envoy, the Presidency reached a compromise, agreeing to
appoint 19 presidential advisers. They would be the 10 nominated by the President,
6 nominated by SPLM/A in Opposition and 3 nominated by the other political
parties and the former detainees.
7.
The Presidency also agreed to expedite the formation of the transitional
National Legislative Assembly. To that end, the 10 members who had been
appointed by the President on 27 April and subsequently sworn in on 23 May to

2/19

16-09891

S/2016/552

replace deceased parliamentarians were endorsed. The remaining six vacant seats,
however, will be filled by the Presidency after joint consultation with the rele vant
constituencies. All parliamentarians who had vacated their seats after the conflict in
December 2013 were also reinstated with immediate effect. The disagreement over
the appointment of 17 new parliamentarians allocated to the other political parties
was resolved on 30 May, with the intervention of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. The
leaders of the two coalitions of the other political parties, the Minister of
Agriculture, Forestry, Tourism, Animal Resources and Fisheries and leader of the
National Alliance, Lam Akol, and the Minister for Cabinet Affairs and leader of the
National Agenda, Martin Elia Lomuro, agreed that representatives of the other
political parties in the transitional Assembly would consist of the 12 parties that had
signed the peace agreement and attended the multi-party symposium held in Addis
Ababa in June 2014 and the 5 other parties whose representatives had attended the
symposium but did not sign the agreement. At the time of reporting, however, the
formation of the transitional Assembly continued to be delayed owing to
disagreements among the parties over the procedure for the election of the Speaker
and the accommodation of members who had changed their political affiliation.
Other political developments
8.
Further to my previous report, in which I reported on the passage of the
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO) Act 2016, discussions are continuing with
the Relief and Rehabilitation Commission of South Sud an and the Ministry of
Humanitarian Affairs and Disaster Management regarding its implementation.
Although implementation was postponed by the Commission on 10 May,
humanitarian workers were told to expect it to begin at some time in June.
9.
At the State level, the formation of state and local administrations continued,
in accordance with the establishment order on the creation of 28 States (No. 36/2015),
notwithstanding the endorsement by the parties of the injunction on its
implementation taken out by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission, and pending the resolution of
state boundaries by an inclusive national boundaries commission. On 17 April, the
President issued a separate order on the creation of new counties within the
28 states. The continued implementation of the order has led to mounting financial
and capacity constraints and intercommunal tensions over boundary disputes, the
location of county headquarters and the sharing of resources. On 1 June, however,
the Presidency agreed to establish a 15-member committee to review the number of
states and their boundaries and make recommendations on the way forward. The
committee will consist of four members from the Sudan People ’s Liberation
Movement in Government, three from SPLM/A in Opposition, one from the former
detainees, two from the other political parties and five international representatives,
including from the troika (Norway, the United States of America and the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland), the United Republic of Tanzania
and South Africa. The committee, once constituted, will have 30 days to complete
its work.
Economic developments
10. The economic situation remained dire. Owing to diminished global oil prices,
the foreign exchange reserves at the Bank of South Sudan are severely depleted.

16-09891

3/19

S/2016/552

According to the National Bureau of Statistics, the 12 -month increase in the
consumer price index reached 245 per cent in March 2016 and 266 per cent in April
2016, driven mainly by surging food prices. Fuel shortages have re -emerged and
salary payments for civil servants are now three months in arrears. The official
accession of South Sudan to the East African Community, expected in October
2016, and parliamentary approval for the revenue authority law could potentially
improve the medium-term to long-term prospects for the economy.

III. Security situation
11. The security situation remained tense in the greater Upper Nile and greater
Bahr el-Ghazal regions, with intercommunal tensions remaining high in Boma and
Jonglei, partly as a result of a cross-border attack into Gambella, Ethiopia. Armed
clashes intensified in Wau County in Western Bahr el-Ghazal between SPLA,
SPLM/A in Opposition and unknown armed groups. In the greater Equatorias,
violence involving armed groups, accompanied by reports of land -grabbing and the
harassment of civilians, continued to be reported.
Greater Upper Nile region
12. The political impasse between the newly appointed authorities i n Boma and
the Cobra faction of the South Sudan Democratic Movement/Army continued, with
fears of renewed conflict in Pibor. Early in April, the South Sudan Council of
Churches attempted to mediate between the parties. Meanwhile, fighting among the
Anuak communities of Pochalla North and Pochalla South counties in Jonglei,
which began at the end of March, with the reported involvement of the Cobra
faction and members of the Murle community, subsided. According to the Relief
and Rehabilitation Commission, an estimated 22,000 civilians from Pochalla North
were displaced by the fighting, with many fleeing to nearby payams bordering
Ethiopia.
13. As the fighting ceased in Pochalla, armed elements, allegedly belonging to the
Murle community, crossed the South Sudanese border and attacked 13 villages in
the Gambella region of western Ethiopia on 15 April. The attackers reportedly killed
186 civilians and returned to Likuangole, Boma, with more than 100 abducted
Ethiopian children and hundreds of head of cattle. The Ethiopian National Defence
Forces immediately crossed into Pochalla South and Pochalla North counties in
order to recover the abducted children. On 10 May, the Chief of the Cobra faction
and Deputy Defence Minister, David Yau Yau, travelled to Gumuruk to restore good
relations with traditional chiefs and the new Boma administration. The Deputy
Defence Minister, the Boma Governor, Baba Medan, and Murle traditional chiefs
are reportedly working together to retrieve some of the abducted children from
Pibor and Likuangole counties. As at 3 June, 78 children had been recovered.
14. In Unity, the several weeks of calm notwithstanding, fighting broke out on
13 April between South Sudan Liberation Army soldiers under the command of
Major General Matthew Puljang and armed civilians in Riek payam, Mayom County.
At least 20 people were reportedly killed. Meanwhile, in Upper Nile, although the
situation remained calm, UNMISS received increasing reports about a build -up of
SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition troops along the west bank of the Nile.

4/19

16-09891

S/2016/552

Greater Bahr el-Ghazal region
15. The security situation worsened in Western Bahr el-Ghazal, with persistent
reports of harassment of civilians in the town of Wau and armed clashes between
SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition forces in Wau County. On 5 April, UNMISS
observed a build-up of SPLA forces in the Wau area, including the deployment of
Mi-17 and Mi-24 attack helicopters and the presence of some 200 to 300 troops at
the airport. The Mission also received reports of an aerial b ombardment of SPLM/A
in Opposition positions in Nvokongo and Ngo Sulungu. Fighting continued over the
following two days, with reports of heavy casualties on both sides, while areas
around Loko Loko and Mboro were completely destroyed. Subsequently, thousa nds
of people were displaced and remain in hiding in the bush (see paras. 20 and 32
below). The Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism has thus far been unable to travel to the site to verify the reports, owing
to security and logistical constraints.
16. In mid-May, UNMISS also received reports of heavy clashes between
SPLM/A in Opposition elements and the Justice and Equality Movement south of
Diem Zubeir, some 75 km south of the town of Raga, during which the Movement
allegedly incurred heavy casualties. In addition, the security situation in Western
Bahr el-Ghazal continues to be adversely affected by the presence of armed migrant
cattle-keepers from Warrap, who allegedly have the support of locally deployed
SPLA forces.
Greater Equatoria region
17. In Central Equatoria, the security situation remained tense, with continued
reports of violence involving armed groups, as well as land -grabbing, looting and
harassment of civilians. UNMISS received reports from local community sources of
the increased presence of armed groups and attacks on the roads to Morobo, Torit
and Kaya. On 12 April, an international NGO team travelling on the Yei -Morobo
road was ambushed and two national staff were killed by an unknown armed gro up
(see para. 21 below). On 7 May, communal violence erupted between Mundari and
Bari communities in the town of Mangalla, Terekeka County, over the
administrative ownership of the town, resulting in four deaths, including three
SPLA guards of the Jubek Governor. Several incidents allegedly perpetrated by
SPLA also took place, including allegations of looting of crops and harassment of
civilians following SPLA deployments in Juba County under the transitional
security arrangements. The fatal shooting of an aid worker on 15 May (see para. 21
below) has prompted local civil society organizations to call for the immediate
relocation of SPLA outside Yei. Meanwhile, in Juba, the situation has remained
tense but stable since the arrival of the First Vice-President.
18. In Western Equatoria, the Government and the South Sudan National
Liberation Movement signed a peace agreement on 2 April, following mediation
facilitated by the faith-based Council for Peace supported by UNMISS and assisted
by the Governor of Gbudwe. The agreement provides for the integration of members
of the Movement into SPLA, the South Sudan National Police Service or other
organized forces. Meanwhile, there has been limited progress in negotiations
between the Government and other armed youth groups in the region. The South
Sudan People’s Patriotic Front is reportedly increasing operations in the area and
incidents attributed to the group were reported in Li -Rangu, Yambio County, and on

16-09891

5/19

S/2016/552

the Nagero-Tambura road, with reported clashes with SPLA. Reported looting and
ambushes of humanitarian and commercial vehicles in Kapoeta East County,
Eastern Equatoria, are believed to have been carried out by armed elements
affiliated to SPLM/A in Opposition. Insecurity was also reported along the Juba Nimule road, with uniformed armed men stopping vehicles at gunpoint, allegedly
linked to the deployment of SPLA soldiers in the area.

IV. Humanitarian situation
19. In April and May, the humanitarian situation remained severe in terms of
scale, scope and urgency. A combination of fighting in previously stable areas of the
country, mounting food insecurity, economic decline and humanitarian funding gaps
continued to make life unbearable for many civilians.
20. In April, humanitarian partners succeeded in reaching Mboro in Western Bahr
el-Ghazal for the first time since November 2015. On 21 April, a humanitarian
assessment was undertaken simultaneously with an inter-agency humanitarian
response, during which about 7,000 conflict-affected people benefited. On 20 May,
an inter-agency humanitarian assessment was conducted in the greater Baggari area
outside the town of Wau, in locations that had not been accessible for more than
seven months. Initial findings indicated visible destruction of civilian property and
livelihoods and looting and vandalizing of community assets, such as schools and
health facilities. High rates of sexual and gender-based violence were also reported.
The affected communities indicated that food, shelter and non -food items and
agricultural inputs were their priority needs.
21. Humanitarian actors continued to encounter challenges to their operations,
including insecurity, active hostilities, bureaucratic impediments and logistical
constraints. Humanitarian partners reported 78 access incid ents in May and 48 in
April, compared with 60 in March and 62 in February. In May, violence against
humanitarian personnel or assets accounted for 73 per cent of all reported incidents.
In April, active hostilities in Upper Nile resulted in the relocation of 17 aid workers
from Ulang County. On 12 April, an international NGO team working with the Mine
Action Service travelling on the Yei-Morobo road was ambushed by an unknown
armed group, which reportedly targeted and killed two South Sudanese staff
members. Early in May, a South Sudanese staff member of an international NGO
was killed at home in Juba; on 10 May, the driver of a truck contracted by a United
Nations agency was killed in an ambush on the Magwi -Torit road; and, on 15 May, a
nun and medical doctor was shot in Yei while driving a marked ambulance,
succumbing to her injuries some days later. The number of aid workers killed since
December 2013 now totals 55.
22. The food security situation remained grave, with deterioration reported in
some areas. Preliminary results of recent assessments indicate an early and
widespread onset to the lean season, with the numbers of severely food -insecure
persons potentially higher than in 2015 and at their highest since independence. The
most significant deteriorations are in the greater Bahr el-Ghazal and Equatoria
regions and are driven by poor market supply, high prices and poor harvests in some
areas. Marginal improvements in parts of the greater Upper Nile region are largely
attributed to improved access and humanitarian assistance, underscoring the need to

6/19

16-09891

S/2016/552

maintain and expand support in the coming lean season. The situation for
populations in Unity remains of grave concern.
23. The combined effects of food shortages, continued insecurity and economic
decline have also triggered a significant movement of people from South Sudan into
neighbouring countries. According to humanitarian actors, from January to mid -May
2016, more than 115,000 South Sudanese had fled to neighbouring countries,
including about 70,000 who fled to the Sudan. Although most of the arrivals were
from Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, some were also recorded from Western Bahr
el-Ghazal and Warrap. New movement patterns were reported into the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Central African Republic, with 12,000 and 11,000
new arrivals, respectively. Movements were also recorded from Eastern Equatoria
into Kenya and Uganda.
24. The operational challenges notwithstanding, humanitarian partners continued
to scale up their response. Since the beginning of 2016, more than 2.36 million
people have been reached with humanitarian and protection assistance, which
includes more than 1.47 million people who have received food assistance,
834,551 people who have been assisted in accessing improved water so urces,
285,057 children (39 per cent of whom are girls) who are accessing education and
148,560 children and pregnant and lactating women who have been treated for
malnutrition. In total, 234,621 health consultations have been carried out in conflict affected and vulnerable areas, with an additional 8,360 women accessing antenatal
care services, 1,580 women assisted in delivery and 185 women accessing post abortion care services. Humanitarian partners took advantage of the dry season to
pre-position and deliver aid supplies where possible, especially in areas that are
inaccessible by road during the rainy season. Ahead of the rains, to mitigate a
possible cholera outbreak, humanitarian partners have also increased the
pre-positioning of health and hygiene supplies across the country.
25. Funding remains a critical challenge. The Humanitarian Response Plan for
2016 is just 30 per cent funded, leaving a gap of $899.6 million.

V. Implementation of the reprioritized mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
26. In implementing its mandate to protect civilians, UNMISS has continued to
follow a three-tiered approach. Under tier 1, protection through dialogue and
political engagement, my Special Representative has used her good offices to
facilitate the continued support of regional and international partners for the
implementation of the peace agreement and advocated directly with national
counterparts to promote freedom of movement.
27. UNMISS has also continued to build local capacity for conflict management,
peacebuilding and mediation, delivering 13 workshops for more than 1,150 attendees,
representing State and traditional authorities, political parties, civil society
organizations, cattle-keepers and communities at large. In Lakes, those efforts have
contributed to the resolution of long-standing resource-based conflicts in Tonj. In
Western Equatoria, local stakeholders discussed insecurity along the Yambio -Juba
corridor. Meanwhile, other programmes were focused on enhancing the r ole of

16-09891

7/19

S/2016/552

women as peacebuilders in their communities. In a round -table discussion that was
focused on leadership, democracy and conflict mitigation in Aweil, Northern Bahr
el-Ghazal, participants underscored the need for forgiveness, reconciliation and
national healing, as well as the importance of conflict-prevention efforts. To
mitigate security incidents in and around its sites for the protection of civilians,
UNMISS also conducted a workshop for 60 community leaders in Upper Nile to
raise their awareness of their roles in constructively cooperating with the delivery of
humanitarian and protection services on site.
28. Under tier 2, protection of civilians under threat of physical violence,
UNMISS has continued to protect some 169,983 internally displaced persons at six
UNMISS sites nationwide. As at 3 June 2016, the largest of those sites included
Bentiu, with 98,653 internally displaced persons, Juba, with 27,959 and Malakal,
with 40,448. External threats to the sites were mitigated through outreach by th e
UNMISS military component and the establishment of additional watchtowers.
Internal security was enhanced through a constant United Nations police presence,
reinforced by the UNMISS military component, as necessary. During the reporting
period, 398 security incidents were reported at the sites. There are currently
37 detainees in three holding facilities in Juba, Bentiu and Malakal.
29. UNMISS also worked to improve the security of the site at Malakal following
the security incidents on 17 and 18 February, through contingency planning in
conjunction with humanitarian actors and community leaders. Site rehabilitation
also continued, including repairs and fortification of the physical security
infrastructure. The Mission and humanitarian partners also assis ted the relocation of
the 22,000 remaining internally displaced Shilluk and Nuer from the UNMISS
logistics base back to the site.
30. Beyond the protection sites, the UNMISS military component has increased its
outreach into conflict-affected areas, primarily through sector-based patrolling from
permanent and temporary operating bases. Long-duration patrols and dynamic air
patrols have also assisted the expansion of its geographical reach. In addition, it is
using early-warning indicators to plan patrols to potential flashpoint areas. In Bentiu
and Leer, the Mission is working closely with humanitarian protection partners to
identify hotspot locations in which civilians are at risk and is conducting regular
foot patrols to the east and west of the protectio n site at Bentiu and evening patrols
in the vicinity of Leer to improve security. It has also established a forward
operating base in Malakal town to improve security for civilians.
31. Under tier 3, establishment of a protective environment, UNMISS conti nues to
focus on extending protection activities beyond the protection sites, to build
confidence and encourage an environment conducive to voluntary returns. In
addition, on 6 May, my Special Representative met the First Vice -President, at his
request, to discuss the voluntary return and reintegration of internally displaced
persons. Given the gravity of the issue, the First Vice-President requested close
cooperation between the United Nations and the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs
on a framework for return and reintegration. Meanwhile, about 20,000 internally
displaced persons were reported to have voluntarily left the protection sites at
Bentiu, Bor and Juba. In Bentiu, nearly 10,000 left the site, probably owing to a
resumption of humanitarian and protection services outside the site and a relative
improvement in the security situation, as well as the need to cultivate crops ahead of
the rainy season. In Jonglei, the “solutions working group” jointly facilitated the

8/19

16-09891

S/2016/552

return of 206 internally displaced persons from the site at Bor to Akobo. To support
sustainable voluntary returns, the United Nations humanitarian country team is
discussing a multidimensional response, including support for early recovery and
community stabilization initiatives.

B.

Monitoring and investigating human rights
32. During the reporting period, UNMISS continued to monitor, investigate, verify
and report on human rights violations and abuses and violations of international
humanitarian law, with a view to documenting past violations for accountability
purposes. Developments in Wau County, Western Bahr el-Ghazal, were of particular
concern, with several instances of heavy fighting between SPLA and SPLM/A in
Opposition in March and April, accompanied by reports of violations, i ncluding
killings and harassment of civilians outside the town of Wau. Active hostilities and
access constraints, including restrictions of movement imposed by SPLA, continued
to hamper UNMISS efforts to investigate the violations. On 5 May, UNMISS gained
access to Farajallah through Wau South payam, Baggari, Natabu, Brinji, Ngisa and
Ngodakala, following the withdrawal of SPLA forces. Civilians had largely deserted
the area, but a few residents indicated that SPLA soldiers had committed serious
human rights abuses, including killing civilians, looting and burning civilian
property. On 10 May, UNMISS observed that civilians had deserted Momoi payam
and that most houses had been vandalized or burned down. A heavy SPLA presence
was observed in Momoi and Bussera. UNMISS continued to gather information
through interviews with victims, witnesses and other sources, including in Wau
County, and to investigate alleged violations in the town of Wau, including the
killing and harassment of civilians by SPLA.
33. During the reporting period, challenges to the administration of justice in
accordance with international human rights standards continued. Cases of prolonged
and arbitrary detention, proxy detention, detention in substandard conditions,
detention in connection with acts not constituting crimes and detention on the orders
of customary courts lacking the statutory authority to pass custodial sentences were
observed, in particular at detention facilities in Juba, Kuajok and Rumbek in Lakes
and Ganyel in Panyijar County in Unity.
34. Politically motivated detentions were a feature in various locations. In
Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, at least 18 alleged opposition supporters were reportedly
arrested between 9 and 11 April in Bar Mayen payam in Aweil South County and
held in police custody. At least 7 of the detainees were reportedly released on
12 April, while 11 were transferred to military custody at an SPLA facility near
Aweil. On 17 May, the 11 detainees were released without charge, reportedly on
condition that they refrain from political activity. They had been physically
mistreated. In Central Equatoria, UNMISS gathered information about an assault on
a public prosecutor by SPLA soldiers in Rejaf payam on 22 April, after he had
ordered the release, for lack of evidence, of 7 of the 11 detainees arrested by SPLA
on 27 March, allegedly for attacking Dinka young people. The seven detainees were
returned to police custody thereafter. On 27 April, the former Governor of Western
Equatoria, Joseph Bakosoro, was released from the custody of the National Security
Service, having been detained without formal charge since 22 December 2015.

16-09891

9/19

S/2016/552

35. A 14-year-old boy, accused with three others of stealing money from a
colonel’s house in Turalei County, Warrap, on 15 May, reportedly died after being
mistreated by five SPLA soldiers. The soldiers have since been arrested. Meanwhile,
at least two SPLA soldiers were reportedly taken into military custody over the
shooting of an aid worker on 15 May in Yei. They are yet to be released in to police
custody.
36. Violations of freedom of expression continued during the reporting period. On
9 May, four staff members of the State-owned Voice of Eastern Equatoria radio
station were detained for several hours by the National Security Service. Be fore
being released on bail, they were warned against broadcasting anything critical of
the Government.
37. Concerns relating to the promotion and protection of economic and social
rights, including those relating to access to land and livelihoods, were a lso reported.
Allegations of land-grabbing, potentially amounting to forced evictions, were
received, including in areas in which cantonment sites were being established in
Juba County. In Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, a government-supported land survey
conducted in March and April in an area of the town of Aweil, ostensibly relating to
the provision of public services, could also reportedly result in the eviction of
economically vulnerable returnee women in the area. Elsewhere in the town, police
officers took unilateral action on 4 April to intimidate local traders into closing their
businesses briefly to draw attention to the non-payment of police salaries since
February 2015. UNMISS is monitoring the disciplinary measures taken against the
officers involved.
38. Restrictions on movement and access continued to pose a challenge to the
monitoring and investigation of human rights violations in some areas. In the
Equatorias, on 5 and 6 April, UNMISS integrated teams monitoring the human
rights and security situation were denied access to Yei and Morobo counties via the
Juba-Yei road for the third and fourth time since the previous reporting period. On
11 April, an UNMISS team was prevented from travelling to Ikotos County for the
second time in recent months, preventing investigation of allegations of human
rights violations committed by SPLA. On 26 April, the local authorities refused
permission for an UNMISS human rights monitoring mission to go to Tambura and
Source Yubu in Tambura County and it continued to be denied access to Yambio and
Masia to monitor the human rights situation, following the directive issued by the
Governor of Gbudwe (created by establishment order No. 36/2016) on 11 May
prohibiting UNMISS patrols. On 2 June, the State Minister for Local Go vernment
committed himself to lifting the restriction on human rights monitoring activities,
but at the time of writing that had yet to be tested.
39. Between 25 April and 9 May, the Government initiated a series of workshops
on conflict-related sexual violence for members of the Joint Technical Working
Group established by the Office of the President to oversee the implementation of
the joint communiqué on conflict-related sexual violence, which it signed in
October 2014. As part of its implementation strategy, the Government has requested
assistance from the United Nations to organize a national consultation and a
validation workshop to bring together all relevant stakeholders working on tackling
crimes of sexual violence. On 9 May, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence
in Conflict travelled to Juba and met the President, the First Vice -President and the
Inspector General of Police. During her trip she called upon the Government and the

10/19

16-09891

S/2016/552

opposition to merge their two implementation plans to address c onflict-related
sexual violence in line with the new political dispensation and urged the transitional
Government to ensure accountability for sexual violence crimes and exclude those
responsible for human rights violations and sexual violence during the
reconstitution of the national armed forces, through a vetting process.
40. During the period under review, 84 incidents affecting 1,605 children were
reported, while the Monitoring and Reporting Mechanism Country Task Force
verified 62 of those incidents, affecting 1,139 children. Denial of humanitarian
access and the recruitment and use of children accounted for the majority of verified
incidents, many of which were reported in Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile. Following
the adoption by SPLM/A in Opposition in December 2015 of an action plan to end
and prevent the recruitment, use, killing and maiming of children, the United
Nations began preparing a release campaign. While no children have been formally
released, SPLM/A in Opposition has appointed two senior child protection focal
points, one military and one civilian, to engage with the United Nations. In May
2016, a joint United Nations-SPLA team embarked on the screening and verification
of children associated with SPLA. Thus far, 22 boys have been registe red and
released from the ranks of SPLA in Bentiu and family tracing and reunification is
continuing. Two schools were confirmed as vacated by armed forces and groups
following United Nations verification missions.

C.

Creating the conditions conducive to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance
41. During the reporting period, through close collaboration with the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Juba and local humanitarian partners
and representatives in the various sectors, UNMISS military personnel provided
force protection for food drops, convoys and many other humanitarian activities.
Force protection for main supply routes also improved conditions for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
42. The Mine Action Service continued to play a key role in creating the
conditions for the delivery of humanitarian assistance through surveys, route
assessments and mine clearance. During the reporting period, the Service assessed
437 km of roads, including the road from Leer to Rumbek, released 4,501,008 m 2 of
land and destroyed 418 landmines, 3,462 items of unexploded ordnance and
28,098 items of small arms ammunition. In Leer and Bentiu, working together with
humanitarian partners, it surveyed and cleared more than 31 school sites. It also
surveyed and cleared borehole sites for international NGOs in Bentiu and Mundri to
restore safe access to clean water. Through survey and clearance of the airstrip, it
provided an emergency response to the need to dispose of explosive ordnance after
recent fighting in Pibor. It also deployed explosive detection dogs at the site for the
protection of civilians in Juba to assist United Nations police officers with search
and weapon-clearing exercises. On 25 April, the Service responded to an incident in
which a rocket-propelled grenade hit and penetrated a container within the
humanitarian hub of the UNMISS compound in Bentiu. It also provided risk
education sessions to 76,486 civilians and safety briefings on landmines for
425 UNMISS staff and humanitarian workers.

16-09891

11/19

S/2016/552

D.

Supporting the implementation of the peace agreement
43. During the reporting period, my Special Representative used her good offices,
in coordination with the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evalu ation Commission,
Festus Mogae, and the African Union High Representative, Alpha Oumar Konaré, to
facilitate the return of Riek Machar and other SPLM/A in Opposition leaders to
Juba, enabling the establishment of the transitional Government. Between 24 Mar ch
and 10 April, UNMISS, in coordination with the Commission, supported the
implementation of the first phase of the transitional security arrangements,
including by providing transport for 360 of 1,370 SPLM/A in Opposition troops to
Juba, as well as representatives of the Strategic Defence and Security Review Board
and 22 officers to support the establishment of the Joint Integrated Police. In
addition, UNMISS provided logistics support for handling flights in Malakal and
the provision of fuel to SPLM/A in Opposition for vehicles and boats for moving
troops from Kaldak to Malakal. It also provided heavy engineering support and
mine action services for the preparation of three sites in Juba to receive the
incoming troops. UNMISS is currently working with the Commission to facilitate
the implementation of the second phase of the transitional security arrangements.
44. In support of the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring
Mechanism, UNMISS continued to provide force protection and logis tics support to
facilitate its operations. On 24 April, the Mission agreed to provide the Mechanism
with up to 24 vehicles in support of its mandate. During the reporting period,
UNMISS also supported the establishment of an additional monitoring and
verification team in Torit, Eastern Equatoria, and the relocation of a monitoring and
verification team in Aweil, Northern Bahr el-Ghazal, to Wau, Western Bahr
el-Ghazal. Nine teams are now operational in South Sudan. Access constraints and
bureaucratic impediments, however, continue to hamper the monitoring and
verification activities of the Mechanism outside the greater Upper Nile region. Most
recently, on 20 May, the monitoring and verification team leader in Torit was
arrested and detained by local authorities. The verification of the implementation of
the transitional security arrangements for Juba continues to be constrained by the
non-disclosure of forces by the Government.
45. On 16 May, the Joint Operations Centre, tasked with deconflicting the
operations of security forces in Juba, began basic operations. In support of the
operations of the Centre, UNMISS has co-located four United Nations police
officers. Partners of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission are also
working to provide other logistical and material support. On 24 May, the Minister of
the Interior issued a directive establishing the Joint Management Team that will
oversee the Joint Integrated Police. On 26 May and 3 June, respectively, the Joint
Management Team met and agreed to develop guidelines for the operations of the
Joint Integrated Police and recommended that training be started using the existing
facilities at the police academy in Rajaf. To resolve the continuing disagreement
among the parties over the authority, reporting and functions of the Joint Integrated
Police, the Minister has mandated that the Joint Management Team report directly
to him.
46. My Special Representative also continued her efforts to facilitate the
coordination of international support for the peace process. Following the formation
of the transitional Government on 29 April, she convened meetings of international
and regional members of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission to

12/19

16-09891

S/2016/552

continue monitoring progress and coordinate engagement with the newly formed
Government. During the meetings, the international partners proposed key messages
to be delivered to the transitional Government, including on the issue of monitoring
and responding to negative propaganda that could undermine the peace process,
advocacy for unimpeded humanitarian access, encouraging coordination with
international partners to address the national economic crisis and calling for the
urgent operationalization of the transitional security institutions.

E.

Cross-cutting issues
47. On 21 April, UNMISS held a national women’s peace forum, as the
culmination of 16 subnational women’s peace forums held nationwide in 2015 and
2016 with the participation of more than 700 women. The forum highlighted the
important role of women in the peace process, the protection of women and girls
against sexual and gender-based violence and the prevention of conflict. Similarly,
on 25 and 26 May, the women of South Sudan, with support from the United
Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women, organized a
two-day national women’s peace conference, attracting 530 participants, to
strengthen collaboration among women’s networks and organizations and develop
an effective mechanism for women’s inclusive and accountable participation in the
implementation of the peace agreement.
48. UNMISS also worked to enhance public understanding of its mandate, its
support for the implementation of the peace agreement and activities relating to the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission and the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism. In addition to weekly press
briefings, UNMISS has undertaken outreach in all field offices and organized events
for civil society and communities in Juba, where key messages on peace were
shared and copies of the peace agreement distributed in four languages. Meanwhile,
United Nations Radio Miraya provided daily coverage of the implementation of the
peace process.
49. Across the Mission area, UNMISS has undertaken activities focused on
awareness of HIV/AIDS and voluntary confidential counselling and testing services,
targeting all civilian and uniformed members of the Mission. In Juba, an additional
24 HIV/AIDS peer educators, including 5 women, completed training. In addition,
2,747 peacekeepers, including 240 women, received HIV/AIDS awareness training,
with 39 personnel, including 5 women, receiving voluntary confidential counselling
and testing services. In addition, three people, including a woman, received post exposure prophylaxis. Public outreach activities were conducted in collaboration
with other humanitarian actors. The Mission conducted two workshops for national
staff working at the sites for the protection of civilians at Malakal and Bentiu; and
74 national staff members, including a woman, of diverse non-governmental
agencies in Malakal and Bentiu received training on HIV/AIDS. The Mission also
raised awareness of HIV/AIDS among 3,129 civilians, including 548 women, at the
protection sites. Sustained weekly radio broadcasts enabled UNMISS to raise the
awareness of an estimated 67,137 people, including 33,003 women, of HIV/AIDS.

16-09891

13/19

S/2016/552

VI. Staffing and status of deployment of surge capacity
50. As at 3 June, the strength of UNMISS civilian personnel stood at 2,581,
comprising 850 international staff members, 1,306 national staff members and
425 United Nations Volunteers.
51. The UNMISS military strength stood at 12,298, consisting of 11,750 military
personnel, 361 staff officers and 187 military liaison o fficers. UNMISS anticipates
the incremental deployment of additional engineering capability of up to
379 personnel and the establishment of a level II hospital in Bentiu. The UNMISS
police strength stood at 1,475 of the authorized 2,001 officers, including
591 individual police officers, 55 corrections officers and 829 personnel in formed
police units. As part of the increased ceiling for police, an additional 70 formed
police unit personnel from Rwanda were deplo yed to Malakal in March and
103 formed police unit personnel from Ghana were deployed to Bentiu in May.
Preparations are under way for the deployment of two additional formed police
units from Rwanda and Ghana to Juba and Bentiu, respectively. To date, 74 of the
planned 100 individual police officers (specialized trainers) earmarked for the
training of the Joint Integrated Police have been deployed.
52. During the reporting period, UNMISS continued to implement the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy for sexual exploitation and abuse and other targ ets
contained in my report to the General Assembly on special measures for protection
from sexual exploitation and abuse (A/69/779). That was achieved through the
UNMISS standing task force on sexual exploitation and abuse and the Conduct and
Discipline Advisory Group. UNMISS also concluded a memorandum of
understanding with NGOs operating from UNMISS premises, obliging them to
report all incidents of misconduct, in particular sexual exploitation and abuse
involving their staff members, to UNMISS. That will enable the Mission to
investigate alleged perpetrators as warranted. The UNMISS immediate response
team was inaugurated on 14 April. The team will provide a comprehensive and
immediate response to cases of alleged sexual exploitation and abuse involving
United Nations personnel.

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement,
international humanitarian law and the security of
United Nations personnel
53. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded 33 violations of the status-offorces agreement, 23 of which were restrictions on movement affecting UNMISS
personnel and associated partners. Incidents included violations of UNMISS
premises and equipment, demand for payment of taxes, confiscation of United
Nations property and interference with air and land operations. Other violations
included interference with the implementation of the UNMISS mandate, direct
attacks on persons seeking protection at UNMISS sites for the protection of
civilians, arrests, detentions, assaults and threats against and robbery from UNMISS
personnel. Reported violations were committed by government agencies.
54. In Bentiu on 25 and 26 April, small arms and rocket-propelled grenades were
fired in the direction of the UNMISS compound by an armed group: two of the
grenades landed inside the compound, damaging a residential container in the

14/19

16-09891

S/2016/552

humanitarian hub, and a bullet injured an internally displaced person in the
protection site. The motive for the attack is unknown.
55. Two UNMISS national staff members, who had initially been arrested on
8 March and released on 15 March, were rearrested and then released on bail on
22 April. On 25 April, the Criminal Investigations Department of the national police
charged them with fraudulently obtaining South Sudanese citizenship. Three other
UNMISS national staff members, two of whom were arrested in December 2013 and
one in October 2014, remain in detention. None of the arrested staff members have
been charged and UNMISS has been denied access to the three staff members who
remain in detention.
56. The Mission continues to notify the host Government of violations through
notes verbales and in meetings with relevant officials. A monthly matrix of incidents
is also shared with the Government.

VIII. Financial aspects
57. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/260 B, appropriated the amount of
$1,085,769,200 for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2015
to 30 June 2016. As at 9 June 2016, unpaid assessed contributions to the UNMISS
special account amounted to $289.4 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions
for all peacekeeping operations as at the same date amounted to $2,279.4 million.
Reimbursement of troop and formed police costs has been made for the period up to
30 April 2016, while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned equipment
has been made for the period up to 31 March 2016, in accordance with the quarterly
payment schedule.

IX. Observations and recommendations
58. The return of the First Vice-President to Juba and the formation of the
transitional Government of National Unity on 29 April marked a major milestone in
the peace process. By taking this important and long -overdue step, the President and
the First Vice-President have opened a new chapter in the history of South Sudan. I
welcome the positive calls made by all sides for peace, national unity and
reconciliation since the formation of the transitional Government and I urge the
parties to finally commit themselves to fully imple menting the peace agreement, in
both letter and spirit, without further delay. The Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, the African Union,
the United Nations and international and regional peace partne rs, who have worked
tirelessly to support a peaceful resolution of the conflict, are committed to
supporting the leaders of South Sudan and its people in its full implementation.
59. The scale of destruction, human suffering, political and social polariza tion and
economic decline that has befallen South Sudan in the past two and a half years
underscores the immediate need to stabilize the country. While there are no illusions
about the continuing climate of mistrust among the parties, over the course of th e
coming 30 months, the transitional Government must transcend those obstacles. It
must boldly spearhead the fundamental reforms outlined in the peace agreement,
including its incorporation into the transitional Constitution of 2011; the drafting

16-09891

15/19

S/2016/552

and ratifying of a permanent constitution; outlining a road map for security sector
reform; undertaking key economic reforms; and establishing the requisite
institutions for justice and reconciliation. To that end, I welcome the intention of the
transitional Government to articulate a time-bound action plan for the
implementation of the agreement. I encourage it to adopt an inclusive approach and
ensure that all stakeholders, including other political parties and civil society
organizations, are involved in moving the peace process forward.
60. To create the climate of trust and security needed to implement the peace
agreement, I urge all sides to abide by their obligations to demilitarize Juba,
redeploy their forces as stipulated under the peace agreement and allow the
Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism to verify
their redeployment. Now that the transitional Government has been formed, I urge
the President and the First Vice-President to prevail upon their respective supporters
to exercise restraint, exhibit good faith in dealing with security and other challenges
or disputes arising from the implementation of the peace agreement and address all
outstanding issues through dialogue and compromise.
61. I also urge the transitional Government to accelerate the establishment and
activation of key transitional institutions. In that vein, I welcome the recent
operationalization of the Joint Operations Centre and the establishment of the Joint
Management Team. I urge the parties to work expeditiously to operationalize the
Joint Integrated Police, in order to contribute to security and confidence -building in
the areas of their deployment. I also commend the representatives of the other
political parties for working together, under the auspic es of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission, to resolve the impasse over their representation in the
transitional National Legislative Assembly and other transitional institutions and
mechanisms. That spirit of compromise exemplifies what is required to move
forward. The next step will be to expedite the selection of the Speaker and establish
the transitional Assembly without further delay.
62. Notwithstanding the recent, positive political developments, intercommunal
violence and violence perpetrated by the parties to the conflict continues in parts of
Jonglei, Western Bahr el-Ghazal and Central and Eastern Equatoria, with dire
consequences for civilians. The hostilities must cease immediately. The increase in
intercommunal violence, is stoked, I fear, by the continuing implementation of the
establishment order for the creation of 28 States, despite the agreed injunction
against it. I take note of the recent measures taken by the transitional Government to
review the number of states and their boundaries. In the meantime, the
implementation of the order must be suspended, lest it contribute to the unravelling
of the fragile gains made in the peace process thus far.
63. I am deeply concerned that access and movement restrictions targeting
UNMISS personnel continue unabated and that attacks on UNMISS compounds
continue, including most recently in Bentiu. I am alarmed that United Nations
personnel continue to remain in prolonged detention and I call upon the transitional
Government to ensure their immediate and unconditional release. I once again warn
all armed groups that they must desist from targeting United Nations staff or
installations, including sites for the protection of civilians. Such acts may constitute
war crimes. UNMISS will, for its part, continue its efforts to manage and mitigate
the potential causes of insecurity in and around sites for the protection of civilians,
especially in Juba, Malakal and Bentiu.

16/19

16-09891

S/2016/552

64. The dire humanitarian situation in South Sudan remains a source of serious
concern. I urge the donor community to redouble its efforts to fill the funding gap of
more than $899.6 million in the humanitarian appeal for South Sudan. It is
unacceptable that humanitarian operations continue to be constrained by denials of
access, restrictions on freedom of movement and continued violence. I am appalled
that, since the beginning of the crisis, 55 aid workers have been killed in South
Sudan. All parties must allow humanitarian actors the freedom to carry out their
work without obstruction or threat of violence. Impeding the provision of life saving aid is a violation of international humanitarian law and prevents the people
of South Sudan from obtaining the assistance that they so desperately need.
65. For a sustainable peace, the transitional Government must also ensure respect
for human rights and accountability for human rights violations, including through
the establishment of all the transitional justice mechanisms called for under the
peace agreement. I welcome the discussions within the African Union Commission
on the modalities for the establishment of a hybrid court, as agreed upon by the
parties to the peace agreement. The United Nations stands ready to lend its technical
assistance to the African Union and the transitional Governm ent in establishing the
court.
66. I commend the Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission for
the momentous achievements of the Commission and reaffirm the continued support
of the United Nations for his efforts. I also commend the Special Representative of
the African Union and other international partners for their efforts in providing
mediation support and exerting constructive pressure on the parties to move the
peace process forward in the last two months. At this critical juncture, our collective
support is essential to reassure the people of South Sudan that a sustainable peace is
within reach. I encourage the international community to provide its moral, material
and financial support to the newly created transitional Government. I ca ll upon the
transitional Government to work with the international community to put in place
the institutions and mechanisms necessary to enhance transparency and
accountability and facilitate donor funding for the implementation of the peace
agreement. The United Nations will continue to work with the region and other
members of the international community to promote the provision of sustained,
coordinated and harmonized international support to the peace process.
67. In my special report on the review of the UNMISS mandate of 23 November
2015 (S/2015/899), I recommended a phased approach to defining the engagement
of the Mission in South Sudan, based on a regular assessment of the operating
environment in the country and the progression of the peace process. Given the
recent political developments and the upcoming renewal of the UNMISS mandate,
on 13 June the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations visited South
Sudan to assess the implementation of the UNMISS mandate and take stock of the
implementation of the peace agreement. I was particularly encouraged by his frank
and constructive discussion with the President on the road ahead. I was reassured to
learn that the transitional Government is well a ware of the political, security and
economic challenges that it will need to address over the coming 30 months in order
to lay the foundations of a sustainable peace for South Sudan. In that context, I
welcome the President’s commitment to improving the operating environment for
UNMISS and humanitarian partners, including by granting access and freedom of
movement, which is fundamental to our continued support to the Government and
the people. I was also encouraged by their exchange on unmanned unarmed aeri al

16-09891

17/19

S/2016/552

vehicles, during which they discussed the possibility of sharing information between
the Congolese and South Sudanese authorities on the ability of those systems to
assist UNMISS with the protection of civilians and act as a deterrent against
spoilers.
68. The above-mentioned developments notwithstanding, as indicated in my
progress report, the political, security, humanitarian and human rights situation in
the country remains fluid and the nascent institutions of the transition have yet to
articulate their priorities. Given that the UNMISS mandate is due to expire on
31 July 2016, I strongly recommend its extension for six months, during which time
UNMISS and Headquarters will carry out the second phase of determining the
support to the consolidation of peace and security in South Sudan that UNMISS
could provide, giving due consideration to national priorities. In the light of the
positive developments towards the implementation of the transitional security
architecture, a detailed military and police capability study aimed at determining the
full scope of support required by the transitional security institutions will also be
undertaken.
69. Lastly, I wish to express my gratitude to UNMISS and the staff of the United
Nations country team, who have worked to protect thousands of civilians and
facilitated the provision of humanitarian assistance. In particular, I wish to thank my
Special Representative, Ellen Margrethe Løj, for her exemplary leadership, as well
as the troop- and police-contributing countries that have provided uniformed
personnel and assets to the Mission.

18/19

16-09891

16-09891

S/2016/552

19/19
