th
MEETING: 15 NOVEMBER 1967

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/1378) . , . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . . . . . . f . . . . . , , , . , . . . . , . . . , , . . . , . . .

1

Complaints by the Democratic Republic of the Congo:
Letter dated 3 November 196’7 from the Permanent Representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/82 18) . . . . . , . . , . . . . , . . , , . . . . , . . . , , . . . . , . . . . , , .

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

Supplements

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Securiiy Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

THIRTEEN HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-EIGHTH

MEETING

Held in New York on Wednesday, 15 November 1967, at 4 p.m.
observations on one particular paragraph. The text of the
draft resolution reads as follows:

President: Mr. Mamadou Boubacar KANTE (Mali).

Present; The representatives of the following States:
Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Denmark,
Ethiopia, France, India, Japan, Mali, Nigeria, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and United States of America.

“The Security Council,
“Concerned by the serious situation created in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo following the armed
attacks committed against that country by foreign forces
of mercenaries,

?rovisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 378)

“Concerned that Portugal allowed those mercenaries to
use the territory of Angola under its administration as a
base for their armed attacks against the Democratic
Republic of the Congo,

I. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Comulaints bv the Democratic Republic of the Congo:
Letter date& 3 November 1967*from the Perman&t
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/82 18).

“Tahing into consideration the support and assistance
that those mercenaries have continued to receive from
some foreign sources with regard to recruitment and
training, as well astransport and supply of arms,

Adoption of the agenda
“Concerned at the threat which the organization of
such forces poses to the territorial integrity and independence of States,

The agenda was adopted.
Complaints by the Democratic Republic of the Cdngo

‘Reaffirming
resolutions 226 (1966) of 14 October
1966 and 239 (1967) of 10 July 1967,

Letter dated 3 November 1967 from the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
addressed to the President of t,he Security Council
(S/821 8)

“1. Condemns any act of interference in the internal
affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
“2. Condemns, in particular, the failure of Portugal, in
violation of the above-mentioned resolutions of the
Security Council, to prevent the mercenaries from using
the territory of Angola under its administration as a base
of operations for armed attacks against the Democratic
Republic of the Congo;

1. The PRESIDENT (@ansEated from French); In accordante with the decision taken at the 1372nd meeting, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Portugal, Burundi, Zambia and Algeria to participate
without vote in the discussion and to take the places
reservedfor them.

“3. Calls upon Portugal to put an end immediately, in
conformity with the above-mentioned resolutions of the
Security Council, to the provision to the mercenaries of
any assistance whatsoever;

At the invitation of the President, Mr, J. Umba di Lutete
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) and Mr. F. de Miranda
(Portugal) took places at the Council table.

“4. Calls upon all countries receiving mercenaries who
have participated in the armed attacks against the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to take appropriate
measures to prevent them from renewing their activities
against any State;

At the invitation of the President, Mr, T. Nsanzd
(Burundi), Mr. J. B. Mwemba (Zam@a) and Mr. A. Ben
Kaci (Algeria) took the seats reserved for them.

2. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I am
pleased to inform the Council that following informal
consultations a consensus has been reached on the text of a
draft resolution, which I shall read out. However, one
member of the Council has reserved the right to make

“5. Calls upon all Member States to co-operate with
the Security Council in the implementation of this
resolution;
1

that the same Western countries did not wish, during
discussion of the Congolese complaints in the Security
Council, to support the proposal that the Council should
express its condemnation of Portugal in the most decisive
manner.

“6. Decides that the Security Council should remain
seized of the question and requests the Secretary-General
to follow the implementation of the present resolution.”

If there is no objection, I shall consider the text adopted.

3. Mr. DE CARVALHO SILOS (Brazil): I asked for the
floor in order to make a statement in connexion with ,the
resolution which has just been accepted by the Security
Council.

9. The Soviet delegation reiterates its firm support of the
demands made by the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and other African States for the condemnation of the
criminal activities of the forces of colonialism and imperialism, and in particular of the Lisbon Government’s activities
against the Congo.

4. Yesterday I had the opportunity of submitting my
delegation’s views on the complaint presented by the
Democratic Republic of the Congo against Portugal
[137&h meeting], so I do not feel that I need elaborate
further on the position of my Government. On the other
hand, however, my delegation would like to point out that
it did not ask for a vote because that was against the wishes
of the members of the Council. My delegation does deem it
necessary to state, for the record, that if such a vote had
been, taken, Brazil would have abstained, as we cannot
support paragraphs 2 and 3 of the resolution.

IO. The Soviet delegation considered, and still considers,
that the Security Council should duly call upon all States
which are allies of Portugal in NATO .and which give
military and political support to the Lisbon rigime, thus
bearing responsibility for the intervention in the affairs of
the Congo, to observe strictly the principles of the United
Nations Charter, the United Nations Declaration on the
Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of
States and the Protection of Their Independence and
Sovereignty, and to respect the sovereignty and independ.
ence of newly-formed African States.

5. Mr. MOROZOV

11. With regard to the resolution adopted by the Security
Council as a result of consultations between members of
the Council, we deem it necessary to point out that
although this draft does contain some form of condemnation of Portugal’s intervention in the affairs of the Congo, it
does not go far enough. It is clear to anyone for what
reason and because of whose position the Security Council
has been unable to reach agreement on a more specific
condemnation in respect of those guilty of aggression
against the Congo, and on the adoption of more effective
measures to prevent a repetition of such acts in the future.

The draft resolution was adopted. 1

(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics)

(translated from Russian):In connexion with the decision

taken by the Security Council, the Soviet delegation deems
it necessary to recall that our position of principle on the
question of armed intervention in the affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was set out in a
statement made in the Security Council on 8 November this
year (1372nd meeting]. We now fully confirm that view.
6. Events in the Congo have shown that the forces of
colonialism and imperialism do not hesitate to organize
open armed aggression against newly-formed African States
in order to undermine their sovereignty and territorial
integrity, and against the national liberation movement of
the Congolese people and of other African peoples.

12. Considering, however, that the draft presented by the
President of the Security Council can to a certain extent
serve to put an end to foreign intervention in the domestic
affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and in
view also of the position taken in the Council by the
representatives of the Afro-Asian countries and the opinion
expressed by the representative of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Soviet delegation has found it possible to
support this draft resolution.

7. In doing this, the colonialists are still using the
Portuguese colonies in Africa as strong points and operational bases for the carrying out of armed provocation
against the Congo and other African States. The aggression
against the Congo is further evidence of the serious threat
to tile African peoples posed by the political union of
racism and colonialism, with the participation of a number
of imperialistic Powers which are active on the African
continent.

13. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom French): I now call
upon the representative of the Democratjc Republic of the
Congo, who wishes to make a statement.
14. Mr. UMBA DI LUTETE (Democratic Republic of the
Congo) (translated from French): I should like to make a
brief statement before I leave a few hours from now.

8. The violation by Portugal of the principles of the
United Nations Charter, of the Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention in the Domestic Affairs of States
and the Protection of Their Independence and Sovereignty,
and of the sovereignty of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is so obvious that even those Western countries
which are allies of Portugal in NATO, and support the
Lisbon regime’s colonialist policy in Africa have found
themselves obliged here in the Security Council to dissociate themselves, in words at least, from Portugal’s
activities in the Congo. It is a secret to no one, however,

1.5. On behalf of my Government, I should like to thank
the members of the Council for the resolution they have
just adopted. The Council showed just now how earnestly it
wishes to see peace and security in my country. It has
likewise shown that it is concerned for the territorial
integrity of my country.
16. In thanking the members of the Council here, I do so
not only in my own name and that of my delegation, not

1 See resolution 241 (1967).
2

only on behalf of the Government and people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also in the name of
the whole population of the Congo, whether Congolese or
foreign, whose persons or property have suffered as a result
of the machinations and misdeeds of the mercenaries, For
there has been 10s~ of life not only among the soldiers of
the Congolese national army, not only among the Congolese civilian population, not only among the foreign
civilian
population,
but among the mercenaries
themselves-for after all, even though they are highwaymen,
they are human beings. Perhaps here in this very hall there
are peopIe with members of their own families in the ranks
of the mercenaries. There is no telling whether the
represelitative of Portugal has not members of his family
among them; I apologize for going back somewhat, but
despite his denials, it appears that the Belgian authorities
apprehended four mercenaries who had used false passports, and among them was a Portuguese-which contradicts everything the representative of Portugal has said.
But this is a secondary aspect of the question.

20. In this copnexion, I should never forgive myself if I
failed to mention the courageous representations made by
certain Governments to the Government of Portugal. There
is no need for me to mention them here; everyone knows of
them, and I would like here and now to express our deepest
gratitude,
21. What is needed, of course, is not simply a condempation of the mercenaries. They must be condemned, but so
also must their masters, for the mercenaries are hired
killers, mere tools, and those who back them, those who
pay them to do their work, are just as guilty as the
mercenaries they make use of. Thus it is not enough merely
to put down the mercenaries, the hirelings. Those who hire
them and seek to use them to bring devastation and death
to our country must also be put down.
22. This is all I wished to say. I thank the members of the
Council for their kind attention. Once again, thank you.
23. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): On behalf
of the members of the Council I thank the representative of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the compliments
he has just paid the Council.

17. What I wanted to do most of all at this time was to
express my gratitude, and I repeat, that of the Government
and people of the Congo and of all foreigners who have lost
their property, or lost members of their families.

24. I call upon the representative of Portugal, who wishes
to make a statement.

18. Secondly, as I said in my statement on Friday last
/1374th meeting/, the resolution, whatever its tenor, is in
the last analysis simply a means; it is not an end in itself,
though it may be a necessary step. What I asked of the
members of this Council was that the Council should take
steps calculated to safeguard peace and security in my
country. I am happy, in any case, that even if it is only a
means it has been achieved.

25. Mr. DE MIRANDA (Portugal): The resolution which
the Council has just adopted by consensus is wholly
unacceptable to my Government since it contains entirely
unwarranted references to Portugal. My Government
strongly repudiates it and rejects its implications, particularly those contained in the second preambular paragraph
which are not only gratuitous and baseless but also unjust
and uncalled for in view of our offer to have the matter
investigated by the Council. My Government likewise
rejects paragraphs 2 and 3.

19. For the danger does still exist, Congratulations have
been expressed here on all sides to the Congolese national
army on having stemmed the tide of the mercenaries; but
the mercenaries themselves have said that they will come
back, that it is only a temporary lull. What I would now ask
of the members of the Council who have voted for this
resolution, and of all the Members of the United Nations, is
that they use their influence, perhaps in a direct way, with
Portugal to bring these misdeeds to an end, for that is what
the entire international community today recognizes them
to be.

26. Accordingly, my delegation wishes to place on record
the strong reservations of the Portuguese Government
regarding this resolution.

The meeting rose at 4.55 p. m.

3

HOW
United

the

T O OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

Nations
publicotionr.may
world.
Consult
your
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS

be obtained
or write

from bookstores
to: United
Nations,

and

distributors
Sales
Section,

throughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Les publications
d6positaires
du
Notions

Unier,

KAH

llOJlYl(UTb

It0 DCCS pnkOlI&X
II.~I IIII~IIITC IIO
Ii3&LllIll”I,
IhO-1IO))Ii

CONSEGUIR

New York

M3AAHUR

ilrCIIT~‘TllaX
wara:nme
lIpO@;tiC

DES NATIONS

Unies
rant
Informer-vous

des venter,

Oprar1113~~11rf

Las publicacianer
en iodor
pa&s
Ventas,
Nueva

in U.N.

Section

Nations
entier.

~i:I~ilIfIIJI

COMO

Litho

des
monde

LES PUBLICATIONS

en vente
dons
les librairier
et ler agencer
aupr&s
de votre
librairie
au adresser-vous
6:
ou Genbve.

OPrAHkl3AYUU

Oo’Zc?~IIIIcIJIIbIX
NlIpfI.

axpocy:

UNIES

OSbE,IjUHEHHblX

Ih[lfii

IlOitifIO

~hLlO~IITL?

cIlptllllili

OprannaaqnH

IQ’IIfiTb

HAL(UR

II IiIJII;fiIlI~IX

06 113~aIllIJrX
0TjZe~1mm11~xX

.WWtl:lllll~X

If nfllIICSI

IIalcrlir,

II

IiIllIililIOJ(
CCI~IIJ~
u0

IMII &llCLltL

PIJBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

de Ias Naciones
Unidas
ertbn
del mundo.
Consulte
a su librero
York o Ginebra.

en venta
o dirijare

Price: $U.S. 0.75 (01 equivalent

UNIDAS
en librerias
a; Nacioner

in other

currencies)

y cosas distribuidoras
Unidas,
Seccibn

de

355594anunry

1971--2,100.
