S/PV.8345

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8345th meeting

Friday, 7 September 2018, 9.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Haley. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Ndong Mba
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Al Jarallah
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-27866 (E)
*1827866*

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 9.35 a.m.

An overwhelming number of people in Idlib — 98.5 per
cent — are civilians.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Staffan
de Mistura, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Syria, and Mr. John Ging, Director of Operations
and Advocacy in the United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
Mr. De Mistura is joining today’s meeting via
video-teleconference from Geneva.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I welcome Mr. De Mistura to the meeting and now
give him the floor.
Mr. De Mistura: I thank you, Madam President,
for this opportunity to address the Security Council. We
believe that the timing is very appropriate, in particular
because the focus is on Idlib. We have been hearing
about it over the past few days. We are all terribly
concerned because all of the elements exist for a perfect
storm, with potentially devastating humanitarian and
other consequences. First of all, let me provide a
summary of the facts. I am sure that John Ging will be
able to refer to some of the humanitarian aspects.
The best available and independent assessment
of the United Nations estimates that there are at
least 2.9 million people in Idlib. I repeat 2.9 million
people — almost 3 million, in fact. Among them
are 1 million children, and 1.4 million people who
have already been displaced at least once. Terrorist
groups on the Security Council’s list are also present,
including non-Syrians, foreign fighters and those who
have committed terrible acts in many other places.
There are also armed opposition groups, many of whom
have been evacuated to Idlib through reconciliation
agreements and are not members of terrorist groups.
2/24

07/09/2018

President Al-Assad has stated that restoring
sovereignty and defeating terrorists remain the priority
of the Syrian Government. Senior Government officials
have also stated that retaking Idlib is the next goal.
Senior Iranian and Russian officials have spoken in
strong terms about their own determination to purge
terrorists from Idlib. At the same time, they have
indicated that, first, the Government would prefer socalled reconciliation agreements rather than military
action; secondly, Russian-Turkish understanding is
crucial; and, thirdly, Syria does not want a confrontation
with Turkey. Those are recent statements made by
Syrian Government officials.
Russia has been engaged in intense dialogue with
Turkey in particular and, as the Council knows, all
eyes are on what could transpire, or has transpired,
following the summit meeting of the Presidents of Iran,
Russia and Turkey, which just concluded in Tehran.
Meanwhile, reports suggest increased deployments of
Government and affiliated forces and equipment near
the Idlib de-escalation zone — yes, that used to be,
and still is officially, a de-escalation zone. Air strikes
and mutual artillery shelling have been reported on
its perimeter for the past months, resulting in deaths
and injuries on both sides, with an intensification since
4 September.
Meanwhile, the leader of what they call the Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham — basically the Al-Nusra Front, and
let us call them by name — has publicly signalled the
group’s intention to fight. On 2 September, photos of
weaponized drones were circulated online after landing
in the Al-Ghab plain. Ostensibly, the same models of
Russian Federation planes were used to carry out several
attacks on the Khmeimim air base in recent months.
For their part, armed opposition groups in Idlib
have reportedly been fortifying their own positions,
digging tunnels and trenches and detonating bridges.
Many of those armed opposition groups — that are not
terrorist groups — have pleaded publicly for the Astana
guarantors to secure a non-military solution. Since
early August, almost every single armed opposition
group in Idlib has now come under the banner of what
is called the “national liberation front”. That includes
various groups that have been operating under the
same banner as the Al-Nusra Front in the past. If that
is confirmed, which is what we seem to be hearing,
18-27866

07/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

that can be taken as a sign of their own willingness to
separate from Al-Nusra. We hope that they will now
take even further steps to separate themselves from
listed terrorist groups. I note in that context that, at the
end of August, Turkey made it clear that it views Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham — the Al-Nusra Front — as a terrorist
organization, thereby sending a strong signal to armed
groups to separate from Al-Nusra from now on. With
statements and counter-statements regarding potential
chemical-weapons use, we have warnings and counterwarnings about the dangers of a major assault on Idlib,
and we have seen an intensified military presence in
the region.
I have laid out to the members of the Security
Council all of the ingredients for a perfect storm. The
dangers are profound, in that any battle for Idlib would
be a horrific and bloody battle. Civilians are its potential
victims, and there are ever-present dangers in the case
of a full-scale assault of incidents or rapid escalations
involving regional and international players. Let us
remember that there is no Idlib after Idlib to which
people can be evacuated, or at least feel safer in during a
battle. There must another way than an all-out military
escalation. The Security Council cannot accept that the
civilians of Idlib must meet that type of fate.
Efforts to combat terrorism do not supersede
obligations under international law and the moral
conscience of humankind. We must put the sanctity
of civilian human life above everything else. That is
why we are urging ourselves and all stakeholders to
contribute to finding a formula to prevent a terrible
tragedy, while at the same allowing the issue of Security
Council-designated terrorist groups to be addressed.
The declaration issued by Presidents Putin, Erdoğan
and Rouhani states that they have decided to address
the situation in Idlib “in the spirit of cooperation that
characterized the Astana format”. We do not have
many more details on that. We would like to see what
that means in practice in order to address the issue.
They are the guarantors of the last de-escalation area,
and therefore have direct influence — and, frankly,
responsibility — on how to solve it. I am sure Idlib
is at the top of their agenda, as was shown in the
Tehran meeting.
I look also to other key actors, including Gulf
and many other countries, that have leverage over
non-terrorist armed opposition groups to do whatever
they can to ensure that they put civilians first and

S/PV. 8345

separate from Al-Nusra. I am concerned about reports
that many groups — although not all — have become
increasingly desperate, and in some cases ruthless.
My colleague John Ging, from the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
will brief members of the Council on what must happen
on the humanitarian side to protect civilians and on
the humanitarian response plan. But let me emphasize
that people should be granted safe passage to places of
their own choosing, if they want to leave temporarily.
We must allow the opening of a sufficient number of
protected voluntary evacuation routes for civilians in
any direction — east, north and south. For that, the
United Nations must be granted access to scale. The
United Nations stands ready, including myself and
surely all of my colleagues of the humanitarian team,
to work with all parties on the spot and elsewhere
on the modalities and parameters for establishing a
functioning evacuation route, if it were required, with
full respect for international humanitarian law and
human rights principles.
Let me further reiterate the Secretary-General’s
clear position that any use of chemical weapons is totally
and completely unacceptable. As the Organization on
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has
found, the norm against the use of chemicals weapons
has been repeatedly violated in Syria. That must not
happen again. I cannot stress enough the danger
associated with any alleged use of those weapons, not
only in humanitarian terms but also when it comes
to the acute threat to maintaining international peace
and security. I equally strongly underscore that the
overwhelming majority of civilians killed in Syria have
been victims of indiscriminate, or sometimes targeted,
attacks against them using conventional weapons. Such
attacks re also abhorrent and unacceptable.
All the talk of an assault that could produce a perfect
storm in Idlib is happening at exactly the same time as
serious talk about moving forward on a constitutional
committee and about desires to urge Syrian refugees to
return to their country. Those narratives do not square
well with each other. Either we are trying to find a
political way to end the war and move to a post-war
political scenario, or we will see the war reach new
levels of horror. That is why today’s meeting in Tehran
is so important, and why I am convening Iran, Russia
and Turkey in Geneva on Monday and Tuesday, and
Egypt, France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the
United Kingdom and the United States on Friday. It

18-278663/24

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

will be the ultimate failure of the imagination and an
end of diplomacy if with those efforts we simply see an
increase in military activity.
Let me conclude with two points.
I have seen many people — civilians — from Idlib
today, including women, noble doctors, farmers and
people of all kinds, approximating almost 3 million.
They have held peaceful demonstrations and lighted
candles at night to show that normal people live in each
of the houses, not necessarily terrorists. They make up
3 million civilians. I have been inspired by what they
have been telling me. They have been asking us — the
United Nations, through the Council — to also express
our voices. In that context, since we are addressing the
question of separating terrorists from others, protecting
civilians and giving a voice to civilians, and as I have
been asked if we the United Nations have any ideas, I
would like to share that we do have some ideas, and
I will take the liberty of elaborating on them when
we meet in private. Any idea or proposal to avoid this
situation from becoming the biggest humanitarian
tragedy at the end of the most horrible conflict in recent
memory should at least be given a chance.
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for
his briefing.
During this presidency, we are holding all meetings
in the open. We want to hear from Mr. De Mistura
what the civilians have to say and what they think. We
would appreciate it if he would say that publicly and
let us know what he thinks. If he has any additional
comments after we are done, we are more than happy to
hear those, if he is comfortable with that being public.
I once again give the floor to Mr. De Mistura.
Mr. De Mistura: Based on your authorization and
your request, Madam President, I have no problem in
doing so. In fact, all of our proposals are, and should
be, public. I will gladly present that information. I only
ask to truly be given a chance to do so. I would not
like to miss the chance to actually make a proposal and
then see whether anyone else has other proposals. I will
be happy as long as we do not simply stop at saying
that this is a horrible thing and that we hope it does
not happen.
The President: We thoroughly agree and we
appreciate Mr. De Mistura’s service.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ging.
4/24

07/09/2018

Mr. Ging: Last week, during the monthly briefing
on the humanitarian situation in Syria (see S/PV.8322),
I briefed the Security Council recent developments in
Idlib, our current response, the planning under way and
preparations should the situation escalate further. Today
I will provide an additional update on the situation and
on the humanitarian response.
As the Special Envoy stated, of the nearly 3 million
people living in the Idlib de-escalation zone — which
includes parts of Idlib, Aleppo, Latakia, and Hama
governorates — 2.1 million are in need of humanitarian
assistance, including 1.4 million people who are
internally displaced. While our humanitarian response
currently focuses on supporting the 2.1 million people
in need, we are concerned for the protection and
safety of all civilians living in the area should the
hostilities intensify.
On 4 September, renewed air and ground-based
strikes in western and southern rural Idlib, as well
as northern rural Hama, led to civilian casualties
and displacement. Heavy bombardment of the Jisr
al-Shughour area of western rural Idlib led to some 13
civilian deaths, including at least four children, injuring
another 20 civilians. On 6 September, a hospital near
Kafr Zita, in northern Hama, was reportedly hit by an
air strike, despite the fact that it had been deconflicted.
We also continue to receive reports of improvised
explosive devices and other attacks killing and maiming
civilians in populated areas throughout Idlib, including
humanitarian aid workers. At least three doctors were
killed in August alone.
As a result of the insecurity, schools in western Idlib
around Jisr al-Shughour and surrounding communities
have been suspended. Key crossing points between
Government- and opposition-controlled areas are also
reportedly closed, some by the destruction of bridges
by non-State armed opposition groups. In addition to
restricting freedom of movement for the population, that
has also contributed to rising food prices and shortages.
At the request of humanitarian organizations, the
United Nations has provided deconfliction information
for 125 humanitarian sites in Idlib to the military
actors. That information was submitted to facilitate
the parties’ identification of humanitarian facilities,
warehouses, offices and sites where humanitarian
assistance is being provided to people in need. In their
military operations, all parties bear the obligation to
take constant care to spare civilians and civilian objects,
18-27866

07/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

including humanitarian workers and humanitarian
facilities. Any deconflicted sites that are reported to
have been targeted must be immediately investigated.
The United Nations and non-governmental
organizations continue to implement a major
humanitarian operation throughout Idlib, with an
average of 2 million people reached every month with
cross-border assistance from Turkey.
Beyond the provision of assistance, efforts are
ongoing to ensure that people in need can be supported
in the event of an increase in hostilities. Our teams
in Damascus and Gaziantep have together developed
a readiness plan that sets out a coordinated, flexible
response for the affected population in the coming
period. Plans are in place to support up to 900,000
women, children and men who could be affected by
conflict, including for up to 700,000 people who may
be displaced within Idlib and beyond due to potential
hostilities. We also estimate that up to 100,000 people
may cross into Government-controlled areas. In
addition, if the conflict spreads to the Tal Rifaat area,
we estimate that another 100,000 people may seek to
move towards other areas in Aleppo governorate or to
north-east Syria.
Humanitarian aid is already being positioned inside
Idlib, as well as in surrounding areas in Aleppo, Latakia
and Hama. That includes ready-to-eat food rations
sufficient for one week to cover as many as 850,000
people — both through cross-border operations via
Turkey and from inside Syria. Additionally, non-food
items, shelter, water, sanitation, hygiene and medical
supplies are also being positioned. The World Health
Organization has dispatched more than 25 tons of
supplies to Aleppo in the past month alone.
The United Nations has released $20 million
from the Tureky humanitarian fund. Approximately
$10 million of that allocation is focused on ensuring
shelter, and non-food items will be available should
an increase in violence force people to be displaced.
While some donors, including the United Kingdom and
Germany, have recently provided additional resources,
for which we are most grateful, the amount received
falls woefully short of the $311 million that we estimate
is required if there is an increase in violence resulting
in mass displacement. Simply put, that is funding that
we do not currently have, as multiple crises over the
past period, in eastern Ghouta, Afrin, southern Syria

S/PV. 8345

and Idlib earlier this year, have strained our already
limited pool of resources.
Civilians in the de-escalation zone have borne the
impact of fighting throughout the years of the Syria
conflict. Vulnerable populations have displaced to the
area from eastern Aleppo, eastern Ghouta, northern
rural Homs and southern Syria. Communities and
humanitarian responders have been stretched to their
limits to support those who arrive, often with nothing.
The humanitarian impact on civilians of any increase
in fighting will therefore be most severe. And the
worst-case scenario in Idlib, where millions would
flee fighting, will overwhelm all capacity to respond
regardless of plans or funding made available. It has the
potential to create a humanitarian emergency at a scale
not yet seen during the crisis.
In conclusion, let me highlight five key asks to the
Council, and through it to all parties to the conflict and
those who have influence over them.
First, there must be a cessation of hostilities
in the area and, at a minimum, we must ensure that
there is no escalation. Secondly, we must ensure the
protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including humanitarian and medical personnel and
assets, in compliance with the parties’ obligations
under international humanitarian law. Thirdly, we must
respect and enable freedom of movement for people
who wish to move in any direction. Additionally,
civilians who choose to stay must be allowed to do so
and must remain protected. Fourthly, we must allow
and facilitate safe, rapid, unhindered and sustained
humanitarian access to the people in need through the
most direct routes, including to areas that have changed
control. Fifthly, there must be increased funding for
priority response and readiness activities, given that
the humanitarian response is already overstretched.
The President: I thank Mr. Ging for his briefing
and important remarks.
I would like to remind the Council that after
Council members speak, if they have any questions or
comments for Mr. De Mistura, we are going to bring
him back after the Council members have spoken and
before the representative of Syria speaks.
Mr. Al Jarallah (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, for his valuable briefing and his efforts in the

18-278665/24

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

Syrian political process. I would also like to thank the
Director of Operations and Advocacy in the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), Mr. John Ging, for his briefing. I
take this opportunity to pay tribute to the efforts of all
humanitarian workers in Syria.
I deliver this statement on behalf of the
co-penholders on the humanitarian situation in Syria,
namely, the State of Kuwait and the Kingdom of Sweden.
Today’s meeting of the Security Council is taking
place at a very critical time. Indications and reports
of a possible imminent military escalation in Idlib
province are increasing. The international community
is concerned, and international aid agencies are
preparing themselves hastily. The situation in Idlib is
different from those of Aleppo, eastern Ghouta and
Dara’a. Idlib is home to nearly 3 million people — half
of them internally displaced. Were military operations
to begin there, it would be disastrous. The humanitarian
consequences will be dire for the inhabitants if
no arrangements are reached between the parties
concerned. Were such an escalation to occur, where
would those innocent civilians go to avoid artillery and
air bombardments? We now know that there is no safe
place in which they could seek refuge.
We urge all the relevant parties to abide by the
de-escalation agreement in Idlib, in the hope that we
will not again a de-escalation zone turned into an
escalation area. We also echo the appeal of SecretaryGeneral António Guterres to the Government of Syria
and all the parties concerned to exercise restraint, as
well as his call on the Astana guarantors to step up
efforts to find a peaceful solution to the situation in
Idlib. In that regard, we note today’s summit of the
Astana guarantors; we expect them to respect their
own de-escalation agreement in Idlib and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
We stress the importance of giving diplomatic
efforts more time and attention, including redoubling
of efforts by all to avoid further bloodshed. The images
of death and destruction from Aleppo and eastern
Ghouta remain in our memory. The Syrian people have
suffered enough over the past eight years, and have been
exposed to flagrant violations of humanitarian law and
international human rights law while the perpetrators
of those crimes have not been held accountable.
Military attacks against Council-designated
terrorist groups in no way absolve any party to the
6/24

07/09/2018

conflict from its obligations under international law,
including complying with the principles of distinction,
proportionality, precaution and protection of civilians
and civilian targets. Even wars have rules that must
be observed. Let us remember that it is innocent
civilians — children, women and the elderly — who
make up the vast majority of the population in Idlib,
not terrorists.
We commend the efforts undertaken by OCHA
and its partners to stockpile humanitarian supplies in
preparation for the expected disaster in Idlib. We urge
donors to step up their contributions to the humanitarian
response and call on all parties to allow and facilitate
rapid, safe and sustained humanitarian access to those
in need. In that context, cross-border assistance is a vital
part of the humanitarian response in Syria. Millions of
Syrians depend upon such assistance, including nearly
2 million people in Idlib and the neighbouring areas.
There is no doubt that the number of those in need will
increase in the event of any comprehensive military
operation there.
The increasing indications and reports coming in
are a matter of concern, and we remind all parties of
their responsibilities under international humanitarian
law to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure.
The systematic attacks against civilian areas,
including schools, hospitals and medical facilities in
Idlib province and beyond, must cease immediately.
Humanitarian and medical personnel must be protected
in line with international humanitarian law. In that
regard, we reaffirm the need to respect Security Council
resolutions, including resolution 2401 (2018), which
was submitted by the State of Kuwait and the Kingdom
of Sweden in February and which calls for a ceasefire
without delay, as well as the delivery of humanitarian
aid. We must also respect resolution 2286 (2016), on
the protection of hospitals and medical personnel, and
resolution 2427 (2018), on children and armed conflict.
Resolutions that are not implemented on the
ground have no value. We underscore the need
for accountability and no impunity. We renew our
support for the International Independent Commission
of Inquiry and the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
18-27866

07/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

The Security Council has a humanitarian, moral
and legal responsibility to the population of Idlib,
and the Council must seek meaningful preventative
measures. The series of meetings of the Council on
Syria in general, and specifically on Idlib this week,
including our meeting today, are critical to that end.
We appreciate and support the efforts of Mr. Staffan
de Mistura in Idlib and throughout Syria. We reaffirm
that the best way to reach a sustainable solution to
the Syrian crisis and avoid humanitarian catastrophe,
particularly in Idlib, remains a political solution under
the auspices of the United Nations, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015) and the 2012 Geneva
communiqué (S/2012/522, annex).
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait and the Kingdom
of Sweden will do their utmost to push the Security
Council towards exploring all meaningful options
and to ensure that the Council closely follows the
developments in Idlib. As co-penholders and significant
donors to the humanitarian response in Syria, we will
continue to play our role to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people and to ensure that the Security Council
upholds its responsibilities in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United States presidency for convening this
meeting, which comes at a critical moment and allows
us to reiterate collectively our serious concerns about
the situation in Idlib. I also thank Mr. John Ging and
Mr. Staffan de Mistura for their very enlightening
briefings and commitment and that of their teams.

S/PV. 8345

taken refuge throughout the conflict. As John Ging
and Staffan de Mistura reminded us, Idlib counts
almost 3 million inhabitants. More than half of them
have already been displaced from other parts of Syria.
In that context, a large-scale military offensive would
create a new humanitarian disaster, given that those
civilians have nowhere else to go. We are now only all
too familiar with how such offensives repeatedly play
out, entailing large-scale violations of international
humanitarian law with deliberate, deadly attacks on
civilians, indiscriminate air raids and the risk of the
renewed use of chemical weapons by the regime. Such
an offensive would also lead to a major migration crisis
for northern Syria, Turkey, and potentially Europe and
even other parts of the world. Such an offensive would
also pose a serious threat to regional security with the
spillover of jihadist fighters there. Lastly, a large-scale
military operation would have repercussions in Europe
and even beyond.
Given the gravity of the situation and the stakes, we
call on the Astana guarantors, who are meeting today
in Tehran and have the means at their disposal to stop
events from spiralling out of control — especially Syria,
Russia and Iran — to shoulder their responsibilities and
commit to three imperatives: to respect the ceasefire,
of which they are the guarantors; to guarantee full,
safe and unhindered humanitarian access throughout
Syria, while protecting civilians; and to make way
for a process leading to a credible political solution to
the Syrian crisis. Respect for the ceasefire is the only
viable path.

Let us go straight to the facts. Syria is once again
on the verge of abyss, as the Idlib area has become a
humanitarian, migration and security time bomb. That
is the three-alarm fire that we would face in the event of
a massive military offensive on the part of the regime.
The risk is considerable and clearly defined. In recent
history, few disasters have been as clearly anticipated
and been the subject of as many convergent warnings
by the international community. As the moment of
truth approaches, those repeated warnings, made
through all means available, must be fully grasped by
the stakeholders. That is the very purpose of today’s
meeting and there is not a minute to lose.

Let us make no mistake — the goal is to avoid a
humanitarian catastrophe and not merely to manage it
as best as we can. Those supporting the Syrian regime
have the means to prevent such a crisis, as the regime
does not have the ability to act alone. A new massacre
would therefore be the responsibility and the failure of
the regime’s supporters. Conversely, they can still halt
the escalation and show the world that they have paved
the way for a peaceful settlement. There is still time
to avoid disaster in Idlib, but once again there is not a
minute to spare. That is why we call on Russia and Iran
to ensure the maintenance of the Idlib region as the last
de-escalation zone, to protect civilians and to respect
and enforce full respect for international humanitarian
law there.

As we speak, a large-scale military offensive by the
regime, supported by its allies, appears to be imminent
in Idlib, where hundreds of thousands of Syrians have

I welcome the steps taken by the United Nations to
prevent escalation and its significant efforts to help the
civilian population, as John Ging mentioned earlier. I

18-278667/24

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

also welcome Turkey’s efforts to that end. For its part,
France has been fully engaged, in particular alongside
Presidents Erdoğan and Putin, to avoid any offensive
and to relaunch the political process. At the same time,
we must do everything possible to ensure safe, full and
unhindered humanitarian access and the protection
of civilians, civilian infrastructure and humanitarian
personnel. We commend the difficult work of the United
Nations on the ground and encourage Mark Lowcock,
his team and John Ging to persevere in their requests to
the Syrian authorities.
I also recall the crucial nature of aid provided by
cross-border convoys, authorized by resolution 2393
(2017). Assistance via Turkey facilitates the daily
delivery of vital support to almost 2 million people in
the north-west. It is therefore our responsibility to help
maintain and strengthen cross-border aid. France will
maintain and adapt its assistance accordingly to northwestern Syria.
We must be extremely vigilant with regard
to exploiting the issue of humanitarian corridors.
The forced displacement of thousands of people to
areas under the regime’s control in the total absence
of international supervision would in no way be
humanitarian, but would rather amount to war crimes.
Priority should continue to be placed on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
Lastly, as our highest-level political authorities
have stressed on more than one occasion, I reaffirm
in the strongest terms that we will exercise the utmost
vigilance concerning any verified renewed use of
chemical weapons by the regime and our full resolve
to take action in any such situation, alongside the
United Kingdom and the United States, as we have
stated previously.
Concerning the fight against the terrorist threat, in
which France is on the front line, it can in no way justify
what we have witnessed in Syria. When the struggle
against terrorism is used to justify indiscriminate
attacks on civilians and serious violations of
international humanitarian law, it becomes merely a
pretext whose effect — and perhaps goal — only fuels
the terrorism that it asserts to combat.
Everyone here must carefully consider the fact
that a massacre in Idlib would undermine the efforts
undertaken to reach a political solution. We must
therefore strive for a sustainable, inclusive and credible
political solution, pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015),
8/24

07/09/2018

which the Council adopted by consensus. In the
immediate term, we must support the establishment
of a constitutional committee with the help of Special
Envoy Staffan de Mistura, whom I thank once again.
Such a committee must meet as soon as possible and
carry out its work in a completely independent manner
under the auspices of the United Nations, which is the
very prerequisite for its credibility. We all know that
this is just one step, and it will be essential to quickly
address the issue of the holding of free and fair elections,
open to all Syrians, including refugees and internally
displaced persons, as well as the creation of a neutral
environment conducive to the restoration of trust and
the implementation substantive reforms. Those will be
essential steps, and that is the only way to avoid the
prolongation of the crisis ad vitam æternam.
In conclusion, I stress that a deadly offensive in Idlib
would mark not the end of the Syrian crisis, as certain
experts in the art of confusion would have us believe,
but rather the beginning of a new phase in the protracted
Syrian tragedy, which would be characterized by
radicalization, instability, an endless cycle of the same
causes and effects, the entrenchment of terrorism and a
possible geographic spread of the conflict. Beyond the
looming humanitarian disaster, that is what is at stake
in Idlib.
Our collective responsibility is to look to the future.
The European Union and several partners have clearly
reiterated that they can assist in rebuilding Syria only
when an irreversible, credible and inclusive political
transition is indeed under way. There will be no blank
cheque for Syria or a massive return of refugees
without confidence-building measures that guarantee
a secure environment. Contrary to what the regime
and its allies would have us believe, it is clear that it
is not the lack of rebuilding that prevents the return of
refugees, but rather the lack of credible progress in the
political process.
We are therefore at a crossroads. France again
calls on the Astana guarantors to respect the ceasefire
because an escalation of violence is in no one’s interest
and, as we speak, could even be avoided. That alone
will enable us to move towards an inclusive political
solution. It is in our best interest and above all that of
the Syrian people. On behalf of France and in support
of the Geneva process, I invite us all to forge ahead
towards a political solution that is within reach if we
unite our efforts and overcome all difficulties.
18-27866

07/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation welcomes the convening of
today’s meeting and thanks Special Envoy for Syria
Staffan De Mistura and Director John Ging for their
enlightening and objective briefings. We reiterate
Equatorial Guinea’s support for their noble efforts in
an extremely difficult environment.
I will focus my statement in particular on the
ongoing military rumblings in Idlib, on the serious
humanitarian situation in the province, and, lastly, on
the importance of not obstructing the political process
to bring about lasting peace in Syria.
Equatorial Guinea is deeply concerned about
the situation in the Syrian province of Idlib and the
possible catastrophic humanitarian consequences in
the event of a large-scale military offensive. The war in
Syria, which has been ravaging the country since 2011,
has reached its climax. According to reports, reports
of Government troops near Idlib suggest an imminent
escalation of violence in the area. It should be recalled
that Idlib, the last terrorist enclave, controlled by and
large by the terrorist group Tahrir Al-Sham, also known
as the Al-Nusra Front, as well as by armed opposition
groups, is part of the de-escalation zone in northern
Syria, sponsored by the Astana guarantors.
The United Nations estimates that there are almost
3 million people in that de-escalation zone, including
nearly 1.4 million internally displaced persons and
2.1 million people in need of humanitarian assistance.
In line with the Secretary-General’s communiqué of
29 August, we urgently call on all parties to exercise
restraint and prioritize the protection of civilians.
We further encourage all parties to take all measures
necessary to safeguard civilian life, allow freedom
of movement and ensure the protection of civilian
infrastructure, including medical and educational
facilities, in keeping with international human rights
law and international humanitarian law.
The international community must avoid any
military imbroglio in Idlib at all costs. If it does not,
in future meetings of the Council we will be forced to
discuss its direct and deleterious consequences, such as
the possible use of chemical substances as weapons of
war against civilians and, according to United Nations
estimates, the approximately 1 million displaced people
and more than $300 million needed to respond to the
imminent humanitarian catastrophe.

S/PV. 8345

On the political front, we reiterate our firm
commitment to an inclusive political process, under the
auspices of the United Nations, in line with resolution
2254 (2015). We hope that the tripartite summit, held
today in Tehran among the Astana guarantors — the
Russian Federation, Iran and Turkey — as well as the
upcoming meetings of the Special Envoy on 10 and
11 September, will lead to consensus-based actions
for the establishment of a truly representative
constitutional committee, thereby paving the way for a
definitive settlement to the conflict. We agree with the
Special Envoy, who recently stated that it is necessary
to maintain moral pressure on the warring parties so
as to prevent a drastic military offensive and allow
more time for a sustainable solution that can combat
terrorism and save civilians.
We understand that in an increasingly multipolar
world, the balance among Powers no longer depends
solely on their economic capabilities, but also on their
military capabilities. The allies of the parties involved
in this politico-military labyrinth must seek another
mechanism or scenario to test their military might. It
is inconceivable to continue sacrificing the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people to live in peace,
stability and lasting progress at the altar of economic
and geostrategic interests. For eight years, millions
of innocent people have suffered direct consequences
of the war and its collateral damage, which is both
devastating and horrific.
Idlib cannot be compared to any other region. The
city is home not only to the fighters who settled there
with their families, following their evacuation from
Aleppo, eastern Ghouta, Dar’a and Quneitra, under the
co-called reconciliation agreement, but also to civilians
who have nothing to do with the war and have simply
sought refuge there. Hundreds of thousands of people
took refuge in Idlib because they were told they would
be safe there. Russia, Turkey and Iran had decreed it to
be a de-escalation zone, but today the warring parties
have taken those people hostage. Equatorial Guinea
calls on Russia, Turkey and Iran, as well as the United
States and Western and Gulf countries with influence
in the area, to do their utmost to ensure that those with
weapons and power will , for the first time in this war,
make civilians their top priority.
I conclude by citing Mr. Jan Egeland, head of the
United Nations humanitarian task force on Syria, who
spoke recently of the intense ongoing political and
humanitarian negotiation on Syria. He said:

18-278669/24

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

“If it succeeds we will have hundreds of thousands
of lives spared, if it fails in the next days and hours
we could see a battle more cruel than any previous
battle in the cruelest war of our generation”.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): We are grateful to the
presidency for convening today’s meeting on the
deteriorating humanitarian and security situation in
Idlib. Allow me to thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Mr. John Ging for their informative briefings.
The conflict raging in Syria and the resulting
violence and violations of international law, including
human rights law, have brought suffering to the
civilian population of Syria at a scale that is unique
in today’s world. We are concerned about the possible
intensification of hostilities in Idlib. Once again, we
stress that there is no military solution to the conflict and
that any attempt to bring about peace by force would be
counterproductive to an inclusive and credible political
process, under the auspices of the United Nations.
In the context of the current situation in Idlib, let
me reiterate Poland’s position.
First, we call on the Astana guarantors and other
actors with influence on the ground to live up to their
commitments and to take all actions necessary to
protect the civilian population of Idlib. Secondly, we
stress again the need to secure full and unhindered
humanitarian access to Syria, including Idlib, and to
take all measures necessary to enhance the protection
of humanitarian workers. Thirdly, refugees must be
given an opportunity for a safe, free and dignified
return to their homes. A major military operation
in Idlib governorate may hinder that goal and
consequently create a new wave of refugees. The Idlib
governorate, having the highest number of internally
displaced persons in all of Syria, requires our special,
cautious approach.
Our particular concern is that we are witnessing the
destruction of Syria’s crucial civilian infrastructure,
including medical and educational facilities. Such
destruction must stop immediately, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Intense bombardments and the shelling of schools and
hospitals in Idlib and other governorates not only have
an immediate and catastrophic impact on the living
conditions of civilians, but also significantly diminish
future efforts to bring about reconciliation in Syria and
to commence Syria’s major reconstruction.
10/24

07/09/2018

Poland is particularly concerned over the fate of the
most vulnerable victims of conflict: children, women
and members of religious minorities. We are alarmed
by the situation of children affected by the conflict,
especially in Idlib. Many children have been forced to
leave their homes in other parts of Syria, seeking safe
refuge in Idlib governorate, although they also face
the risk of violence, displacement and loss of family
members. The escalation of military activities would
result in a major humanitarian tragedy, with children
falling victim once again.
At the same time, Poland strongly advocates
women’s participation and empowerment in all aspects
of the process of finding a solution for the conflict in
Syria. While many men have been killed, imprisoned
or forced to leave their homes for war, women are
faced with the task of caring for their families in dire
circumstances in a display of heroism, perseverance
and resilience.
Let me conclude by emphasizing our concern about
the possibility of another chemical attack in Syria. The
use of chemical weapons is not only a horrifying act
of barbarism, but also an illegal act that could have
devastating consequences for the civilian population.
The perpetrators of such crimes must be aware that the
international community will do its best to bring them
to justice.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We welcome the convening of this meeting and the
important briefings by Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Mr. John Ging. We also appreciate their tireless efforts
and those of their teams.
Peru observes with deep regret and concern the
continuation of the conflict in Syria. We note with
alarm the prospect of a new escalation of violence in
the town of Idlib and the devastating humanitarian
consequences that it would bring. The levels of violence
and suffering registered in Aleppo and eastern Ghouta,
among other locations of the protracted conflict,
prompt us to underline the responsibility of the Council
to protect some 3 million people in Idlib, including
more than 1 million children. In a few days, we could
be talking about tens of thousands of new fatalities and
some 700,000 newly displaced persons, according to
United Nations estimates. That does not include the
wounded and the destruction of civilian infrastructure.
We must also anticipate the serious repercussions
that a new display of barbarism would have on the
18-27866

07/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

peace process that, with the support of the Council, is
being promoted by the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral. That could lead to the further destabilization
of the Middle East and to new tensions among the
permanent members of the Council, which have a special
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
In that context, we emphasize the applicability of
the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes,
as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. We
also recall that resolution 2401 (2018), which must
be enforced and implemented, calls for a ceasefire
on all Syrian territory. The Council, and especially
the countries with influence on the ground, must act
to ensure that the parties to the conflict abandon the
military track and the contempt they have shown for
international law and international humanitarian law
by acting with impunity.
Peru emphatically condemns terrorism and believes
that terrorist groups that remain in Idlib and other parts
of Syrian territory must be held accountable before
the courts for the crimes they have committed. But
we emphasize that in no case does that justify further
massacres of civilians. In that regard, we highlight the
spirit of unity and commitment expressed on Wednesday
by the 10 elected members of the Council in conveying
a message of concern that emphasizes the urgent need
to prioritize the protection of civilians in Idlib.
We hope that the Astana guarantors, meeting today
in Tehran, will be able to agree on a formula to prevent
the tragedy looming over the civilian population of Idlib,
and on that basis support the political process based on
resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex).
Dag Hammarskjöld, alluding to the horrors of
the Second World War, famously stated that the
Organization was “not created in order to bring us to
heaven, but in order to save us from hell” (SG/382,
p.7). A few months ago, however, Secretary-General
António Guterres described eastern Ghouta as “hell
on earth” (S/PV.8185, p. 2). We believe that it is time
for the Council to act with unity and commitment to
prevent Idlib from becoming a new scene of horror
and suffering.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to thank the American presidency
of the Council for organizing this meeting on the latest
developments in Syria and, more particularly, in Idlib

S/PV. 8345

governorate. We also thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura and
Mr. John Ging for their excellent briefings.
Reports of the imminent large-scale and intense
fighting between belligerents in Idlib governorate are a
source of great concern for my country, inter alia, because
of the risk of exacerbating the already dire humanitarian
situation. Indeed, of the approximate 3 million
inhabitants of Idlib governorate, 2 million — or twothirds — face pressing humanitarian needs. In addition,
according to the estimates of the United Nations and
humanitarian agencies, the resumption of fighting in
Idlib governorate would cause a massive displacement
of between 450,000 and 750,000 people.
The certain humanitarian disaster that would result
from the escalation of fighting is compounded by the
risk of the possible use of chemical weapons by the
belligerents. That tragic and alarming event, in my
delegation’s view, would once again constitute a breach
of international law on the protection of civilians in
armed conflict and undermine the international legal
mechanisms in the area of non-proliferation.
That is why Côte d’Ivoire wishes to reaffirm its
principled position that there is no alternative to the
search for peace through a frank and inclusive dialogue
in Syria. We therefore condemn any use of force as a
means of conflict resolution and urge all Syrian parties
to prioritize political dialogue, in accordance with
resolution 2254 (2015), which lays out the road map for
the peace process in the country.
In conclusion, my country calls on the parties to
the conflict in Syria to exercise restraint to prevent any
deterioration of the humanitarian and security situation,
and urges them to strictly respect their obligations
under international humanitarian law and human rights
law. It therefore calls on them to fulfil their obligations
to protect civilians in conflict situations and to refrain
from any action that could impede the delivery of
humanitarian aid to distressed populations.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Special Envoy De Mistura and
Director John Ging for the briefings. We commend their
efforts to facilitate the political process and alleviate
the humanitarian situation in Syria.
China has been closely following the political
process and humanitarian situation in Syria. We note
that some areas in Syria are rebuilding hospitals and
schools and repairing transportation, power and other

18-2786611/24

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

infrastructure. Refugees and internally displaced
persons are gradually returning to their homes. The
international community should further scale up its
humanitarian assistance by providing much-needed
help to all the areas in need within Syria.
That said, the situation in Syria remains challenging.
The political process is faltering, coupled with rampant
terrorist activities and high tensions in some parts of
Syria, especially Idlib. Given the current situation, we
call on all the relevant parties to step up their diplomatic
efforts, address issues through dialogue, and facilitate
de-escalation through dialogue. The international
community should pool its efforts and continue to
resolutely combat terrorism and consolidate the gains
achieved to date.
Meanwhile, we call on all parties to do everything
possible to avoid harming innocent civilians. All parties
are duty-bound to adhere to the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and other recognized
basic norms governing international relations, fully
respect Syrian sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, and avoid the wilful use of force or
threat of force.
China has always stood for a political settlement
to the issue of Syria, which represents the only path
to peace and stability in Syria. The international
community should provide steady support to the United
Nations as the main mediator and to Special Envoy De
Mistura in his efforts to facilitate the resumption of
the Geneva peace talks. The international community
should act on the principle of a Syrian-owned, Syrianled process and on resolution 2254 (2015) in pushing all
parties in Syria to engage in inclusive political dialogue
in search of a solution that responds to the realities on
the ground, while accommodating the concerns of all
parties. Special Envoy De Mistura will hold discussions
with the relevant parties on the establishment of a
Syrian constitutional committee. All parties should
exert their influence and push the Syrian Government
and opposition groups to move towards each other
with a view to achieving early results and adding new
momentum to the Syrian political process.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the Special
Envoy. I also thank John Ging very much, as well as
the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait for
being here with us today.
This is a terrible situation. I think that what we are
hearing today is very strong support for the primacy
12/24

07/09/2018

of the political process, as well as a very strong appeal
for there not to be an all-out military offensive against
civilians in Idlib. I would just like to echo those two
things right out front before I go into the bulk of my
remarks. I think the French representative put it very
well when he talked about the importance of this issue
for international peace and security.
I want to begin by again thanking the Special Envoy
and his team for everything they do, and obviously
the United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. We are very grateful to those
humanitarian organizations and workers who are making
tireless efforts in the most difficult circumstances to
provide aid to people across Idlib. Once again, we are
reminded of the importance of cross-border assistance
as a critical lifeline for civilians who otherwise cannot
be reached.
We very much support the urgent diplomatic
efforts being made by Turkey and the United Nations
to deal with Idlib, both on the civilian side and on the
humanitarian side. The fate of nearly 3 million people is
at stake, and we would very much appreciate a briefing
on Astana. I suspect that is not possible today, but if it
were possible we would appreciate a briefing from the
Department of Political Affairs. We hope that Russia
and Iran will use their influence to live up to their
commitments to uphold the de-escalation arrangements
that they have agreed, and we urge them to do so and
to reach a negotiated way forward with Turkey. If there
is anything that my Government can do to assist in that
process, we will happily do it.
On the military situation, like other speakers we
are very concerned at the reports in the past few days of
dozens of Russian air strikes against areas of Idlib. Local
monitoring organizations have reported 38 civilian
casualties as a result of the strikes on 4 September
alone. I have already said that nearly 3 million civilians
are at risk of their lives in Idlib. The United Nations
estimates that there are at a maximum 15,000 fighters
for the terrorist groups, which is 0.5 per cent of the total
population. We too in Britain know what it is like to
suffer from terrorism, but those figures are very stark.
I would just like to echo what the Minister said about
the doctrine of proportionality, discrimination and
precaution.
The Secretary-General has been clear that the
systematic use of indiscriminate weapons in populated
areas may amount to war crimes. We should be crystal
18-27866

07/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

clear about that. There are more babies in Idlib than
there are terrorists, and I think that should give those
engaging in military action pause for thought. The
last time we discussed the issue of the military side,
we were in the consultations room and I read out our
understanding of which Syrian military units were in
the vicinity of Idlib. In echoing the Secretary-General’s
call, I would like to read those units out in the Chamber.
I would like to make very clear that if there is a major
offensive against civilians, with mass civilian casualties
in Idlib, then those are the people that the international
community will be holding accountable for those
abuses and violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law.
Our understanding is that the overall head of the
Syrian army is the Minister of Defence, General Ali
Abdullah Ayyoub, but the primary unit deployed to the
Idlib area is the 4th Armoured Division to the west side of
Idlib. Maher Al-Assad is the overall commander of that
unit, but we believe that Major General Ali Mahmoud is
the Deputy Commander. We understand that the Syrian
Republican Guard is probably deployed to the east
side, around Abu Al-Duhur, and that its commander is
Major General Talal Makhlouf. Tiger Forces are likely
deployed to the south-east side, and their commander is
Brigadier General Suheil “The Tiger” Al-Hassan. Then
we think that there are also Second Corps and Fifth
Corps units in the area, and the commander we know
about for that is Major General Aous Aslan. As I say, if
there is a major offensive against Idlib, then, in addition
to the Syrian regime, those commanders and units will
be held accountable by the international community.
If I may, I would like to say a word about the aid
package for Idlib. The United Kingdom has announced
an additional aid package to ensure that the most
vulnerable receive the medical treatment, food, water
and support they desperately need. The $15 million in
new aid includes support to medical centres and mobile
clinics and psychological support. We are also backing
new technology that provides civilians with early
warnings, in the hope of saving lives in communities
bombarded by air strikes. Thanks to that, we believe we
have been able to warn more than 2 million people and
have reduced casualties by up to 27 per cent in areas
under heavy bombardment. However, donors should
not have to do that. Donors are not a substitute for
the Syrian regime, with Russian support, stopping the
campaign against their own civilians.

S/PV. 8345

I would like to conclude by reiterating that we
support Turkey’s efforts to reach a peaceful solution and
avert a humanitarian catastrophe. We call on Russia to
do more to restrain the Syrian authorities from attacking
Idlib and to bring about de-escalation. We also call on
all parties to respect international humanitarian law.
I will not touch on the issue of chemical weapons
because we addressed it in the Chamber yesterday
(see S/PV.8344). I would like to end by echoing the
comments made by the representative of Equatorial
Guinea with regard to the primary importance of the
political process and bringing an end to this cruel war.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s meeting on
such an urgent and grave subject. We thank Mr. Staffan
de Mistura and Mr. John Ging for their informative
briefings and continued efforts to help the people
of Syria.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is extremely
concerned about the situation in Idlib. We fear a repeat
of a horrific scenario we have seen before — the
massive use of military force with a ground campaign
by the Syrian army, air raids by Russia and support
from Iran, at the cost of thousands of innocent lives,
with disastrous humanitarian consequences. There is
no military solution that will bring about long-term
peace in Syria. We need a political transition and a
political solution. In that regard, I will focus on three
issues: first, the need to prevent a further escalation of
violence in Idlib; secondly, the humanitarian situation;
and, thirdly, the political process.
First, we must prevent further escalation in Idlib.
We must prevent further military escalation in the last
de-escalation zone in Syria. Almost 3 million people
are trapped in the Idlib area. As clearly stated by the
Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kuwait just now,
the humanitarian consequences of an all-out offensive
will be disastrous. Furthermore, the risk of regional
escalation is high, including the creation of possible new
flows of refugees. Parties must uphold international
humanitarian law throughout Syria, and in Idlib in
particular. We heard from the countries involved that
their aim to fight terrorists. Let me remind them that
any measure to counter terrorism must comply with
their obligations under international law, in particular
human rights law, international refugee law and
international humanitarian law. Combating terrorism is
no excuse for launching attacks without distinction or

18-2786613/24

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

proportionality. Combating terrorism is no excuse for
attacking innocent civilians, destroying hospitals and
killing humanitarian workers. Combating terrorism is
no excuse for creating a humanitarian disaster.
The guarantors of the Idlib de-escalation zone and
the Syrian regime must work towards a non-violent
negotiated solution. We express our strong support
for the urgent diplomatic efforts made by Turkey and
the United Nations. In view of the meeting of the
Astana guarantors in Tehran today, we call on them,
in particular Russia and Iran, to uphold the ceasefire
and their agreed de-escalation arrangements. Their
earlier commitments include the protection of civilians
as a matter of priority. They must protect civilians, not
attack them.
Secondly, with 1.4 million internally displaced
persons in Idlib, the humanitarian situation is already
of great concern. Many people in Idlib depend on
humanitarian aid for their daily survival. For the sake
of those civilians, once again, we call for the full
implementation of all Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2401 (2018), which was made
possible by our Kuwaiti and Swedish colleagues.
During the war in Syria, we have seen indiscriminate
air strikes and attacks on hospitals and schools. Now we
know that the Russian military and the Syrian military
have been informed about the exact coordinates of the
remaining hospitals in Idlib, any future attack on such
essential civilian infrastructure therefore falls under
their full responsibility. Humanitarian workers are not
a target. Attacks on hospitals and humanitarian aid
workers are an affront to human decency. Attacking
innocent doctors and nurses is a criminal act. Aid to the
people in Idlib must be made available. Parties must grant
sustained, unimpeded humanitarian access, including
through the essential cross-border mechanism. Without
that access, a humanitarian catastrophe is inevitable.
The Council should provide a positive response to the
five requests Mr. Ging mentioned earlier.
Lastly, we need an inclusive, United Nations-led
political process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015),
which includes a political transition that aims to address
the root causes of the conflict and lay to rest its source.
As I stated before, there will be no reconstruction aid
before a sustainable political transition is in place. We
fully support Staffan de Mistura and commend him and
this team on their persistent efforts.
14/24

07/09/2018

In conclusion, we will continue our efforts for
accountability for mass atrocities and the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. At the moment, one member of the
Council continues to block the referral of the situation
to the International Criminal Court. Therefore, we will
continue our efforts for accountability for the mass
atrocities committed in Syria and elsewhere, outside of
the country. Impunity cannot and will not prevail.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation would like
to thank the Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, and the Director of Operations and Advocacy
in the United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Ging, for their
briefings. We understand their immense responsibility.
Let me reiterate my delegation’s full support for
their work.
Once again, we underscore our concerns about the
possible escalation of violence in Idlib ‑ a city home to,
as mentioned earlier, approximately 3 million people,
of whom 1.4 million are internally displaced. Many are
children who could face internal displacement. That
could lead to a humanitarian disaster and increase
the number of people who have lost their lives to the
conflict over the past eight years. In that regard, we
believe that there is an urgent need to fully implement
resolution 2401 (2018). We hope that the meeting taking
place among the signatories of the Astana agreements
will shed light on how the Security Council can meet
its aspirations. We call on the parties to continue to
monitor the implementation of those agreements.
We reiterate that we must prevent the escalation of
violence and instead provide humanitarian assistance
to the 2.1 million civilians in need in Idlib. Ongoing
coordination is essential in order to facilitate better
access for humanitarian convoys, including the crossborder convoys.
We believe that any effort or measure to combat
terrorism necessarily requires protecting civilian
lives, including complying with obligations under
international law, including the Charter of the United
Nations and the relevant international conventions
and protocols. We are keen to hear the suggestions of
Mr. De Mistura with regard to protecting civilians.
We stress the need to ensure that populated
areas and the entire territory are cleared of explosive
remnants of war, including in the city of Raqqa. That
is a crucially important and urgent task, not only to
18-27866

07/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8345

reduce the risks posed to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance but also since steps must be taken to avoid
fatalities among medical crews, humanitarian workers
and ultimately the civilian population as they return
to their cities of origin, including in Idlib province.
Moreover, we underscore that any returns must be
voluntary, unimpeded, dignified and secure.

peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis and in response to
the urgent and difficult situation in Idlib. We also thank
Director John Ging of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for his briefing. We commend
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners for
continuing to provide much-needed assistance to all in
need under extremely challenging circumstances.

We reiterate the importance that all parties respect
their obligations under international law, especially
international humanitarian law. When we say “all
parties”, we intend what was noted by the representative
of Equatorial Guinea: not only those States directly
involved but also those States financing the armed
groups present in Idlib.

We are concerned about the situation in Idlib and
the possibility of a humanitarian disaster should the
fighting escalate. We recognize that there are United
Nations-designated terrorists in Idlib, who must be
defeated through coordinated international efforts.
What worries us is that military escalation would
aggravate the humanitarian, crisis in a province
where there are approximately 1.4 million people
who have already been displaced, and exacerbate the
suffering of vulnerable groups. We therefore believe
that everything possible should be done to protect
the lives of millions of civilians. In that regard, we
appreciate ongoing consultations, particularly among
the Astana guarantors, as Idlib is a de-escalation zone.
We sincerely hope that the key summit of the Astana
guarantors that is taking place today will lead to a
productive and meaningful outcome in finding a more
sustainable solution to the complex situation in Idlib.

We must ensure the protection of civilians, schools
and hospitals. It is imperative that such civilian objects
not be used as the targets for attacks, and likewise the
workforce of the various humanitarian agencies on the
ground must be protected.
We reject any attempts to split up Syria. It is up to
the Syrian people to freely determine their future and
their political leadership in a context of sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. We must
therefore continue supporting the efforts of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria.
In conclusion, we stress that there can be no military
solution to the conflict in Syria and the only alternative
is through an inclusive political process of dialogue
negotiated, agreed and led by the Syrian people through
the implementation of the final statement of the Syrian
National Dialogue Congress, held in Sochi in January,
and the establishment of a constitutional committee, a
process that should be facilitated by the United Nations
in keeping with the Geneva process and in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).
Finally, while underscoring this matter is the
responsibility of the Security Council and its 15
members, as the Permanent Representative of Peru said,
the permanent members bear particular responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We can only hope that in their decision-making it is
not their military interests that prevail but rather the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We thank Special Envoy
Staffan de Mistura for his briefing. We support and
appreciate his indefatigable efforts in the search for a

We also call on all States that have influence over
Syrian actors to play a constructive role in the efforts to
avoid a humanitarian disaster in Idlib. We are convinced
that it is in such difficult situations that all those with
influence should work together in a genuine spirit of
cooperation, which would demonstrate the primacy and
power of diplomacy.
While we advocate a sustainable solution to the
Idlib situation, the humanitarian work of the United
Nations and its humanitarian partners should also be
fully supported so as to continue reaching all those in
need of humanitarian assistance. That will require the
protection of civilians and humanitarian workers. In
that regard, the offer of the Special Envoy to intervene to
help ensure the safety of civilians should be considered
with the ultimate objective of doing everything possible
to protect civilians in the province.
We further reiterate that all parties should ensure
safe, unimpeded and sustained humanitarian access.
In addition, as we have heard from Director Ging,
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
need additional funding to respond to the growing
humanitarian needs and to implement the preparedness

18-2786615/24

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

plan that he mentioned. Hence, we encourage all donors
to extend their generous assistance.
Finally, the people of Syria have experienced
unspeakable tragedy over the past seven years.
What they need and deserve is a comprehensive and
sustainable political solution that meets their legitimate
aspirations. While we fully recognize that avoiding
further military escalation for the sake of civilians is
our current priority, the crisis in Idlib and across all of
Syria can be resolved only through political dialogue.
There is no military solution. Therefore, at this highly
decisive and critical time, the Security Council should
support the tireless efforts of the Special Envoy both to
avoid the worst-case scenario in Idlib and to establish
a constitutional committee that could lead to the
reinvigoration of the political process, in accordance
with resolution 2254 (2015).
In that regard, we note with appreciation that the
Special Envoy has scheduled consultations for next
week with relevant States that may have influence on
the process. Ultimately, it is through such consultations
and, more important, a comprehensive, Syrian-led and
-owned dialogue facilitated by the United Nations, that
lasting solutions to the crisis in Idlib and the whole of
Syria may be found.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We join others in
thanking Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and the
Director of Operations and Advocacy in the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John
Ging, for their comprehensive and very informative
briefings on the matter before us. Current developments
around Idlib province could easily lead to a deterioration
of the humanitarian situation in the region, together
with further human casualties among civilians.
Recalling that the Russian military forces were
invited by the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
to counter terrorism in the country, we believe that will
enable the definitive liberation of the entire territory
of the country, with favourable conditions created for
a political settlement on the basis of resolution 2254
(2015).
We encourage the guarantor States of the Astana
process and other stakeholders to continue consultations
on the search for peaceful ways to liberate Idlib province
from terrorist elements. Separating the terrorist groups
from moderate opposition forces that are ready for
peaceful negotiations with Government forces could be
a way forward, as Staffan de Mistura suggests.
16/24

07/09/2018

We urge the parties to the conflict not to allow a
humanitarian catastrophe to occur. To let the situation
unravel would be to negate all the good efforts to resolve
the Syrian crisis in the framework of the Geneva talks
and the Astana process.
Kazakhstan supports the intention of Mr. De
Mistura to hold meetings on 10 and 11 September within
the framework of the Astana process, especially as the
situation around Idlib is escalating. We appreciate the
constructive role of the United Nations Special Envoy
in the process of seeking a political settlement in Syria.
We hope that the Tehran summit of the Presidents
of the guarantor States of the Astana process — Russia,
Turkey and Iran — will promote a mutually acceptable
decision to restore confidence between the parties
in conflict, facilitate progress on the humanitarian
situation and invigorate the process towards a
political solution.
We also support the efforts of the guarantor States
of the Astana process to assist Syrians in restoring
unity in the country and achieve a political settlement
of the ongoing conflict through inclusive dialogue. That
can be achieved by supporting a constitution backed by
the Syrian people under appropriate United Nations
supervision. Kazakhstan calls for stepping up joint
efforts aimed at implementing the confidence-building
measures arrived at within the framework of the
Astana process, including the release of detainees and
abductees, the handing over of bodies, the identification
of missing persons and other arrangements.
We believe that the international community
should direct its joint efforts at creating the conditions
for settling the intra-Syrian conflict by exclusively
peaceful means in order to rebuild this ruined country
and address the complex humanitarian situation. We
must also consider creating appropriate conditions for
the return of Syria’s numerous refugees. Kazakhstan
believes that the active restoration of Syria must
continue, regardless of jurisdictions. Kazakhstan is
ready to do its utmost to address all issues related to
regional and global security.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): The Deputy Foreign Minister
of Kuwait also spoke on behalf of Sweden this morning,
so I can be very brief and reiterate some of the key
points that he and others made.
I think that the way in which Idlib is different
from Aleppo, eastern Ghouta and Dara’a has been
18-27866

07/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

clearly stated. The people there have nowhere left to
flee to. The size of the population, 3 million, has been
mentioned, and it includes many children and internally
displaced persons. The catastrophic consequences of a
full-scale military escalation have been highlighted,
not least by this morning’s briefers, Mr. John Ging and
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. Many have expressed their
grave concern about the escalating military action
by Syria and Russia, which have been reminded,
along with other parties, of their obligation to protect
civilians in accordance with international humanitarian
law. Theirs is the primary responsibility for preventing
further humanitarian disaster.
It has also been stressed around the table how
important it is that the Astana guarantors, who are
meeting at the highest level today, immediately
implement their own de-escalation agreement in
Idlib and prioritize the protection of civilians. I echo
the many speakers who have emphasized how urgent
it is that the guarantors act now in order to avoid the
enormous humanitarian catastrophe that would unfold
before our eyes if there were to be a large-scale military
offensive in Idlib.
So while it is clear where the responsibilities
lie, it is also incumbent on the Council to continue
to explore all meaningful preventive options. We
have therefore advocated for this meeting in order to
enable the Council to prevent this scenario, to express
our support to Mr. De Mistura and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and to push for
a political solution. We hope that the clear public calls
that have been made around the table today and by the
10 elected members earlier this week and the European
Union members yesterday (see S/PV.8344) will have the
desired effect.
But we are also prepared to sit down in close
consultation with Mr. De Mistura today, over the
weekend or whenever, if need be, in order to explore
any concrete meaningful suggestions and proposals
to ensure that the Council also collectively shoulders
its responsibility and explores and fully exhausts all
possible preventive actions.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura and Mr. Ging
for their briefings. The United States presidency has
formulated the topic of today’s meeting in a curious
way. It has been convened at the initiative of some
Council members of the Security Council to consider

S/PV. 8345

the situation in the Middle East, with an emphasis on
the situation in Idlib. It would appear that Idlib is some
kind of separate State entity. We would like to remind
the Council that it is an integral part of the Syrian Arab
Republic, whose sovereignty and territorial integrity
we hope no one questions.
In that connection, Mr. De Mistura’s statement
to the effect that the Syrian authorities have every
right to fight for the restoration of control throughout
their territory is very apposite. Furthermore, it is an
obligation of the Syrian Government towards its
people. We should remember that in eastern Aleppo,
Ghouta, the southern suburbs of Damascus, Qalamoun,
Dara’a, Quneitra and other difficult areas, it was not
peaceful civilians who were evacuated, but rather fullon fighters who had refused to lay down their weapons
and return to a normal life as law-abiding citizens.
Nobody disputes the fact that in the Idlib
de-escalation zone there is a large number of Jabhat
Al-Nusra terrorists who pose a threat to international
peace and security. It is that large, militarily capable
terrorist group’s operations that is determining the
current situation in that part of Syria, and its members
are striving to keep the area under their control, and the
fact that the situation is at a standstill is unacceptable.
The de-escalation agreements stipulate that they
are temporary, and the relevant Security Council
resolutions clearly state that none of the cessation-ofhostilities regimes apply to terrorist organizations. The
fight against them must go on, and in that regard we
have consistently called on the international community
to act decisively, according to the same rules and on
a basis of cooperation. It is self-evident that it is not
acceptable to preserve terrorist potential for political
aims, whatever they may be. It is not acceptable to make
all kinds of efforts to create obstacles to the return of
Syrian refugees to a country that has largely been rid
of terrorists. It is not acceptable to make every effort
to obstruct the process of rebuilding Syria and subject
it to political conditions. That only attests to the fact
that, in reality, our Western partners have absolutely
no interest in the fate and plight of ordinary civilians.
The terrorists in Idlib are taking aggressive
action. They have taken millions of civilians hostage
and are conducting raids on surrounding areas and
shelling nearby towns and villages. The cessation-ofhostilities regime is being violated dozens of times
every day. Russian troops have destroyed 55 unmanned
aerial vehicles armed with explosives flown out of the

18-2786617/24

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

de-escalation zone. On 4 September, Russian aircraft
carried out strikes on confirmed Al-Nusra targets, far
from residential areas, in Idlib province. They were
caches where drones and their munitions were stored
and kept. A storage site for man-portable air defence
systems was also destroyed with high-precision
weapons. Where did the terrorists get hold of such
large quantities of foreign military equipment? Was
it directly from the manufacturers? Or was it from
the so-called moderate opposition, which has had no
problems getting external support? That is an issue that
the relevant United Nations bodies should investigate
without delay.
Al-Nusra is focusing its efforts on consolidating
radically minded illegal armed groups around it. The
terrorist leaders are have been making fierce efforts to
block the desire of commanders in the field and leaders
of local governing bodies to get out of these groups,
going as far as eliminating them physically. A typical
example of that approach has been the destruction of
groups from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant that
refused to join Jabhat Al-Nusra and whose remnants, as
many as 500 people, had lost control over regions they
had previously held and gone underground.
Here are a few statistics. In the Idlib de-escalation
zone there are altogether 40 to 45 armed groups whose
members total about 50,000. The greatest resistance
comes from Jabhat Al-Nusra, with 16,000 members,
and other unreconciled groups, totalling 11,300, whose
core consists of foreign fighters and Syrians who have
the blood of supporters of Damascus on their hands.
They include Hizb Al-Islami Al-Turkistani, with some
700 members; Jaysh Al-Izza, with as many as 1,000
members; the radical ranks of Ahrar Al-Sham, with as
many as 800 members; Faylak Al-Rahman, with about
5,500 members; Haras Al-Din, about 1,500 members;
Nusrat Al-Islam, about 1,900 members; and Jabhat
Al-Wataniya lil-Tahrir, with as many as 800 members.
A few armed groups — Jabhat Al-Wataniya lilTahrir and the radical ranks of Ahrar Al-Sham — are
completely dependent on Al-Nusra. Furthermore, many
adherents of those groups are unreconciled because
they are forced to be, remaining loyal to the extremists
out of fear for their lives and the safety of their families.
However, there are still some groups, whose
numbers total around 13,300, that are operating in the
zone and are willing to reconcile. They include about
2,300 from the Free Syrian Army, 4,000 from Nusrat
Al-Islam, 5,000 from Ahrar Al-Sham, 2,000 from
18/24

07/09/2018

Nour Al-Din Al-Zenki, and others. Besides that, most
villages are held by local self-defence units of between
30 and 50 people, about 10,000 altogether, who are also
disposed to make peace. As many as 80 per cent of the
inhabitants of Idlib are sick of the extremists’ tyranny
and support reverting to the embrace of the State as
soon as possible, a mood shared by some fighters who
realize the futility of armed resistance. That has been
encouraged by the success of reconciliation in other
de-escalation zones, security guarantees provided
by Russia and work that is being done to ensure
refugees’ return. I want to point out that schools and
medical facilities financed by the Government are still
functioning in Idlib and funds from the budget are
being earmarked for supporting vital infrastructure and
paying civil servants’ salaries.
The Russian Federation is making major efforts
to resolve the Idlib situation through negotiations. To
that end, intense consultations are being held with the
Astana process partners and with those on the ground
who are actually controlling the situation. A top-level
meeting of the guarantor countries is being held in
Tehran today.
One effective solution would be to separate the
armed opposition groups that want to participate in
the political process from the terrorists, who remain a
legitimate target for elimination. Many speakers today
have called on the Astana process guarantors. We have
also frequently turned to our Western partners, but they
have not heeded our calls. Unfortunately, the Western
capitals led by Washington that are trying to prevent
the fall of their extremism-inclined clients’ regime
have not used their influence or helped to encourage
a separation. Instead, they are hatching another round
of aggressive plans around high-profile chemical
provocations. We are under the distinct impression that
in fomenting hysteria over Idlib, our Western partners
are trying to prevent the fall of the last major terrorist
stronghold in Syria in any way they can, and this is
far more about geopolitics than about the humanitarian
concern for the protection of civilians that they claim.
The possibility of joining in the initiatives for
reconciliation and thereby strengthening the positive
trends in Syria is still there. Staffan de Mistura, who is
in active contact with the Syrian opposition within the
framework of his political mandate, could also send it
the same message. We affirm our full commitment to
a Syrian-led political process on the basis of resolution
2254 (2015). I will not list everything we have
18-27866

07/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

undertaken to advance the political process. We call on
other partners to make a real contribution to it.
The propaganda campaign currently being
fomented by Damascus’s opponents around Idlib
follows the scripts for the scenarios that were predicted
when Aleppo and eastern Ghouta were being liberated,
but neither of those apocalyptic prognoses materialized,
unlike in Raqqa, which has been bombed into the
ground by the so-called coalition. The subject of the
military occupation by Western countries of areas
of Syria, including its humanitarian aspects, clearly
warrants special discussion in the Security Council.
The President: I will now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of the United
States of America.
I would first like to thank Mr. Ging and Mr. De
Mistura for giving us the latest information about the
dire situation in Idlib. I also want to welcome the
statement of grave concern about Idlib that the Security
Council’s 10 elected members delivered yesterday.
The Al-Assad regime and its enablers, Russia and
Iran, have a playbook for this war. First, they surround
a civilian area. Next, they make the preposterous claim
that everyone in the area is a terrorist, so that every
man, woman and child becomes a target. Then comes
the so-called starve-and-surrender campaign, where
they keep attacking until the people no longer have
food, clean water or shelter. It is a playbook of death.
The regime has spent the last seven years refining it
with Russia and Iran’s help. It has happened so many
times before. In July, it was Dara’a and south-western
Syria where the regime trapped and besieged civilians.
In February, it was eastern Ghouta. The year before,
it was eastern Aleppo, and before that, places like
Madaya and Hamah. In the process, the regime has left
behind a country of rubble. The atrocities committed
by Al-Assad will be a permanent stain on history and a
black mark for the Council, which Russia has blocked
over and over again from taking action to help.
Now an offensive against Idlib is starting. Despite
the clear warnings of the President of the United States
and other world leaders, air strikes by Russia and the
regime have already begun against civilian areas. The
United States has been very clear with Russia and the
broader international community. We consider any
assault on Idlib to be a dangerous escalation of the
conflict in Syria. If Al-Assad, Russia and Iran continue,
the consequences will be dire. We heard earlier that

S/PV. 8345

3 million people are at risk in Idlib, 99 per cent of them
innocent civilians. To put that in perspective, that is
7.5 times the number of the people whom the Al-Assad
regime besieged in eastern Ghouta. It is nearly 11
times the number of people whom the Al-Assad regime
trapped in eastern Aleppo. At the time, we said that
the level of civilian suffering was unbearable. If the
Council can even imagine it, Idlib would be even
worse. The Al-Assad regime must halt its offensive.
Russia and Iran, as countries with influence over the
regime, must stop the catastrophe. It is in their power
to do so. Our Russian colleagues claim that they are
seeking a political solution to the Syrian conflict, but
they do nothing to help us get there. If they support an
offensive in Idlib, the world will know where Russia
really stands when it comes to supporting peace talks.
The United States is deeply concerned about the
presence of terrorists in Idlib. There are many ways
to target those groups effectively without causing a
humanitarian catastrophe. But when Russia and the
Al-Assad regime say they want to counter terrorism,
they actually mean that they want to bomb schools,
hospitals and homes. They want to punish the civilians
who had the courage to rise up against Al-Assad. When
the regime calls the brave White Helmets terrorists, we
know that they are not serious about fighting terrorism.
The United States will not cooperate with Russia in the
Al-Assad regime’s slaughter of innocent civilians.
Russia also wants the United States and the
international community to provide money to rebuild
Syria. To translate that, they want us to clean up all
the roads, bridges and homes that Russian jets, Iranianbacked militias and Syrian shells have destroyed.
The United States will not consider such requests for
reconstruction aid until we see concrete results from a
genuine political process that ends the war and offers
freedom to the Syrian people. No one else should either.
That would be absurd. The United States taxpayer is
certainly not going to subsidize Al-Assad’s campaign
of destruction.
There is time still to pursue an alternative. The
United States wants to see such a political solution
emerge in Syria, one that is based on the road map
set out in resolution 2254 (2015). That calls for a real
dialogue among Syrians and the drafting of a new
constitution, leading to genuine free and fair elections.
But for Russia, continuing to support that murderous
dictator and isolating itself from the international

18-2786619/24

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

community is the wrong choice. An offensive in Idlib
will only leave Syria weaker and more broken and
create generations of Syrians who will never forget the
heinous and senseless brutality of the Al-Assad regime
and its allies.
We urge Russia to consider its options carefully,
stop Al-Assad’s assault on Idlib and work with us — with
the United Nations and international partners — to find
peace at last for Syria. The Secretary-General and the
overwhelming majority of the members of the Council
have made their position very clear: Russia needs to live
up to its responsibility and put an end to the fighting.
There are no other options for the people of Syria. They
have suffered enough.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I again give the floor to Mr. De Mistura for any
additional comments that he may wish to make.
Mr. De Mistura: I thank you, Madam President,
for again giving me the floor. For this meeting is
potentially crucial, as we continue to hope that the
meeting in Tehran will be as well — from what we
hear, there have been important discussions. Time is of
the essence.
Let me start with a picture. I do not know whether
Council members can see it properly, but depicted
here is an image of women holding candles. They are
civilians, as are 98.8 per cent of the people in Idlib.
They are our top priority.
I received a letter from 1,000 women in
Idlib — women and mothers, not terrorists — who have
been urging all of us to remember that they are civilians,
internally displaced people, teachers, doctors, nurses,
engineers, writers and homemakers, and that they come
from many parts of Syria. Idlib therefore symbolizes the
mosaic that is Syria. It is true that many of the fighters
who were evacuated — or decided to reconcile, evacuate
or whatever the terminology was — also went there, but
they are a very small group in comparison with those I
am referring to. In their letter, the women stated:
“We invite you, Mr. De Mistura, to Idlib to see for
yourself and tell everyone in the world that we are
civilians of Idlib whose voices have been silenced
and are not being heard. Civilians have been
suffering over the past years, and we are hoping
that they will not have to suffer any longer. We
20/24

07/09/2018

want a country without war, and we want a future
in which we can live.”
They too are against terrorism, but they cannot
show that because the situation is very difficult.
However, they are not expecting to be bombed while
terrorists are being identified or addressed.
Let me go into some more substantive aspects.
The reason that all of us were very eager to meet
today is because there was an important meeting in
Tehran among the Heads of State of Iran, Turkey and
Russia. As we are aware, they have been intensely
discussing future formulas for Idlib. We do not know
the details of what was discussed or what the outcome
is. What I got from their meeting is that time is needed
and time is of the essence. I hope that more time will
be given for discussions among them and among all
of us in order to avoid what we all call, and President
Erdoğan repeated again today, a potential catastrophe.
There were reports that President Erdoğan put
some ideas on the table, and I understand that they were
quite substantive. We have not seen them yet, and we
are looking forward to hearing more when we meet our
Turkish partners and colleagues early next week — and
perhaps the Council will be hearing more about them.
The signals indicate that they intend to continue talking
about how to implement some ideas. On that basis, let
me also propose my own idea. Actually, it is an idea I
heard from civil society. I know some people say “civil
society” when they may be referring to terrorists, but
the people I am referring to are very normal people who
have been expressing fear about being where they are
and about what could happen.
The key dilemma that we are hearing all the
time — and it is indeed a dilemma; I feel it too — has
to do with how one squares a terrible circle having
to do with the fact of the presence of a number of
United Nations-listed terrorists. We know that they are
terrorists, as they have been clearly identified, but they
are a small number in comparison with the 2.9 million
people. Then there are almost 3 million people who are
just in between and would not like to end up in between.
They key word that I have been hearing, which
was also mentioned in Tehran and which we have been
hearing for at least three years, is “separation”. How
do you separate listed terrorist groups and other armed
groups that are not terrorists and can be “reconciled” — or
at least one can take a different approach in addressing
18-27866

07/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

them — and the general population? I think there is
even a reference in paragraph 4 of the joint statement
made in Tehran on that. Let us therefore address that
aspect. That is where we need more creativity.
I believe one Government official publicly asked
why the United Nations did not come up with some
ideas on how to separate them. I agree that it is not
easy. However, here is a potential plan: turning the
table. We have been saying that there are no more
Idlibs — I have been saying it and Council members
have been saying it, and rightly. However, are Council
members sure that within Idlib there are no more
Idlibs? Let me explain: perhaps the population should
not be moving away. The people that should be moving
out of the population centres and the villages are the
fighters — the Al-Nusra Front.
That type of idea is potentially doable and is based
on some assumptions. The first assumption is that the
large majority, that is, 98.5 or 98.8 per cent, of the
population in Idlib are civilians, and they have a voice.
They are telling us that. They want to use that voice.
And they can use that voice in order to produce the
separation we are talking about. The second assumption
is that Turkey is generally very worried about a potential
catastrophe. We heard that from President Erdoğan.
Turkey has influence — we know it, Turkey knows
it — on armed groups present in the area, and it can
exert that influence.
Russia, Iran and the Government of Syria state
that their priority is to defeat terrorists in Idlib, or at
least to separate them. How can we not agree on that?
If that is the case, the main objective of a plan would
be to first spare the lives of civilians and to avoid a
mass exodus, because that would be a problem. We can
handle 700,000 or 800,000, but there are 3 million of
them. In which direction will they go? Towards Turkey
or towards the Government area, where they are afraid
to go? It is therefore important to avoid that effect.
Secondly, we may be able to see whether we can
assist separating the population de facto from the
extremists and terrorists, and the terrorists from other
groups. What could such a plan consist of? Ideally, all
militant fighters should be provided with a deadline to
move their own military presence and bases away — I
repeat, away — from population centres and villages.
Population centres would therefore remain under the
control of the civilian local councils and local police.
That would apply in particular to members of Al-Nusra,

S/PV. 8345

who should be notified by the guarantors — especially
including Turkey, which has the capacity to send strong
messages to them — to evacuate houses and villages.
At the same time — and this is the message that I
received from the population — a media campaign
would be needed to indicate that this is what has been
asked of those armed groups, namely, to move out. “Do
not remain in my house. Do not remain in my city.”
Three million people can be mobilized in that context.
Do we have examples of that? Such social
mobilization has already been increasing. We have
seen not only candle lights, but demonstrations without
Al-Nusra’s banner. There was an attempt today by
Al-Nusra to actually fly its own flag. The people
said, “No, we do not want that; we want just to remind
everyone that we are civilians”. Three million people
have a voice, which they can use if they know that we
are serious. That would require, of course that, at the
same time the Russian Federation ensure this type of
plan, together with Turkey, which would be a major
player in such an endeavour, and that the population
be made aware and mobilized to actually express their
voice to tell the fighters that there would be no aerial
attacks or major military attacks on any population
centre. Otherwise, all this would be futile.
This is not the only plan and could be one of
many; for all I know, it could be the plan that President
Erdoğan has proposed to President Putin. I really do
not know. This plan is based on the common sense of
the people whom the United Nations is supposed to
represent sometimes — is that not true? — especially in
the kind of situation in which they now find themselves.
Russia and Turkey, above all, should be the guarantors,
together with Iran, of such a plan. Perhaps, the Security
Council could then support it.
In conclusion, I believe that we — including
me — are constantly raising concerns, stating how
tragic and terrible the situation could become and
warning about it, while we need to have some concrete
plans. I heard of one such plan from the people of Idlib.
The President: I thank Mr. De Mistura for sharing
that additional information from the citizens of Syria.
I now give the floor to the representative of Syria.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to provide the Security Council
with some information concerning the Astana process.
The Astana process — during which, as Council

18-2786621/24

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

members know, I participated in its deliberations
leading to the Astana 4 agreement — is intended
to reach an understanding aimed at establishing
de-escalation zones within Syria. That understanding
was temporary for six months, renewable in the event
that the armed groups that participated in reaching
the Astana 4 agreement respected the ceasefire and
disassociated themselves from terrorist groups. That
has not happened in Idlib.
Those armed groups refused to dissociate
themselves from terrorist groups. Rather, to be
precise, the armed groups did not refuse to dissociate
themselves; it was the same sponsors of those armed
groups and terrorist groups that refused to do so
while the armed groups had agreed to the Astana 4
agreement. Thus, the disassociation did not happen in
Idlib. In addition, the terrorists in Idlib launched 400
drones targeting the Russian Hmeimim base in Latakia.
They have also bombarded Aleppo city almost daily
for more than a year-and-a-half since we adopted the
Astana 4 agreement. Therefore, whoever says that Idlib
is a de-escalation zone is wrong, being unaware of the
situation on the ground. There is no de-escalation zone
in Idlib because armed groups have not respected the
provisions of the Astana agreement.
This is just an introduction for members of the
Council to explain what we mean by the Astana
process, its understanding and how we have reached
the current situation in Idlib. Of course, the story dates
back earlier. As the Council knows, it started at the
Vienna conference in November 2015, in which Syria
did not participate and to which it was not even invited.
At that conference, it was decided that Jordan would
prepare lists determining who is and is not a terrorist.
Saudi Arabia was asked to decide who represented
and did not represent the opposition. So far that has
not happened, which explains the current situation.
The countries sponsoring terrorism do not want to
distinguish between terrorists and armed opposition.
The Astana process tried to find a solution
through the establishment of de-escalation zones.
Unfortunately, the process has failed in Idlib for the
same reason because the sponsors of the armed and
terrorist groups failed to respect the decisions made in
Vienna Conference in 2014 and the Astana 4 agreement.
My British colleague said earlier that there are 50,000
terrorists in Idlib. Mr. De Mistura said that there are
very few gunmen in Idlib, but I would say to my dear
colleague the British Ambassador that we are talking
22/24

07/09/2018

about 50,000 terrorists. Could she imagine some day
seeing 50,000 terrorists in Manchester, wreaking
havoc, while we call them the moderate British armed
opposition? Is it imaginable that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs would provide
them with humanitarian aid so as to sustain them in
Manchester? That would be absurd.
It is truly ironic that many States Members of
the Organization are now facing an unprecedented
challenge, namely, that the presidency of the Council
is simultaneously playing the role of adversary and
arbiter. Yesterday, Madam President, you forced the
discussion on Nicaragua onto the Security Council’s
agenda, although the situation in that country does not
constitute a threat to international peace and security.
Today, you are forcing a discussion on Idlib, which is
a dear part of my country. It will be Venezuela’s turn
tomorrow, followed by that of Iran, according to our
understanding of the current month’s programme
of work.
The bitter hostility directed towards us for decades
has never been our choice because we are one of the
founding Members of the United Nations. We believe
in peace and in sparing humankind the scourge of
war. It has become common practice for three Western
countries that are permanent members of the Security
Council to use their presidency of the Council to rally
others against my country and Government. They
hold hundreds of meetings, ring alarm bells, level
accusations against us and use menacing language
whenever the Syrian army and its allies make progress
in countering the armed terrorist groups that are the
tools used by those countries.
For the thousandth time, we underscore in this
Chamber that the Governments of those three Western
countries and their tools in the region are the main and
direct cause of the suffering of our people inside and
outside the country. They fuel the conflict in Syria and
do their utmost to perpetuate by investing in the takfiri,
Wahhabi and Saudi terrorism that they invented in the
1980s. Their intelligence services devised deceptive
names for the terrorists, such as the Caliphate State,
the Army of Islam, the Soldiers of Islam, the Al-Nusra
Front, the Turkistan Islamic Army and the Nur Al-Din
Al-Zenki Movement. All those names have absolutely
nothing to do with Syria. They use such groups as a tool
of their foreign policy to exact revenge from countries
that reject their diktats.
18-27866

07/09/2018

The situation in the Middle East

Any action taken by the Syrian Government to
expel terrorist organizations from the Syrian province
of Idlib — Idlib is not in Somalia — is a legitimate,
sovereign right under international law, the Charter
of the United Nations, Security Council resolutions
on counter-terrorism and the Astana agreements.
Such action is ttaken in response to the demands of
millions of Syrians, including the people living in Idlib
who are besieged by terrorist organizations. Every
day, the Government receives thousands of appeals
from our people in Idlib, asking us to liberate them
from terrorism.
No country or entity has the right to curtail our
sovereign right or use the suffering of civilians in
Idlib as a pretext for political or media bartering
in order to dissuade the Syrian Government from
restoring security, stability and normalcy to that Syrian
province. Defending terrorist groups operating in Idlib
and surrounding areas is a desperate attempt to save
such groups and prolong their existence in preparation
for recycling them and then sending them as heavily
armed “moderate” oppositions to other countries, such
as Yemen, Iraq, Afghanistan and Nigeria.
The Syrian State is deeply committed to ensuring
the safety of its people. That is why we have clearly
stated that reconciliation is our priority. We gave
armed groups in Idlib plenty of time to lay down their
arms, become part of the reconciliation process and
disassociate themselves from terrorist organizations
not covered in the Astana 4 agreement. In that regard,
those who facilitated the entry of foreign terrorist
fighters into my country — the United Nations and
the Secretariat refer to them as non-State actors, as
opposed to terrorists; the French Ambassador uses the
term “jihadists”, not “terrorists” — in particular the
Turkish Government, still have a chance to remove
them from Idlib province, just as they did with elements
of the White Helmets who were sent to Idlib, with the
cooperation of Israel and Jordan, in order to commit
further terrorist crimes with chemical weapons.
If armed terrorist groups refuse to lay down their
weapons and leave Syria, the Syrian Government is
prepared to shoulder its humanitarian responsibilities
and take all the necessary measures to protect civilians;
ensure them safe corridors for leaving Idlib; and
provide them with shelter, food and medical care, just
as in other, similar situations. The aim is to liberate
the province of Idlib from the Al-Nusra Front, which
is a designated terrorist organization, alongwith other

S/PV. 8345

affiliated terrorist groups not covered by the Astana
agreements. The Syrian Government has also called
upon all international organizations operating in Syria
to prepare to meet urgent humanitarian needs.
Speaking of the Al-Nusra Front, I note that the
United States, Britain, France and Ukraine continued
for one full year in this Council to refuse our call to add
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham — which means the Al-Nusra
Front, which means Al-Qaida, which means the
criminals who attacked New York — to the Council’s
terrorist list. However, a month ago we suddenly heard
that Washington, D.C., had approved the designation
of Hayat Tahrir al-Sham as a terrorist group affiliated
with the Al-Nusra Front, which means Al-Qaida.
The Syrian Arab Republic is committed to
countering and uproot terrorisming and to liberate
all Syrian territories from terrorism and foreign
occupation in all its forms and manifestations. Support
for Syria today is the litmus test of good intentions,
compliance with international law and the Charter and
of credibility in the war against terrorism. We have
provided information to the Council on the intention
of terrorist organizations and the White Helmets to
use chemical substances in order to blame the Syrian
Government and pave the way for yet another tripartite
act of aggression. We call on those three countries
with influence on terrorist organizations to prevent
them from using weapons or chemical substances as a
pretext to allow interference and direct aggression by
their sponsors against my country.
I would like to inform the Council of the good
news that investing in terrorism in Syria has failed.
Liberating Idlib from the Al-Nusra Front and other
terrorist organizations would be the last nail in their
coffin. It would crush the hopes of those who invested
billions of dollars in terrorism and whose cries have
echoed in the halls of the Organization, just as they did
when the Syrian army liberated the eastern districts
of Aleppo, eastern Ghouta, Dar’a, Quneitra and their
rural areas.
In conclusion, I would like to respond to my
colleague, the Deputy Foreign Minister of Kuwait.
I remind him that Waleed Al-Tabtabaie, a member of
the Kuwaiti National Assembly, organized a campaign
to send terrorists to Syria in 2012. The campaign was
called “Go fight for jihad in Syria”. I am speaking here
about a member of the Kuwaiti Parliament, supported
of course by terrorist takfiris and salafis who are also

18-2786623/24

S/PV.8345

The situation in the Middle East

members of Parliament in Kuwait. Another Kuwaiti,
Shafi Al-Ajmi, who was added to the list of terrorists
at our request, although other members had refused
to do so for several years, claims that he is a religious
leader. He sent thousands of terrorists and billions of
dollars to support terrorism in my country. In 2012, The
New York Times published a long article on a member
of the Kuwaiti army, one Sergeant Al-Mutairi, alleging

24/24

07/09/2018

that he had sent terrorists and $500 million to sponsor
terrorism in my country. That is what we received from
our brothers in Kuwait. Kuwait calls us brothers but
I do not know what kind of brothers these men are.
Cain and Abel were not like that. When we stood by
Kuwait’s side, we did not send terrorists to Kuwait. We
sent military forces to protect Kuwait.
The meeting rose at noon.

18-27866
