MEETING:

NEW

1 I DECEMBER

1973

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/

Adoption

bf the agenda

1757)

. . . . , , . . . . . . , . . . . .. , ,. . . .. ,. . .

,. . , , . . . . , , .

1

., . . .. , . . . . . ,. . , ,. , . . , . ..

1

The situation in Namibia:
(0) Letter dated 4 December
1973 from the Permanent Reprusentatives of
Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/l 1145);
(b) Report by the Secretary-General
on the implementation
of Security Council
resolution
323 (1972) concerning the question of Namibia (S/10921 and
Corr.1)
. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .. . .. . . . .. . .. . . .. .. .

1

I

SlPV.1757

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document,
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEENHUNDREDANDFIFTY-SEVENTHMEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday,
President: Mr. HUANC Hua (China).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l757)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 4 December 1973 From the Permanent
Representatives of Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/l 1145);
Report by the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 323
(1972) concerning the question of Namibia
(S/ 10921 and Corr. 1).
The meeting was called to order at II.25 a.m
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
(u) Letter dated 4 December 1973 from the Permanent
Representatives of Guinea, Kenya and the Sudan to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1145);
(b) Report by the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council resolution 323 (1972)
concerning the question of Namibia (S/10921 and
Corr.11 )
1. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): In accordance with the decision taken at our 1756th meeting
yesterday, I shall now, with the consent of the Council,
invite the representatives of the Niger and Somalia to take
places at the side of the Council Chamber in order to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, on
the understanding that they will be invited to take a place
at the Council table when it is their turn to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Diallo (Niger)
and Mr. H. Nur Elmi (Somalia) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
1 SW Official
Year, Supplement

Records of the Security
Couttcil,
for April, May and June 1973.

Twenty-eighth

11 December

1973, at 10.30 a.m.

2. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): I should
like to inform members of the Council that, in addition, I
have just received a letter, dated 11 December 1973, from
the representative of Nigeria containing a request that he be
allowed to participate, without the right to vote, in the
Council’s discussion of the item inscribed on the agenda, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure. If 1 hear no objection, I shall
take it that the Council agrees to invite the representative
of Nigeria to participate in the discussion, without the right
to vote, and I shall ask him to take the place reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber, on the understanding that he will be invited to take a place at the
Council table when it is his turn to speak.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ogbu (Nigeria)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Council
Chamber.
3. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): In accordance with the decision taken at our last meeting, I invite the
President and the delegation of the United Nations Council
for Namibia to take places at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. I? J. F. Lusaka
(Zambia), President of the United Nations Council .@Namibia and Mr. I? Mikanagu (Burundi) and Mr. M. Sidik
(Indonesia), the delegation of the United Nations Council
for Nambia, took places at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT (translation from Chinese): In a letter
(S/11153] dated 10 December 1973 to the President of the
Security Council the representatives of Guinea, Kenya and
the Sudan have asked that, under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure of the Security Council, an invitation be
extended to Mr. Mishake Muyongo. Accordingly, 1 propose,
if there is no objection, that pursuant to rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure the Council extend the
invitation requested in the letter.
5. As I hear no objection, I take it that the Council agrees
to that proposal. I shall therefore at the appropriate pomt
in our deliberations and with the consent of the Council,
invite Mr. Mishake Muyongo to speak.
6. Mr, ANWAR SAN1 (Indonesia): Mr. President, before I
address myself to the item on the agenda, allow me to
express my congratulations, as well as those of my
delegation, to you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for December. My delegation would
like to assure you of our whole-hearted co-operation in the
implementation of your important and difficult duties. I

declares its desire to comply with the principles of the
Charter and to guarantee the undisputed right of the
Namibians to self-determination and independence. There is
an obvious contradiction between the policies actually
practised in Namibia and the explanation of those policies
given by the Government of South Africa to the United
Nations.

would also like to express to your predecessor, our
colleague and good friend Ambassador Jankowitsch of
Austria, the high appreciation of my delegation for the
efficient manner in which he guided the Council’s work
during the month of November.
7. We are convened to consider once again the problems
arising from South Africa’s refusal to relinquish its illegal
control of Namibia. In its search for a solution which will
enable the Namibian people to exercise its inalienable right
to self-determination and independence, the Security Council, in its resolutions 309 (1972), 319 (1972) and 323
(1972), agreed to invite the Secretary-General to initiate
and maintain contact with all parties concerned. We now
have before us the report [S/10921 and COW.~] on his
efforts. My delegation would like to express its thanks and
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his endeavour to
pave the way towards the solution of the Namibian
problem in accordance with General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions.

12. Particularly significant are the deviations from the
guarantees of freedom of speech, of assembly and of
political activity. Despite assumnces to the SecretaryGeneral that “the South African Government recognizes
and accepts” these principles, and that they must apply
“equally to all political parties of the Territory”, the South
African Government is in fact inflicting inhumane punishment upon those who dare to protest against the imposition
of its policy of apartheid in Namibia. A press release from
the International Commission of Jurists, dated 1 November
1973, reported that over 100 Ovambos had been flogged in
attempts of the South African Government to stifle their
public opposition. Such acts are in flagrant contradiction
with the assurances given by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of South Africa to the Secretary-General.

8. My delegation listened with great interest to the
statements made by the representatives who preceded me.
We listened with special attention to the statement made by
our colleague Ambassador Lusaka of Zambia /I 756tk
meeting] in his capacity as President of the Council for
Namibia, in which Indonesia has the honour to serve as a
member.

13. In that light, the suggestion that within 10 years the
population of Namibia might “be ready to exercise its right
to self-determination” II~H~ be viewed with the grentcst
suspicion. Ten years more under South African racist rule
will mean another 10 years of exposing the polilically
articulate part of the Namibia11 people to the danger of
possible liquidation, of endangering the national unity and
territorial integrity of Namibia in view of the policy of
Bantustans that South Africa is introducing in the Territory.

9. Resolutions 309 (1972), 319 (1972) and 323 (1972)
reaffirm the right of the people of Namibia to selfdetermination, national independence and preservation of
its territorial integrity. Any policy introduced in Namibia
by the South African Government which is contrary to the
rights of the Namibian people, and introduced while
contacts with the Secretary-General were proceeding, can
only be considered as proof of bad faith on the part of the
South African Government. It is in this light that we must
see the establishment of an Ovambo “homeland” in
Namibia. On the occasion of the establishment of the
Ovambo “homeland”, Mr. Jannie de Wet, the Commissioner
General for the Indigenous Peoples of South West Africa,
was reported to have said: “You’‘-the
Ovambo-“will
be
developed to complete independence.”

14. The National Convention, uniting representatives of all
the African nationalist parties in Namibia, including the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), the
National Union of Democratic Organizations, SWANU, the
Rehoboth Baster Volkcspartei, and the other groups which
together represent the vast majority of the people of
Namibia, has expressed its opinion on the current South
African policies in the following terms. It is, it said, its goal
“to unite the suppressed people of Namibia in one national
unity and to fight for the total and complete independence
and freedom of the Territory; to oppose all forms of
tribalism, race discrimination and other forms and actions
aimed at the segregation of the people of Namibia”. This
statement of the National Convention released on 16 April
1973, makes clear the sentiments of the people of Namibia.
Any rigime which fails to take notice of such expressions
of the will of the people cannot, in good conscience, claim
to be assisting them in their development towards the free
exercise of their inalienable rights.

10. In the past the creation of “homelands” has constituted an essential element in the execution of the policy
of apartheid within South Africa itself, and it will certainly
have a negative effect upon the territorial integrity and
national unity of Namibia. The people of Namibia themselves have indicated that they recognize this great danger.
The South West Africa National Union (SWANIJ) and the
Damara Executive Council, two political organizations
representing the African inhabitants of Namibia, issued a
joint declaration denouncing this policy. As reported in the
Windhoek Advertiser of 24 September 1973, their declaration read in part: “We reject any form of racial and tribal
division of Namibia, We stand for one and whole
Namibia.” Clearly, the introduction of the policy of
“homelands” to the various tribal groups would destroy the
national unity and territorial integrity of Namibia.

15. Even more to be regretted is the introduction in
Namibia by the South African Government of the so-called
advisory council. In his communication to the SecretaryGeneral which deals with the composition of the “council”,
the South African Minister for Foreign Affairs admitted
that many of the groups approached to nominate members
to that body refused to do so, and that rump groups, not
representative of the entire spectrum of opinion within
each tribe, were then allowed to provide representatives for

11. These acts and others raise serious doubts as to the
sincerity of the South African Government when it
2

this least representative of assemblies. The “council”
cannot truly represent the wishes or the needs of the vast
majority of the people of Namibia, and will only serve to
continue the illegal and oppressive rule of the South
African administration in the Territory.

19. Mr. MOJSOV (Yugoslavia): Mr. President, 1 am particularly pleased to greet you in your capacity of President
of the Security Council for the month of December and
representative of the People’s Republic of China, the great
country with which the Yugoslav peoples and Government
have very good relations which they will strive to promote
still further to the mutual benefit and in the interests of
broader international co-operation, peace and progress. My
delegation promises you the fullest co-operation, and,
knowing full well your abilities and unfailing courtesy, we
are confident of the Council’s successful work during this
month.

16. After the recent dialogue between the SecretaryGeneral and the South African Government there is no
possibility of a misunderstanding with regard to the true
value of the South African Governments’s proposals or to
the precise degree of its desire to adhere to the principles of
the Charter.
17. Indonesia sincerely desires a peaceful solution of the
question of Namibia. We had hoped that the efforts of the
Secretary-General would lead to the discovery of a way to
resolve the impasse created by South Africa’s obduracy.
After examination of the report of the Secretary-General,
and after making a comparison between South Africa’s
statements and its acts, however, we are forced to arrive at
the conclusion that such a hope must now be viewed as
unrealistic. The Organization of African Unity (OAU) and
the International Conference of Experts for the Support of
the Victims of Colonialism and Apartheid in Southern
Africa have both recommended that the contacts between
the Secretary-General and the South African Government
be terminated except, as the Conference put it, to arrange
for the immediate transfer of power in accordance with the
provisions of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of
27 October 1966. Indonesia supports that recommendation. The people of the Territory have also expressed
themselves clearly and unequivocally through their representatives in the National Convention. It would be futile, as
well as contrary to the principles of self-determination to
which the United Nations is committed, if we were to
attempt to pursue a policy which has been overwhelmingly
rejected by the representatives of the people of Namibia
thcmselvcs.

20. I also wish to avail myself of this opportunity to
express my thanks to Ambassador Jankowitsch, Permanent
Representative of neighbouring and friendly Austria, for
successfully carrying out his function of President for the
month of November.
21. We have again met today to consider, on the basis of
the Secretary-General’s last report, the situation in
Namibia, a Territory which was placed, by General
Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October 1966,
under the administration of the United Nations, but
which-in spite of that decision and a number of other
decisions of the General Assembly and the Security Council
and of the famous advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice of 21 June 19712-has been under the
illegal occupation of the racist regime in South Africa ever
since.
22. The world Organization-through a number of its
organs and, more particularly, through the Security Council, the General Assembly, the Committee of 24 and the
Council for Namibia-has so far made a series of unsuccessful efforts with a view to putting an end to this
intolerable situation. One of the last steps was the
adoption-in Addis Ababa, on 4 February 1972-of resolution 309 (1972) inviting the Secretary-General to initiate
contacts with all the parties concerned with a view to
establishing the necessary conditions which would enable
the people of Namibia to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence.

18. In the circumstances, it is difficult to see what purpose
would be served by a continuation’of the present dialogue
between the Secretary-General and the South African
Government. In view of the actions taken by the South
African Government in Namibia to express the legitimate
right for freedom of the people of that Territory, we agree
to the view expressed in the consensus of the Council for
Namibia that

23. My delegation-representing a country where unreserved support for the struggle of peoples for liberation
from the colonial yoke is a fundamental tenet of foreign
policy-was selected to become one of the members of the
Group of Three of the Security Council which was
entrusted with the task of assisting the Secretary-General in
carrying out his mission. I should merely like to report here
that since its establishment the Group of Three has
presented, among other things, two basic aide-memoires,
one in order to help the Secretary-General in his arduous
task of conducting contacts with the Government of South
Africa, and the other to help prepare the subsequent
mission of his Representative and put it in the correct
framework. The contents of both aide-mCmoires are well
known to the members of the Security Council as well as to
all those concerned so I shall not quote from them on this

“To maintain contacts with the South African regime
would mean an acceptance of its policy on the part of the
United Nations”.
[S/10921 and Corr. 1, annex II,
Pam 5 (b). /
So long as that Government pursues policies which violate
the “inalienable and imprescriptible right of the people of
Namibia to self-determination, national independence and
the preservation of their territorial integrity, on which any
solution for Namibia must be based” /Security Council
resolution 323 (1972), para. 4] it is very difficult to
continue a dialogue with them without strengthening their
hand and giving the impression to the world of legitimizing
their illegitimate occupation of Namibia. Indonesia is in
agreement with those who oppose the idea of continuation
of these talks and will therefore vote in support of the draft
resolution in document S/ 11152/Rev. 1.

2 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued
Presence of
South Africa
in Namibia
(South
West Africa)
notwithstanding
Security Council Resolution
276 (19701, Advisory
Opinion, I.C.J.
Reports 1971, p. 16.

3

especially through the use of the so-called contract labour
system, which is very similar to slavery.

occasion, On the basis of resolution 309 (1972) and the
two aide-m6moires, the Secretary-General undertook to
carry out his highly responsible task. The subsequent events
and views of the Secretary-Gen’eral are presented in his
latest report.

27. It is here that the information given by the South
African Government to the Secretary-General in Geneva-to
be found in the Secretary-General’s report-is particularly
revealing. I refer, of course, to the last sentence of that
information given by the South African Government, which
says that:

24. On the basis of that report, as well as many other facts
with which my delegation as well as the international
community is familiar, it is clear that the reactionary
regime in South Africa did not approach the contacts in
good faith at all. To our great regret and indignation,
Pretoria used resolution 309 (1972) as an opportunity to
buy time and further consolidate its Nazi-like reactionary
rule over the people of Nambia. The apartheid regime in
South Africa has used the past two years to intensify its
repressive measures against the people of Namibia in order
tc prevent them from realizing their right to selfdetermination, independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity. Massacres and mass reprisals continue to be
carried out against all those who resist the yoke of the
white settlers. Particularly unscrupulous measures are being
taken against the members of SWAPO, the only genuine
representatives of the struggle for the realization of the
legitimate rights of the people of Namibia. The illegal
occupation regime continues to resort to the enactment of
a number of so-called administrative measures. The most
sinister and most terrorist-like of these measures has been
the pursuit of the policy of separate “homelands”, in a
futile but bloody effort to prevent the strengthening of the
national consciousness and unity of the Namibian people.
Pretoria was doing this at the very moment that the United
Nations was making a substantial effort by once more
giving a chance to South Africa to get out of Namibia
peacefully.

“On the basis of present developments, the Government
of South Africa anticipates that it might not take longer
than 10 years for the population of South West Africa to
reach the stage where it will be ready to exercise its right
to self-determination.” [S/I 0921 and Corr.1, para 14.1
The words “longer than 10 years” can mean any figure.
And the foregoing statement does not relate to giving
independence to Namibia; it is only an assessment that by
that time the people of Namibia will be mature enough and
ready to exercise its right to self-determination. What a
brutal way to slander the people of Namibia and the whole
of Africa.
28. That is the true position of the South African racists
revealed in all its brutality and arrogance. They need at
least 10 more years-and Ambassador Escher was told by
some official South African sources during his trip, as he
has privately indicated here, that what they really mean is
that they need another 50 years. They need some such time
to plunder and totally exhaust the tremendous natural
riches of Namibia-diamonds; uranium in the largest quantities, and even more precious in times of an energy crisis;
the oil that was traced by satellite sensors, and so on. Then
after they lay waste the country and rob it of its best
wealth, after they bleed white both country and people and
completely debilitate them, then perhaps, they will be
ready to leave.

25. The regime in South Africa is pursuing this reactionary
policy in the closest collaboration with the racists and
Fascists in Salisbury and Lisbon, and with the help of the
tolerant attitude and frequently the direct support of some
Western countries which in this way protect their own
narrow economic and military interests in the south of
Africa. In the pursuit of its reactionary policy, Pretoria
does not limit its actions to Namibia, but is also resorting to
numerous aggressive acts against the neighbouring independent African countries, and in particular against Zambia.
For those reasons the aggressive policy of South Africa
constitutes a threat to the peace and security of the African
continent, and consequently to the international community as a whole.

29. If only because they have smoked out the true
intentions of the South African apartheidem in the rcvealing passage just quoted, the activities and the report of the
Secretary-General have made a valuable contribution.
30. But, of course-and Pretoria should not entertain any
illusions on this score-the United Nations and an outraged
world will never accept and will not permit the rape and
crippling of Namibia that Pretoria has set out to achieve, in
blind defiance of all morality and reality.

26. We are deeply convinced that what is involved in
Pretoria’s tenacious hold over Namibia is to a large extent
the greedy and inadmissible economic interests of Pretoria
and of a number of big companies from the large,
developed Western countries. The operations of these
companies neither promote nor facilitate in any way the
development of Namibia or the welfare of its people. Big
foreign companies, together with the South African racists,
are interested solely in squeezing out inhumanly large
profits and in doing so they resort to the most sinister
forms and methods qf plunder and exploitation of the
natural resources and labour force of the Territory. The
ransacking of the natural resources of Namibia is accompanied by the most cruel exploitation of its inhabitants,

31. Very recently another country, arrogantly believing
that it could eternally and with impunity occupy other
peoples’ territories, woke up one day only to realizc that
the reality is different, changed; that the world has passed it
by, and that the forces on whose side is morality are
stronger; that they will never become reconciled to occupation and oppression; that they can and will strike.
32. In the concluding part of his report the SecretaryGeneral states, inter alia, that:
“A study of the statement reproduced above Shows that
the position of the Government of South Africa is still far
4

from coinciding with that established in the resolutions of
the United Nations concerning Namibia”

great number of countries members of the international
community. This support found particular expression at the
Tenth Summit Conference of the Organisation of African
Unity and at the Fourth Conference of Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries in Algiers, as well as
at the recently held Summit Meeting of Heads of State of
Arab countries.

and that:
‘L. . . the statement does not provide the complete and
unequivocal clarification of South Africa’s policy in
regard to self-determination
and independence for
Namibia envisaged in resolution 323 (1972)” [ibid.,
para.

36. Since 6 October the Middle East has not been the
same. Very soon, much sooner than the oppressive and
racist regimes of Pretoria, Salisbury, and Lisbon are wont to
believe, the south of Africa will not be the same.

.18.]

33. In the light of the report of the Secretary-General
taken as a whole and of its conclusions in particular, and on
the basis of the data we have, my delegation is firmly
convinced that there is no justification at all for the
continuation of the contacts between the Secretary-General
and the Government of South Africa and that these
contacts and further efforts should be discontinued. My
delegation has adopted this position as a result of a serious
and comprehensive study of this problem, in its capacity as
a member of the Group of Three, of the Council for
Namibia and of the Committee of 24 and as an active
participant in the work of important international forums
and gatherings where this issue has also been examined
during the past period. We should only like to emphasize
that the Council for Namibia, the Committee of 24 and the
Fourth Committee of the General Assembly at the current
session, as well as the Tenth Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of OAU and the Fourth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries
held recently in Algiers, have already taken a stand against
the continuation of contacts. The correctness of this stand
has been also confirmed by the statements made by the
preceding speakers at this series of meetings of the Council,
and in particular those of the President of the Council for
Namibia and Permanent Representative of Zambia, Ambassador Lusaka. For those reasons the Security Council
should adopt the draft resolution submitted by the delegation of Peru. In this context we wish to stress that to our
mind the Secretary-General’s efforts have not been in vain.
The matter has now been cleared up and it has become
crystal clear to all that it is not possible to settle matters
with the racists in Pretoria in a peaceful way at all.

37. At almost the very end of its stay in the Security
Council, my delegation is pleased that, after a meaningful
effort, the Council and the United Nations will proceed
with the unchanged, even invigorated, policy of full support
for the people of Namibia and joint battle ivith that people
for its liberation, independence, territorial integrity and
unity.
38. In that struggle the peoples and Government of
Yugoslavia will continue, as they have done in the past, to
lend to the people of Namibia their full moral, political and
material support.
39. Sir Laurence MCINTYRE (Australia): Mr. President,
permit me first of all to welcome you to the presidential
chair of this Council and to promise you the full cooperation of my delegation.
40. Let me also thank and congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Jankowitsch of Austria, for his very efficient
handling of the work of this Council during the month of
November.
41. My Government’s position on the subject of Namibia
has been made clear on several occasions in the United
Nations during recent months. It was set forth in some
detail in my delegation’s reply of 21 September 1973 to the
questionnaire circulated by the Secretary-General on 12
June 1973 regardingthe complianceof MemberStateswith
United Nations resolutionsconcerningNamibia. In the
courseof the presentsession
of the GeneralAssemblyit has
been given further expressionby the Australiandelegation
both in the Fourth Committeeand in the Assemblyitself.

34. Nothing remains to be done in such a situation but to
intensify still further the struggle by all means, including
the armed struggle that the people of Namibia are waging
under the courageous leadership of SWAPO. We are glad to
note that the present case, too, has confirmed the historical
fact that the just demands of a people living under foreign
yoke and subjected to colonial aggression and occupation
cannot be suppressed and that the liberation movement in
Namibia is achieving significant victories. A number of
examples prove that this is the only way. One of the most
recent and most commented-upon examples has been the
proclamation of the independence of the Republic of
Guinea-Bissau. This young Republic has emerged from the
blood of its best sons and will serve to the world as an
example showing the road to be followed by all peoples
under a similar colonial yoke, and particularly by the
peoples in southern Africa.

42. The Australian Governmentremainstotally opposed
to the continuedunlawful occupationand administration
of Namibiaby the Governmentof South Africa. Thereis no
doubt in our minds that South Africa has no further
mandate in Namibia and that its administrationof the
Territory should be terminated. We regard the South
African presenceasprejudicialto the future progress
of the
Territory and to the rights and interests of the great
majority of its people,including their inalienableright to
self-determination,and also as an affront to the United
Nations.
43. Australia hasno materialinterestsin Namibia.Thereis
no Australian Governmentinvestmentor other economic
interest, nor are we aware of any private Australian
investment.Our only interestliesin the early andpeaceful
transition of the Territory into a future whichwill meetthe

35. In their struggle the people of Namibia are not alone.
They enjoy the moral, material and political support of a
5

desires of the majority of its people and which will
dischargethe United Nations from a responsibilitythat it
has for solong, too long, beenpreventedfrom carrying out.

you most warmly. You are a worthy representativeot the
most populated country in the world, which, becauseof its
pragmatismand determinedefforts, will no doubt find the
real way to developmentof the lessendowed.

44. The Australian Government has avoided any action
which could help to entrench South Africa’s illegalposition
in the Territory. We do not recognize the Governmentof
South Africa when it purports to act on behalfof Namibia.
Furthermore, my Government has declared that it will
co-operate with the United Nations and with all its agencies
in actions designedto bring South African occupationand
control of Namibia to an end.

50. May I, as Chairman of the African Group for
December,alsoexpressmy gratitude for your givingmean
opportunity to present to the Council, whose work you
direct with competenceand dignity, Africa’s position on
this important question of Namibia, which has been of
concernto our Organizationfor so many years.

45. My delegation,as a memberof the SpecialCommittee
of Twenty-Four, joined in that Committee’sconsensus
on
Namibia adopted on 29 June of this year. An important
element in that consensus,as indeed also in the draft
resolution adopted by the Fourth Committeeon 4 December,3 was the strong conviction that no useful purpose
would be served by continuing the contacts betweenthe
Secretary-Generalandthe Governmentof South Africa. My
delegation was not entirely happy with that part of the
consensus,and we felt constrainedto expresssomereservation about it, even while sharingfully the generalfeelingof
frustration and disappointmentover the equivocalnature of
the South African Government’s responsesto the Secretary-General’s requestsfor clarification of its attitudes and
intentions.
46. We would not argue with the proposition that continuing a dialogue with South Africa on the future of
Namibia servesno useful purposeat the presenttime. But
t@ereis a difference betweendecidingto terminatecontacts
and leaving them in abeyance: the one conveys an
impressionof finality; the other leavesa door unlocked
which could conceivably be reopened-in this casenot
necessarily to the detriment of the majority of the
Namibian people. Thus, in my delegation’sview, it is not
simply a question of the usefulnessor uselessness
of
carrying on a dialoguewith South Africa at this time. It is
rather a question of whether or not we in this Council
should retain somedegreeof flexibility againstthe possibility of future changein circumstancesand attitudes, and
also-and I believe we should consider this carefullywhether or not the United Nations should be seento be
assumingthe responsibility for slammingand locking the
door.
47. In the light of those considerations,we find ourselves
able to vote in favour of draft resolutionS/l 1152/Rev.1, as
introduced at the precedingmeetingby the representative
of Peru.
48. The PRESIDENT (trans2ation from Chinese):The
next speakeris the representativeof the Niger,I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
49. Mr. DIALLO (Niger) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, since I am addressingthe Security Council
for the first time I hope you will allow meto congratulate

51. In fact, it was in 1920 that the defunct Leagueof
NationsplacedNamibiaunder South African Mandateand
gave South Africa the task of promoting in every possible
way the well-beingof the inhabitants of the Territory and
to that end of developing their capacity to administer
themselves,of taking into account the political aspirations
of the population and of assistingthem in the progressive
developmentof their free political institutions. More than
50 yearshave passedsincethen and, although the windsof
decolonization are blowing throughout the world, the
inhabitants of Namibia still live under the worst form of
colonization, the most savagerepressionand abominable
aparthaid.
52. In the 27 yearssincethe United Nations replacedthe
Leagueof Nations, everything has been tried to persuade
South Africa to allow the people of Namibia to exercise
their right to self-determinationand independence,pursuant to the relevant Articles of the Charter and in
accordancewith General Assemblyresolution 2145 (XXI)
of 27 October 1966, which terminated South Africa’s
Mandate over Namibia; General Assembly resolution
2248(S-V) of 19 May 1967, which establishedthe United
Nations Council for Namibia and entrusted it with the
administrationof the Territory until its independence,to
be attained by June 1968 at the latest; and the advisory
opinion of the International Court of Justice of 21 June
1971 confirming that South Africa hasno legalright over
Namibia.
53. Today the Security Council is examiningthe report of
the Secretary-Generalon the contacts he hashad with the
South African authorities pursuant to resolution 323
(1972). It wasduring the historic meetingsat Addis Ababa,
in January-February 1972, that this Council decided,in its
resolution309 (1972), to requestthe Secretary-Generalto
establishcontactswith all the partiesconcernedwith a view
to enablingthe people of Namibia freely to exercisetheir
right to self-determinationand indcpendcnce.
54. In the mindsof the authors of the resolution, aswell
as during the discussionthat precededits adoption, it was
clearly a matter of overcoming the deadlock createdby
South Africa by its refusal to implement the relevant
United Nations resolutions, to accept resolutions 2145
(XXI) and 2248 (S-V) and to withdraw from the Territory
of Namibia in accordancewith the advisory opinion of’ the
International Court of Justice.
55. Africa hasnever opposedthe use of peaceful means
for the settlementof disputeswhen those meansarelikely
to be successful-andthis despite the reservationsand the

3 Subsequently adopted by the General Assembly as rcsolulion
3111 (XXVIII).

6

doubts we entertain regarding the usefulness of any
contacts with South Africa. Thus it was that the African
members of this Council did not wish to oppose the
adoption of resolution 309 (1972).

64. The report of the Secretary-General which is before
the Council confirms South Africa’s tendency to maintain
itself in Namibia with the blessing of the United Nations.
On analysing South Africa’s proposals, as presented in the
Secretary-General’s report, we see that they do not differ in
any way from those made by that country at the time when
the United Nations came into being; nor do they differ
from the policy which South Africa has applied in Namibia
since that time,

56. From the first visit of the Secretary-General to South
Africa and Namibia, the position of the Pretoria authorities
has been rigid, to such an extenl that the SecretaryGeneral’s first report concerning those contacts was very
significant in that it contained only one recommendation to
the Security Council, namely, that he be allowed to recruit
a personal representative.

65. First of all, South Africa wishes to gain acceptance of
the division of the Territory into “homelands”, “Bantustans”, and “regions”, which not only is contrary to all
United Nations decisions and to the will of the Namibian
people who were consulted but also would consolidate the
division of national unity and territorial integrity.

57. Ambassador Escher was appointed and sent on his
mission to South Africa and Namibia and was able to
establish many contacts which, in fact, did nothing but
confirm what we already knew. It is clear that South Africa
wished to avail itself of the so-called dialogue with the
United Nations to perpetuate its illegal occupation of
Namibia with its abject policy of apclrthez’d, of “homelands” that are nothing but concentration camps, cheap
labour reserves-in a word, places of despair and of
injustice. What is more, the South African authorities took
advantage of the time offered by those contacts to create a
so-called advisory council with puppet representatives of
various regions under a regional administration or authority
designed to do nothing other than to constitute privileged
minorities that would assist in breaking up the national
unity and the territorial integrity of Namibia.

66. Secondly, South Africa wishes to gain acceptance of
the creation of the advisory Council, which was presented
to Ambassador Escher as a concession to the United
Nations but the unavowed purpose of which was to affirm
the direct authority of Vorster over the international
Territory of Namibia and divide it up through privileged
puppet minorities.
67. Thirdly, South Africa is attempting to make the
United Nations go back on its decision in General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI) that terminated South Africa’s
Mandate over Namibia. It wishes to create a situation which
will lead to the decision of the International Court of
Justice of June 1971 being forgotten. Thus, Vorster would
have us believe that in 10 years’ time the Namibians will,
perhaps, arrive at a stage where they will be able to govern
themselves.

58. The only’ useful proof revealed by the report of
Ambassador Escher is that of the unshakable will of the
population of Namibia to accede to self-determination and
independence in unity.

68. That argument has been debated at length in the
United Nations and in 1960, by its resolution 1514 (XV),
the General Assembly decided that the argument that a
colonial people was not ready to exercise its right to
independence was an unacceptable pretext. Every people
has an inherent right to self-determination and independence, and can exercise it at any time. The people of
Namibia have proved, through their contacts with the
Secretary-General and his Representative, Ambassador
Escher, that they are sufficiently mature to take over their
own responsibilities completely.

59. T believe I can say without fear of contradiction that it
was because the questions which our colleague Mr. GabreSellassie of Ethiopia put in the course of the 1678th
meeting of the Security Council, on 28 November 1972,
were not replied to in the report of Ambassador Escher
after his visit to Sou&h Africa that the Heads of State and
Government of Africa, meeting in Addis Ababa on the
occasion of the tenth anniversary of OAU, considered that
contacts with South Africa were harmful to the interests of
the people of Namibia and decided that they should be
brought to an end. They felt that once again South Africa
had lost an opportunity to become reconciled with free
Africa and the rest of the world.

69. Furthermore, the General Assembly considered this
problem in 1966, and in 1967 it established the United
Nations Council for Namibia, which was specifically
charged with the administration of Namibia and with
preparing the Namibian people for independence. Perhaps
what is to be regretted is that independence-which,
according to the mandate given to the United Nations
Council for Namibia, should have been achieved in June
1968 at the latest-in becoming more doubtful, if one takes
into account daily events and the meagre results of
contacts.

60. ?;he questions Mr. Gabre-Sellassie posed were the
following:
61. Does South Africa accept United Nations responsibility in the self-determination process and does it accept
the establishment of an effective United Nations presence
in Namibia?
62. Does South Africa accept the exercise Of Sdfdetermination by the people of Namibia as a whole, with
unity and territorial integrity?

70. In May 1973 the Heads of State and Government of
African countries had occasion to examine the SecretaryGeneral’s report and they considered, as I said earlier. that
the present situation in Namibia and the direction of the
policy of South Africa were harmful for the people of

63. Does South Africa accept that whatever rights it might
have had under the Mandate of the League of Nations have
been terminated?
7

/S/IO921 and Corr.I, para. 18.1 Accordingly, it seems
clear, almost two years after their establishment, that these
contacts have been disappointing not only to the African
countries but to the entire international community.

Namibia. There is nothing in the report to indicate that
South Africa is prepared to comply with United Nations
decisions or to accept the advisory opinion of the InternationaI Court of Justice of 1971, or to carry out the
transfer of power to the United Nations Council for
Namibia as called for in General Assembly resolution
2248 (S-V).

78. The experts who met last April in Oslo perceived the
danger of continuing such contacts, which would enable
South Africa not only to perpetuate its presence in Namibia
but, what is even more serious, to establish military bases
there for attacking neighbouring African countries.

71. One even wonders whether those contacts were
intended, as some have mainfained, to be a face-saving
device for South Africa if it agreed to be persuaded by
peaceful, means to withdraw from Namibia, or whether, on
the contrary, the purpose of the contacts was to have the
United Nations accept something that it has never ceased to
refuse and condemn.

79. in deciding to request the Security Council to put an
end to the contacts of the Secretary-General with South
Africa and to take steps pursuant to Chapter VII of the
Charter, to compel the Government of South Africa to call a
halt to its illegal occupation of Namibia, the Heads of State
and Government of the Organization of African Unity
wished to express their support for the United Nations
Council for Namibia in its ceaseless efforts to discharge the
task entrusted to it by the General Assembly.

72. The positions of South Africa in regard to Namibia are
clear if one considers the policy which it has carried out
and continues to carry out despite contacts with the United
Nations. In fact it is no secret to anyone that before, during
and after the visit of the Secretary-General and his
Representative, and despite the most formal promises of
the South African authorities to take no measures of
reprisal against persons because of their political opinions,
arrests, detentions and torture have increased in South
Africa and Namibia. It is also significant to note that a state
of emergency was proclaimed in Namibia at the exact
moment when contacts were requested by the Security
Council and that despite the assurances given to the
Secretary-General limitations on freedom were increased.

80. I could not conclude without solemnly reaffirming the
confidence of the African Group that the United Nations
Council for Namibia, with the support of the Security
Council and in co-operation with the Organization of
African Unity and the national liberation movements, will
be able to find effective means to enable the Namibians
who have always considered the United Nations their only
hope, to recover their rights and dignity in unity and in
territorial integrity.

73. We have all heard about the public floggings, a return
to mediaeval practices, ordered by so-called tribal courts
with the encouragement of South Africa. Those measures
of repression accompanied the application of administrative
measures aimed at dividing the Territory and at its final and
definite annexation by South Africa.

81. On behalf of Africa, may I express the ardent hope
that the members of this august Council, inspired by the
noble ideals of their brave predecessors who drafted the
United Nations Charter, will, in accordance with the
relevant Articles of Chapter VII of the Charter, take urgent
measures to put a final end to the illegal occupation of
Namibia by South Africa.

74. There was general surprise when in March last, despite
United Nations reservations, South Africa announced the
establishment of the so-called advisory council. Since then
the world has witnessed the efforts of South Africa to
implant the Bantustans of Ovamboland and the fortunate
and striking failure it suffered in the course of elections to
the Assembly of the so-called autonomous regional unit.

82. Mr. SEN (India): Mr. President, I should like to
congratulate you on your assuming the presidency of the
Council for December. Next month, India will retire from
the Council, and it is fitting that in the last month of our
current membership we should be working with a fellow
Asian in the Chair. We offer you our fullest co-operation in
the discharge of your responsible task. We should also like
to extend our appreciation to the outgoing President,
Ambassador Jankowitsch
of Austria, who brought his
youth and dedication to the best service of the Council. We
thank him.

75. Africa is not alone in considering that South Africa
has lost an opportunity to normalize its relations with the
international community.
76. On 27 March this year, on the occasion of a lunch
given by the United Nations foreign press correspondents,
the Ambassador of France expressed his regret that South
Africa had taken no measures likely to enable the Secretary-General to submit a positive report to the Security
Council. He stated that the only way to resume the
dialogue would be for the Government of South Africa to
prove its intention to grant self-determination and autonomy to Namibia, but that that Government did not seem to
have seized the only genuine opportunity available to it.

83. The original mandate concerning the question of
Namibia was entrusted to the Secretary-General by the
Security Council on 4 February 1972, when it adopted its
resolution 309 (1972). In that resolution, while inviting the
Secretary-General to initiate contacts with all parties
concerned with a view to establishing the necessary
conditions so as to enable the people of Namibia to exercise
their right to self-determination and independence, the
Council had also called on the Government of South Africa
to co-operate fully with the Secretary-General in the
implementation of that resolution. Since then the Secretary-General has submitted three reports, the last being his
report in document S/l0921 and Corr.1, of 30 April 1973.

77. In his report the Secretary-General concludes that
“the position of the Government of South Africa is still far
from coinciding with that. . . of the United Nations”.
8

84. We shall, of course, vote for the draft resolution
submitted by the representative of Peru, as it fully reflects
our views about the futility of establishing contact with
South Africa or continuing any negotiations with it. The
Secretary-General’s report demolishes completely the
theory that by removing or reducing South Africa’s
isolation we can make it behave in a decent or civilized
manner.

reports published in the Windhock Advertiser of 20
November 1973, urgent applications have been filed in the
Supreme Court on behalf of the Bishop of Damaraland and
the Bishop of the Ovambo-Kavango Lutheran Church,
Bishb-p Aula. In spite of the urgency of the matter, the
hearing of the show-cause notice has been fixed for 22
February next year. Meanwhile, a request for a doctor to be
present while floggings are administered was not allowed,
because it was considered impracticable in Ovambo.

85. The original resolution had two elements: the efforts
to be made by the Secretary-General and, the other, the
co-operation to be offered by the Government of South
Africa. At the risk of repeating what has been said by the
representatives who have already spoken in detail on the
subject of the efforts of the Secretary-General and his
representatives, may I say that we greatly appreciate them,
and I personally believe that Mr. Chacko’s death was perhaps
not in some small measure due to the considerable tension
and over-work involved in the difficult and delicate task
which the Council had set the Secretary-General and with
which he was associated.

89. In the circumstances there is no doubt that any
meaningfu1 talks with the representatives of the Pretoria
rbgime is impossible. The wider question of the independence of Namibia has already been discussed in the Fourth
Committee of the General Assembly, but we consider that
it would be useful if the Secretary-General was requested to
watch the situation and report to the Security Council as
circumstances warrant. The Secretary-General, being the
highest executive officer of an Organization to which South
Africa still wishes to belong, has a task to perform and we
should not deprive him of our support and confidence if
there is some chance, however slight, that progress can be
made on this problem, even if South Africa has left the
freedom fighters no other option but to undertake a
prolonged and agonizing campaign for freedom.

86. Now, the fact is that the South African Government
has systematically taken actions to frustrate the SecretaryGeneral’s mission. Before deciding on and announcing the
method by which the people of Namibia would exercise
their right to self-determination, national independence and
the preservation of their territorial integrity, on which
alone any solution for Namibia can be based, the South
African Government declared in June that elections for the
Bantustan would take place on 1 and 2 August. Because of
the election campaign started by the Namibians on the basis
of “One Namibia, one nation”, there came a wave of arrests
and detentions. However, the result of this so-called
election was a clear defeat for the South African Government. Of those eligible to vote, only 2.5 per cent voted.
Infuriated by this defeat, the South African Government
initiated a policy of terror: some of the SWAP0 leaders
were arrested and charged with offences under the Sabotage
Act; meetings were broken up by the police, who on several
occasions opened fire. This reign of terror culminated in the
strike of 20 August, in which hundreds were eventually
arrested and detained “for being illegally in Windhoek”. A
concentration camp has now been set up in a very remote
place-at Omidamba on the Namibia-Angola border.

90. We do not consider it necessary, at any rate at this
stage, to comment on the substance of the problem.
Understandably, several speakers, particularly our African
colleagues and the President of the Council for Namibia,
have already brought us up to date on the tragic developments in Namibia since the Council last discussed them
about a year ago. It seems to my delegation that at times
instead of showing our disapproval, in many ways open to
us, of those who encourage South Africa, we have indeed
rewarded them. There is much need for vigilance, for when
Namibia is free-as it undoubtedly will be-we would wish
the people of Namibia to look upon us as partners in our
common struggle and not as mere bystanders who behaved
in a whimsical way.
91. But whatever we may do, the pain of the Namibians
will be removed and their dignity restored. There will be
detractions, djssensions, and temptations, but nothing can
reveise the trend towards equality in all respects SO
noticeable in the whole of Africa.

87. We are considering the report of the Secretary-General
in an atmosphere of unrest and terror in Namibia. From
one college alone, Augustineum College of Windhoek, 250
students have been expelled. Thy whole of Katutura
Township has been combed by the police in a massive
manhunt. People are being summarily arrested and freely
flogged. According to the memorandum submitted by a
delegation which included two members of the British
Parliament and the SWAP0 representative in the United
Kingdom to the British Minister of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs, more than 100 people SO far have
been publicly flogged, and women and children are included
among them. The men and boys were forced to stand
naked while being flogged, the women and girls had to hoist
their skirts up over their faces while receiving the lash.

92. Mr. l3OYD (Panama) (interpretatiorz from Spanish):
Before stating Panama’s position on the substance of the
item under discussion, I should like to express the satisfaction of the delegation of Panama at seeing the representative of the People’s Republic of China, Ambassador
Huang Hua, as President of the Security Council during the
final month in which we shall be serving on the most
important body of the world Organization.
93. We also wish to place on record our appreciation of
the intelligent, skilful and courteous manner in which the
representative of Austria, Ambassador Peter Jankowitsch,
presided over the delicate and complex meetings of the
month of November 1973, when this Council took farreaching decisions on the composition of the United
Nations Emergency Force which, on the Council’s imtruc-

88. The South African Government announced that that
was traditional “tribal punishment”. According to the latest
9

tions, is now in the Middle East discharging an important
mission of peace.

Council may take to put an end as soon as possible to the
intolerable situation which South Africa maintains in
Namibia.

94. Latin America has always played a very important role
in the process of decolonization of the African continent
and, because it is a happy coincidence, it is only fair to
recognize that the present President of the General
Assembly, Ambassador Leopold0 Benites, has for more
than 10 years participated, in an outstanding and untiring
manner, as many other prominent representatives of the
western hemisphere have done, in the vindication of the
just claims for independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity, to which the peoples of Africa are entitled.

101. Mr. ABDULLA (Sudan): Mr. President, my delegation would like to extend to you its warmest congratuiations on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of December and to wish you a
successful term of office. My delegation would also take
this opportunity to extend affectionate felicitations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Jankowitsch of Austria, for the
able and efficient manner in which he performed his duties
during a period of delicate and important deliberations.
102. We have had the opportunity to listen during these
two days to the extensive and able survey of the question
of Namibia in the context of the report of the Secretary.
General as well as of his previous reports since the adoption
of resolution 309 (1972) in Addis Ababa on 4 February
1972.

95. At the historic meeting in Addis Ababa, on 31 January
1972, on behalf of our delegation, we stated that “Side by
side with its African brothers Panama shares their suffering
at any attempts to undermine the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of these nations. My delegation condemns all forms of colonialism in Africa”. /1631st
meeting, para. 29.1 In the Security Council the voices of
the five African and Latin American members always
should be heard in unison fo condemn all forms of
colonialism.

103. My delegation is appreciative of the efforts of the
Secretary-General in carrying out his difficult mandate.
During his early contacts with the authorities of South
Africa, the Secretary-General faithfully tried to establish

96. In Addis Ababa, in 1972, where we unreservedly
condemned ihc odious policy of upurtheid, we enthusiastically joined the representative of Argentina, Ambassador
Carlos Ortiz de Iiozas, in his efforts to try to find a solution
for the case of Namibia, the result of which was the
adoption of Security Council resohltion 309 (1972).

$6. . the necessary conditions so as to enable the people
of Namibia, freely and with strict regard to the principle
of human equality, to exercise their right to seifdetermination and independence, in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations;” /resolutions
309

(1972)].

97. Panama has always supported every measure to
strengthen the United Nations Council for Namibia, and we
firmly believe thal the United Nations Fund for Namibia
plays a very important role in training the people who
aspire to achieve independence and sovereignty for their
nation. My delegation considers that since the advisory
opinion of the International Colrrt of Justice, given on 21
June 1971, the presence of South Africa in Namibia is
illegal from every puint of view, and that the occupation of
Namibia by South Africa is a fact which contributes to
unrest in the area and is a threat to peace and security in
that part of the world.

104. By 17 July 1972, the date of his report to the
Council [S/l 07381, the Secretary-General had already
learnt that in EasternCaprivi and Ovambolandin Namibia
the Government of South Africa had already taken fresh
stepsto apply its policy of the so-called“homelands”. Once
more, and reluctantly, the Council, by resolution 319
(1972) of I August 1972, extended the mandate of the
Secretary-General. Consequently, the Secretary-General
presentedhis report in document S/l0832 of 15 November
1972. During the discussionswith the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,Mr. Vorster, the Prime
Minister of South Africa, assertedthat it was not the
appropriate stage to go into a detailed analysis of South
Africa’s policy of self-determination and independence.
This reply was fortunately counter-balancedby the rejection, by the overwhelming majority of the people of
Namibia, of the South African administration of the
“homelands” policy and by the demand for national
independenceand preservationof national integrity of their
country.

98. The efforts of the Secretary-General, which are recorded in document S/10921 and Corr.1, show that the
position of the Government of South
Africa is quite
different from the one indicated in United Nations resolutions on Namibia. The efforts of the Secretary-General, in
regard to the question of Namibia, deserve the appreciation
of the Council even though they were unsuccessful.
99. My delegation, given the facts which we are compelled
to face, is in full agreement with the draft resolLltion
submitted yesterday by the delegation of Peru [S/111.52/
Kc~).l/, in which the Council declares that no further
efforts wilI be made to seek an accommodation with the
Government of South Africa with a view to finding a
solution to the problem of Namibia on the basis of
resolution 309 (1972).

105. 1 should like to quote the judgementon the situation
and the conclusionswe drew from the secondreport of the
Secretary-General,back in December1972:
“In the light of this summaryof [our arguntentson the
contents of the report], my delegationis forced to draw
one main conclusion: namely, that the Government of
South Africa is taking cover under the pretext of a
prolonged, futile dialogue with the United Nations in
order both to appeaseinternational public opinion andto

100. In conclusion, the delegation of Panama wishes to
announce that it will support any measures which this
10

consolidate her apartheid designs in Namibia, Its main
interest in Namibia has been and continues to be cheap
contract labour and exploitation of the Territory’s
wealth. Indeed, for over 50 years South Africa has not
done anything worth while in the Territory towards the
improvement of the living conditions and welfare of the
inhabitants, much less towards the development of real
self-government. It is therefore idle to give South Africa
another chance, which she would obviously use to cause
the Territory to disintegrate much further and break the
backbone of the mounting liberation movement, as
clearly demonstrated before and during the visit to
Namibia of the Secretary-General’s Special Representative.

brutal way that any possibility of free determination by the
People of Namibia of its own future becomes most difficult
if not impassible. Nobody with a reasonable political sense
can imagine that the racist rCgime of South Africa will work
for majority rule in Namibia, and the opposite is true.
110. However, we all know that, as Ambassador Mojsov of
Yugoslavia has just pointed out, there are other vicious
motives behind these wild attempts of the racist rCgime to
extend its illegal occupation. We all know that there is
exploitation of the uranium mines; we know about
diamond exploration, copper, oil, fisheries and plantations-all of which are being exploited by foreign concerns
and taxes are being paid to South Africa in order to extend
its illegal occupation of Namibia.

“Time has proved that once a people decides to be
independent, it will be, and invariably [the same people]
acquires the art of government and standing together in
the process for the sake and in pursuit of its own national
existence. . . .

111. After 15 months of dialogue and, probing, the
Secretary-General could not persuade the Government of
South Africa to see eye to eye with the United Nations
with regard to the principle of self-determination and
independence, let alone to accept them or apply them in
Namibia. On the contrary, fur the past two years, since the
adoption of resolution 309 (1972) on 4 February 1972
initiating the dialogue, South Africa has taken advantage of
this long period of grace to consolidate further its apurtheid
policy in the Territory and to contract illegally for further
concessions to foreign concerns. We shall have to remember
similar and earlier attempts by the United Nations with the
South African authorities that met with the same fate as
that of the Secretary-General’s efforts.

“In the case of Namibia the United Nations presence
gives it a greater advantage than any of the African
countries which bypassed the experience in selfgovernment as proposed by the Prime Minister of South
Africa.
“It is a vicious argument by South Africa to claim that
“homeland development”,
constitutionally
or economically, is better for the Territory. Tribal existence has
never been a barrier to national liberation in Africa, and
above all in Namibia, where only a few tribes live and
where all are united in the struggle for independence. It
requires no deep economic knowledge to decide that the
pooling of the economic resources of the whole Territory
is of more value than dividing the Territory into a number
of independent economic units of ‘homelands’. . ,“.
[Icib’lst meetirig, paras. 115118.1

112. This is why we are here today to decide officially on
the termination of the contacts which actually terminated a
long time ago. As early as May 1973 the Assembly of Heads
of State and Government of OAU resolved the following:
“Calls upoil the United Nations Security Council to
terminate the contacts of the United Nations SecretaryGeneral with the South African Iacist authorities as such
exercise has proved ultimately to be detrimental to the
interests of the people of Namibia and prejudiciaf to an
early attainment of independence by this Territory.”

106. We drew that conclusion as long ago as December
1972 regarding these contacts.
107. Despite all the doubts expressed in the Council, for
the third time the Secretary-General was mandated to make
further contacts with the authorities of South Africa with a
view to seeking complete and unequivocal clarification of
South Africa’s policy regarding self-government and independence for Namibia. That was in resolution 323 (1972).

113. My own Head of State was a party to this decision,
and this is the position of my delegation today.
114. This is again an occasion for this Council to make it
clear beyond any doubt to the racist regime of South Africa
as well as to those delegations which manoeuvred this
Council into this dialogue with South Africa thar this
Council stands firmly by its decisions prior to resolution
309 (1972) as well as by the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice of 21 June 1971.

108. In a typically deceptive and evasive manner characteristic of all racial rCgimes haunted by the idea of
self-preservation as privileged minorities, the racist rCgime
has qualified every answer to the most direct questions
submitted by the Secretary-General.

115. My Government’s views on the question of Namibia
have been expressed on several occasions in various COnImittecs of the General Assembly, as well as in the Security
Council. The justification for repeating them today is that
it was more than haIf a century ago that, after liberating
Namibia from German rule, the international CO~l~ll~~il~~p
undertook to administer the Territory as a sacred trust of
civilization and to provide for the well-being and development of its inhabitants. Yet today the people of Namibia,
agaiilst their unanimous will and, worse still, against the will

109. The assertion by South Africa was that it was
desirous to assist the population of Namibia-they called it
South West Africa-to
exercise its right to Selfdetermination and independence and that the Government
of South Africa would fully respect the wishes of the whole
population of the Territory and that it has no intention of
imposing any constitutional system on the people. Yet, we
are all aware that “homelands” have been created ever since
and that the administration has been manipulated in such a
11

of the international
community, are being subjected to
apartheid, a system censured by the General Assembly as a
crime against humanity and described by the Security
Council as abhorrent to the conscience of mankind.

United Nations requests to comply with the resolutions of
the General Assembly and the Security Council and the
opinions of the International Court of Justice.
118. The problem that we are faced with today is a
challenge to the authority of both the Council and other
organs of the United Nations in connexion with Namibia.
In the view of my delegation, the Security Council should
take a very serious view of the situation and should, first,
determine that the continued presence of South African
administration in Namibia constitutes an act of aggression
and, therefore, a threat to international peace and security,
and, second, adopt appropriate measures under Chapter VII
of the Charter to ensure the compliance of the South
African Government.

116. Since the establishment of the United Nations, the
question of Namibia has been the subject of several
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council and five references to the International Court of
Justice.
117. The substance of all the sessions of those organs of
the United Nations system points to the following: first,
that Namibia has an international status for which the
international community
is directly responsible; second,
that South Africa’s presence in that Territory is illegal and,
therefore, that its racist administration should withdraw;
third, that South Africa has defiantly refused to heed the

The meeting rose at 1. OSpm.

12
