S/PV.7880

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

7880

th meeting
Wednesday, 8 February 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Yelchenko. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ukraine)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Kandeel
Ms. Guadey
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Okamura
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Vaverka
Mr. Hickey
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Final progress report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Operation
in Côte d’Ivoire (S/2017/89)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-03382 (E)
*1703382*

S/PV.7880

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

The meeting was called to order at 3 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Côte d’Ivoire
Final progress report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(S/2017/89)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire to participate in this
meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Aïchatou
Mindaoudou, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/89, which contains the final progress
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire.
I now give the floor to Ms. Mindaoudou.
Ms. Mindaoudou (spoke in French): I would like
to thank you and the members of the Security Council,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to present the latest
report (S/2017/89) of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Côte d’Ivoire and to brief the Council on
recent major developments in the country.
Since the previous time I briefed the Council (see
S/PV.7601), a little more than a year ago, Côte d’Ivoire
has once again passed a test in its holding of democratic
elections, including a constitutional referendum on
30 October 2016 and elections to the legislature on
18 December. Despite a few protests in the run-up to
the referendum and some problems at various polling
stations during the legislative elections, the people
of Côte d’Ivoire voted peacefully and calmly. The
validation of the final results by the Constitutional
Council was carried out in a peaceful, orderly
2/8

08/02/2017

atmosphere. All of the observer missions — national,
regional and international — agreed that the results
of the vote reflected the will of the electorate and that
the organization of the referendum and election was
transparent and trustworthy.
I would like take this opportunity to once again
commend the people of Côte d’Ivoire for their
determination to maintain a peaceful atmosphere
throughout the process; the national authorities,
including the Independent Electoral Commission, for
organizing both elections without major incident; and,
lastly, the security forces for doing their part to secure
the electoral process coolly and efficiently.
As I did prior to the presidential election of October
2015, in the period leading up to the constitutional
referendum and the legislative elections I used my
good offices to encourage the various stakeholders
to maintain an orderly environment conducive to the
election campaigns, which they did. In particular,
the women of Côte d’Ivoire took an active part in
the promotion and implementation of a non-partisan
approach to matters of national interest. Between the
2015 presidential election and the referendum and
legislative elections of 2015, they participated actively
in debates on social, economic, security and political
issues. A significant number also ran for office in the
legislative elections, and although the number of seats
held by women in the National Assembly decreased,
despite the new Constitution’s proclamation of gender
parity, this bodes well for increased participation by
women in future elections and public office, among
other things. I would therefore like to pay tribute to
the tireless efforts of the Government, the majority and
opposition political parties, civil society, traditional,
religious and community leaders and women’s and
youth groups.
The new Constitution, which launches a Third
Republic, and the new, representative Parliament that
resulted from inclusive elections afford Côte d’Ivoire
an opportunity and impetus to fully consolidate the
country’s gains and establish long-term stability,
particularly if efforts are made to ensure that the
dividends of the economic recovery that has taken
place since the post-election crisis of 2010 and 2011
reach the people and enable them to benefit fully from
that growth.
While national reconciliation is making much
slower progress than the economic recovery, we are
17-03382

08/02/2017

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

S/PV.7880

still seeing notable advances. That is owed in part to
the publication of the report of the Dialogue, Truth and
Reconciliation Commission — as was recommended
by the Security Council in resolution 2226 (2015),
and which is a major step forward for the national
reconciliation process — and also to the upcoming
establishment of the new Senate, which could speed
up national reconciliation significantly. In addition
to that, the Government has continued to compensate
the victims of previous crises, unfreeze assets and
restore occupied properties. In his New Year’s address,
President Ouattara also pardoned 2,942 detainees,
including some who had been imprisoned after the
post-electoral crisis. All of that has contributed to
positive momentum. Nonetheless, the prosecution of
those alleged to have committed crimes during the
post-election period is still feeble. In that regard, in
order to ensure Côte d’Ivoire’s long-term stability, it is
crucial that investigations be carried out swiftly and in
full, if we are to create conditions in which all those
who committed serious abuses or violations of human
rights can be brought to justice, regardless of their
political affiliation.

in that the modus operandi was the same: the demands
were similar; both situations were settled in the same
way, through a negotiated agreement; and no soldier was
disciplined for insubordination. The implementation of
those laws are therefore integral to the transformation
of the security sector, which, inter alia, must touch
upon the themes of professionalism and responsibility.

On another front, the delays in prosecuting
alleged perpetrators of sexual abuse and gender-based
violence, and in providing care for their victims, despite
preventive efforts in that connection over the past 10
years, remains a concern. The timely adjudication of
such cases is critical to ensuring security and support
for victims, who represent the most vulnerable elements
of society — women and children.

In the past two years, the mission has supported the
National Human Rights Commission for Côte d’Ivoire
through institutional support and capacity-building at
the national and local levels, aimed at improving the
ability to monitor, investigate and report on human
rights violations and abuses, pursuant to the country’s
legislation and international human rights treaties
ratified by Côte d’Ivoire. The Commission will then be
able to take over, among other things, the monitoring
and the implementation of the joint United Nations
Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)-Forces armées de
Côte d’Ivoire (FACI) mechanism, created on 24 August
2015, which seeks to enable swift action against any
allegation of soldiers committing human rights.

The national police, gendarmerie and the armed
forces of Côte d’Ivoire were able to effectively secure
the referendum and legislative election despite certain
limitations and challenges. Although it is true that some
members of the armed forces revolted in January in
protest over their salaries and living standards — and
others from within the gendarmerie, corrections officers
and firefighters tried to follow suit, making the same
demands — those mutinies revealed that efforts must
continue to be made to enhance soldiers’ standards of
living and to set up a professional army.
The expeditious implementation of the 2015 Law
on the Organization of the Defence Sector and the
Armed Forces of Côte d’Ivoire, the 2016-2020 Military
Planning Law and the 2016-2020 Domestic Security
Planning Law must successfully and definitively
address the grievances that were highlighted. The
January mutiny mirrored that of 18 November 2014,

It is therefore essential that the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire continue to prioritize the reform of the security
sector — military, gendarmerie and police — as well
as the sustainable reintegration of former combatants
into society, with support from its bilateral and
multilateral partners.
The security situation in Côte d’Ivoire remains
stable. Its national security institutions have
demonstrated their ability to effectively and evenhandedly address latent security threats, both within
and outside the country. Nevertheless, some challenges
remain with regard to the proper equipping and
financing of law enforcement agencies. Reported
human rights violations have also decreased over the
past five years.

Since the adoption of resolution 2284 (2016),
we have worked closely with the Government, the
United Nations country team and key partners on
the development of a transition plan for UNOCI,
which was formally endorsed by stakeholders on
17 October 2016. It identifies residual priorities in
six key areas: social cohesion; human rights; security
sector reform; disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, weapons management and civilian
disarmament; defence, security and law enforcement;
and communications, particularly the transfer of
ONUCI FM radio. I would like to praise the Ivorian

17-033823/8

S/PV.7880

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

Government for its tireless efforts to ensure that the
transfer is carried out according to the recommendations
of the United Nations. In that regard, the plan also
identifies implementation partners and resource
requirements. The transfer of those priority functions
to the Government, the United Nations country team
and other partners is nearly complete.
Meanwhile, we are on schedule for the definitive
closure of UNOCI by 30 June. The civilian personnel
have been scaled back gradually and, by the end of
April only 159 will remain — of which 148 will work
exclusively on the physical closure of the mission. The
61 civilian, military and police field offices will be
fully closed by 15 February. The mission’s assets are
being liquidated, in accordance with the plan drafted
and approved by Headquarters in New York. By that
date, the majority of the mission’s uniformed personnel
will have left Côte d’Ivoire.
Major political milestones have been reached
with the successful holding of the referendum and
legislative elections in a peaceful environment.
Economically, the country continues to surge forward
with infrastructure works and increasing foreign
direct investment. However, we must bear in mind
that some challenges continue to require the attention
and engagement of the people and the Government
of Côte d’Ivoire and the support of their partners. In
particular, national reconciliation must be actively
pursued and transitional justice expedited; the security
sector needs to be overhauled, pursuant to applicable
laws; former combatants need to be sustainably
reintegrated into society; and the economic, social and
cultural rights of Ivorians must be promoted if we are
to avoid civil servants from making untimely demands
and carrying out crippling strikes and demonstrations.
Taken separately or together, all of those challenges
will determine Côte d’Ivoire’s trajectory towards
lasting stability.
The departure of UNOCI is imminent, and only
four months away. Allow me to take this opportunity to
convey my appreciation and admiration to the Ivorian
people and the Government of Côte d’Ivoire for their
firm commitment to moving away definitively from the
past crisis to a future of peace and shared prosperity.
I would also like to appeal to our partners to continue
supporting the efforts of the Ivorian people, but
above all to continue supporting — in the very short
term — the implementation of the transition plan by
financing the identified activities for the consolidation
4/8

08/02/2017

of the peacekeeping gains achieved by UNOCI during
its 14 years in Côte d’Ivoire. Only then will the United
Nations intervention in Côte d’Ivoire, through ONUCI,
be a real success story. On all of those issues, the
combined support of the Security Council, Member
States, international partners and the United Nations
country team remains essential to ensuring that Côte
d’Ivoire is headed irrevocably towards sustainable
peace and stability.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank the troop- and police-contributing countries
for supporting the United Nations in the service of
peace and security. I commend UNOCI forces for their
courage and commitment. They have played a crucial
role in making that progress possible. Allow me also
to pay tribute to the military and civilian personnel
who made the ultimate sacrifice by giving their lives in
service to UNOCI.
Once again, I thank the members of the Security
Council for their invaluable support.
The President: I thank Ms. Mindaoudou for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
and foremost, I would like to welcome the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire, Mr. Marcel
Amon-Tanoh, and to thank him for attending today’s
meeting. Similarly, allow me to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI),
Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou, for her comprehensive
briefing, as well as to commend her efforts and the
work of the entire UNOCI team.
Uruguay welcomes the most recent report
(S/2017/89) of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Côte d’Ivoire. We note that the country has continued
to make great strides in strengthening its institutions,
which is key to achieving sustainable peace. Above
all, we commend the progress made through the
recent holding of a constitutional referendum and
peaceful legislative elections, as well as in promoting
and protecting human rights, fostering national
reconciliation and promoting cross-border cooperation
to combat the scourge of terrorism.
Almost a year ago, the Security Council ended the
sanctions regime imposed pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004). We believe that, to date, the Government has
17-03382

08/02/2017

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

been responsible in its approach and we encourage it
to continue its efforts. We are aware that there is still a
long road ahead, but we are certain that Côte d’Ivoire is
now on the right path to peace and the rule of law.
Mr. Okamura (Japan) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou,
for her update on the situation in Côte d’Ivoire, where
peace and democracy have been restored. I would also
like to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte
d’Ivoire, Mr. Marcel Amon-Tanoh, for being here today.
(spoke in English)
Allow me to make a statement as we mark the final
progress report (S/2017/89) of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI).
After 14 years, UNOCI is finally drawing to a close. It
is as though we are reading the final chapter in a long
saga, with a happy ending after a very dramatic story.
UNOCI is a particularly unique tale. Whereas most
peacekeeping operations are deployed in the aftermath
of a crisis, UNOCI experienced escalated violence on
the ground and faced the risk of relapse into civil war
during its deployment.
UNOCI has faced and overcome many challenges,
such as implementing the peace agreement; supporting
the electoral process, including generating a voters
list and issuing identity cards; a sitting President
who refused to accept his electoral loss; undertaking
a protection-of-civilians mandate when there are two
opposing military forces; and even becoming caught
up in the extreme situation itself. Nowadays, such
situations are not unfamiliar to us.
UNOCI constitutes a handbook for many extreme
scenarios that peacekeeping might face. UNOCI has
seen them all, and it offers us many lessons for the
future. It also pioneered many innovations, including
inter-mission cooperation with the United Nations
in Liberia and Sierra Leone. The Quick Reaction
Force concept was also developed over the course of
UNOCI’s deployment.
I recall the day when the Constitutional Council
announced that Laurent Gbagbo had won. At that time,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Choi
Young-jin asked the Ambassadors of major countries
to gather in his office. I was among them. He told us
that he could not certify that announcement and that
he could certify only the outcome that the Independent

S/PV.7880

Electoral Commission had issued the day before,
proclaiming Alassane Ouattara as the winner. He
made his determination clear and asked for our unified
support. An unusual situation followed. There were
two Presidents, two Prime Ministers, two Foreign
Ministers and two military forces. UNOCI worked to
protect Alassane Ouattara, who was under siege inside
a hotel. Foreign Minister Marcel Amon-Tanoh was also
among those under siege. The incumbent President,
Mr. Gbagbo, then declared that the United Nations
must leave. The United Nations refused, but then
faced great difficulties with Mr. Gbagbo’s supporters.
And indeed, a number of stray bullets did fly into
UNOCI headquarters.
I would like to testify to the profound dedication of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Choi
Young-jin and of UNOCI staff. Despite the risks, they
overcame the extreme difficulties the mission faced.
Without their bravery, the conflict might not have
been resolved and we would not have peace today. I
personally owe a great deal to UNOCI’s role to protect
civilians. When months of tension escalated into street
violence, a number of diplomatic colleagues and I were
rescued thanks to the heroic efforts and professionalism
of the French Operation Licorne and UNOCI.
(spoke in French)
I cannot conclude my intervention without
underscoring the bold and resolute efforts of the
Ivoirian people, average citizens fighting for peace and
democracy. When the armed conflict broke out, citizens
took to the streets to demand a peaceful resolution
to the conflict. The security forces then opened fire,
and many people lost their lives. I remember the day
when women took to the streets to demand peace. They
were armed only with pots and pans, which they were
beating. Even after being attacked and dispersed by
security forces, they continued to beat their pots and
pans throughout the night in their homes. The vital role
that women play in promoting peace and security could
not have been more visible.
Following the crisis, the story continued with
international mobilization. We commend UNOCI’s
dedication during the transition period and to date.
UNOCI, the United Nations country team and Ivoirian
authorities strove to meet the difficult post-conflict
challenges, including the reform of the security sector
and national reconciliation. We can all be welcome
the conclusion of the UNOCI mission, six years after

17-033825/8

S/PV.7880

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

the civil war. I am convinced that the purpose of the
United Nations is to support the determination and
courage of ordinary people who pursue peace and
democracy. UNOCI has fulfilled that mission and
will forever remain in the history of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Through you, Sir, I would like to
welcome His Excellency Mr. Marcel Amon Tanoh,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire. It is a
genuine pleasure to have him present here today at this
meeting of the Security Council.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia welcomes the
briefing by the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Operation in
Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI), Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou.
We congratulate her on her excellent leadership and
also congratulate all civilian and military personnel for
their dedication to peace and stability.
I first wish to salute the efforts undertaken by the
people and Government of Côte d’Ivoire in favour of
national dialogue, peacebuilding and political unity.
Clear examples include the presidential elections held
on 25 October 2015, the constitutional referendum and
the legislative elections. We reaffirm resolution 2284
(2016), which extended — for the last time — the
mandate of UNOCI until 30 June, as a sign of the
positive progress achieved by the Government of Côte
d’Ivoire.
All countries have challenges that they must
face. In the case of Côte d’Ivoire, it is of course the
people and the Government of the Côte d’Ivoire, in
the framework of its sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity, that must meet those challenges
in the framework of the democratic values of peace
and integration.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Côte d’Ivoire.
Mr. Amon Tanoh (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): At the outset, allow me to express on behalf
of the President of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, His
Excellency Mr. Alassane Ouattara, and the Government
of Côte d’Ivoire, our best wishes for the succcess of the
Ukrainian delegation during its presidency, and to pay
homage to all Council members for their tireless efforts
to maintain international peace and security.
6/8

08/02/2017

I would also like to reiterate the congratulations
of the Ivorian Government to Secretary-General
António Guterres for his outstanding election as head
of our Organization.
I also commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Aïchatou Mindaoudou, for
the quality of her briefing and the report submitted
for consideration by the Council (S/2017/89). We also
wish to congratulate and thank the entire staff of the
United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI)
for its dedication to the cause of peace in our country.
With four months ahead until the closure of UNOCI, on
behalf of the Ivorian Government I take note with great
interest of this thirty-eighth report of the SecretaryGeneral and welcome the thorough implementation
of resolution 2284 (2016), our road map. Since the
adoption of that resolution, our country has undergone
a substantial transformation that makes the definitive
return to peace and our path towards development
irreversible, in spite of the twists and turns that are
inherent to the lives of nations and that can be seen
around the world.
Since our last meeting (see S/PV.7681), the
conditions that led to the lifting of the sanctions regime
and the decision to draw down UNOCI have been
consolidated further. The country inaugurated the Third
Republic on 8 November 2016, following the adoption
by referendum of the new Constitution on 30 October
2016. The Constitution of the Third Republic turns a
final page on the crisis that our country experienced
over the past decade. It strengthens national cohesion
and the stability of the country. It provides Côte d’Ivoire
with solid, credible and democratic institutions. That
is demonstrated by the plurality of the first National
Assembly of the Third Republic, which is characterized
in particular by the return of the opposition and the
presence of numerous figures in Parliament who are
independent of political parties.
Côte d’Ivoire is a country that is secure and at
peace. The mutinies of a small faction of the army,
based on old demands of a corporate nature, cannot
call that conclusion into question. However, they have
motivated the Government, in particular through
training and greater discipline, to accelerate the
necessary professionalization of the armed and security
forces with the entry into force of a law on military
programming and internal security forces. The first
decisions taken in that framework, which include the
appointment of new leaders at all levels of our armed
17-03382

08/02/2017

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

forces and security forces, as well as the improvement
of the living and working conditions of our soldiers, will
transform their daily lives and capabilities in a lasting
way. The President of the Republic, who is fully aware
of these events, is working daily to resolve the deeprooted causes. These measures also put the finishing
touches on the ambitious reform of the security sector
and consolidate the achievements of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process, which our
country courageously carried out in record time and for
which we provided more than 70 per cent of the funding.
Côte d’Ivoire is riding an undying wind of optimism.
The rate of growth of the gross domestic product over
the past five years has been on average 9 per cent per
year, and the cumulative amount of foreign direct
investment remains high — an eloquent testimony to
the renewed confidence of our partners in our country.
The Government now seeks to redistribute, through its
inclusive development policy, the fruits of that growth to
Ivorians, in particular to the most disadvantaged, while
taking into account all the imperatives of development.
The forthcoming drawdown of UNOCI should not
end our collaboration. On the contrary, it should allow
us to place our collective action in the framework of
the fight against regional and global challenges. That
includes terrorism, which struck my country in March
2016, following many others, and which constitutes a
major threat to peace and security in our region and
beyond. That notwithstanding, the terrorist attack in
Grand-Bassam enabled my country to highlight the
great ability of its forces to respond appropriately to
this type of threat.
We therefore welcome the deployment within
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali of the Senegalese rapid
reaction force battalion, which has long served in our
country, and whose capacities, together with those of
all other forces, will be decisive against the terrorist
groups that are destabilizing Mali and exerting great
pressure in terms of security on our country and all
the neighbouring countries of Mali. I have faith in our
ability to go further in preventing the terrorist threat
and strengthening the ability of our States to respond,
if we remain unified.
The countries represented here and the entire
international community have given a great deal for
the peace and reconstruction of Côte d’Ivoire. The
time has come for Cote d’Ivoire to serve the cause of

S/PV.7880

peace everywhere. Our country wishes to increase
its participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations; in that regard, it is counting on the support
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
strengthen the capacity of its forces in that area.
Already, a deployable battalion will soon be able to
participate in United Nations operations, with the help
of our main strategic partners.
Above and beyond that, and with its experience
in crisis management and the philosophy of dialogue
and peace — which has always underpinned its action
in Côte d’Ivoire and throughout the world — the
Ivorian Government asks Security Council members
and all Member States to support its candidature for
a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for
the term 2018-2019 in the elections scheduled for
June 2017. As those present know, our candidacy
was endorsed by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union. It
embodies the values that are at the heart of the work of
the Security Council and of our Organization at a time
when our world must show more solidarity and mutual
understanding in the face of new threats.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Security Council on the steadfastness
it has shown in managing the crisis in The Gambia and
for its crucial support to ECOWAS. This made it possible
to uphold the free choice of the people of The Gambia
in electing President Adama Barrow. The management
of this situation demonstrated that we — the United
Nations, regional economic communities and the
African Union — must work together in order to ensure
that democracy and the aspirations of peoples to freely
choose their leaders prevail everywhere.
UNOCI will remain a success story — a tremendous
achievement whose lessons will inspire United Nations
peacekeeping operations and the commitment of our
Organization to peace around the world. The country
that UNOCI will leave behind in June is a country that is
standing on its own feet — a prosperous nation. It is the
largest economy among the francophone countries of
West Africa and one of the largest in the region. Its fate
will be determined by the Ivorian people. The vision of
the President of the Republic, which he has consigned
me to convey, is clear. In his capacity as guarantor of
our country’s institutions, he will continue to work
tirelessly to ensure the development of a modern,
united and strong nation, led by rejuvenated Ivorians

17-033827/8

S/PV.7880

The situation in Côte d’Ivoire

08/02/2017

aware of the impact of their actions on the progress of
their nation.

and profound gratitude for the enormous sacrifices that
have been made for my country.

In conclusion, on behalf of the Ivorian people and
the Ivorian Government, I would like to once again
reiterate to the members of the Security Council and
to the entire United Nations system my sincere thanks

The President: I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
this subject.

8/8

The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

17-03382
