A/RES/71/147

United Nations

Distr.: General
20 December 2016

General Assembly
Seventy-first session
Agenda item 83

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 13 December 2016
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/71/514)]

71/147. Commemoration of the seventieth anniversary of the
International Court of Justice
The General Assembly,
Mindful that, in accordance with Article 2, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations, all Members shall settle their international disputes by peaceful means
in such a manner that international peace and security, and justice, are not endangered,
Bearing in mind the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning
Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations 1 and the Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of
International Disputes, 2
Recognizing the need for universal adherence to and implementation of the
rule of law at both the national and international levels,
Recalling that the International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ
of the United Nations, and reaffirming its authority and independence,
Noting that 2016 marks the seventieth anniversary of the inaugural sitting of
the Court,
Noting with appreciation the special commemorative event held at The Hague
in April 2016 to celebrate the anniversary,
1.
Solemnly commends the International Court of Justice for the important role
that it has played as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations over the past
70 years in adjudicating disputes among States, and recognizes the value of its work;
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the Court for the measures adopted to
operate an increased workload with maximum efficiency;
3.
Stresses the desirability of finding practical ways and means to
strengthen the Court, taking into consideration, in particular, the needs resulting
from its workload;
_______________
1
2

Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.
Resolution 37/10, annex.

16-21354 (E)

*1621354*

Please recycle

A/RES/71/147

Commemoration of the seventieth anniversary of the International Court of Justice

4.
Encourages States to continue considering recourse to the Court by
means available under its Statute, and calls upon States that have not yet done so to
consider accepting the jurisdiction of the Court in accordance with its Statute;
5.
Calls upon States to consider means of strengthening the Court’s work,
including by supporting the Secretary-General’s Trust Fund to Assist States in the
Settlement of Disputes through the International Court of Justice on a voluntary
basis, in order to enable the Fund to carry on and to strengthen its support to the
countries which submit their disputes to the Court;
6.
Stresses the importance of promoting the work of the Court, and urges
that efforts be continued through available means to encourage public awareness in
the teaching, study and wider dissemination of the activities of the Court in the
peaceful settlement of disputes, in view of both its judiciary and advisory functions.
62nd plenary meeting
13 December 2016

2/2
