VI.

--

--

ea! and international, in Somalia, in the planning and implementation of refugee projects and refugee-related development activities;
12. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to apprise the Economic and
Social Council at its second regular session of 1988 of the
progress made in their respective fields of responsibility
with regard to those provisions of the present resolution
which concern them;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the United Nations High Commissioner and the
United Nations Development Programme, to submit a report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session on
the progress achieved in the implementation of the present
resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December 1987
42/128.

Emergency assistance to voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 41 / 140 of 4 December 1986 on
emergency assistance to voluntary returnees and displaced
persons in Chad, as well as all its previous resolutions on
this question,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on
emergency humanitarian assistance 10 voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad, 148
Deeply concerned about the persistence of the drought
and the invasion of locusts and predators, which are compounding the already precarious food and health situation
in Chad,
Conscious that the large number of voluntary returnees
and displaced persons resulting from the war and the
drought in Chad poses a serious problem of integrating
them into society,
Considering the mass return to their home villages of
persons displaced as a result of war and drought in the
northern region of Chad,
Bearing in mind the many appeals made by the Government of Chad for international emergency assistance to
the voluntary returnees and displaced persons in Chad,
who are victims of the war and of natural disasters,
1. Endorses the appeals made by the Government of
Chad for emergency assistance to the voluntary returnees
and displaced persons in Chad;
2. Reiterates its appeal to all States and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations to support,
by generous contributions, the efforts being made by the
Government of Chad to assist and resettle the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;
3. Takes note with satisfaction of the action undertaken
by the various organizations oft he United Nations system
and the specialized agencies with a view to mobilizing
emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary
returnees and displaced persons in Chad;
4. Again requests the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to mobilize emergency humanitarian assistance to the voluntary returnees and displaced persons
in Chad;

---··

--

5.

Calls upon the Secretary-General to continue his ef-

forh t,, mobilize special humanitarian assistance for the

resettlement of displaced persllllS in the northern region of
Chad.
6. Rt'quests the Secretary-General, in co-operation
with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, to
report to the General Assembly at its forty-third session
on the 1mplernentation ,,f the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 December /987
42/129.

Situation of refugees in the Sudan

Illl' (i,,neral Assembly.
Recalling its resolution 41/ 139 of 4 December 1986 and
its other previous resolutions on the situation of refugees
in the Sudan,
Hav1nf.!. considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral149 on the situation of refugees in the Sudan and
the report of the inter-agency mission annexed thereto,
Appreciating the important measures that the Government (lf the Sudan is taking in order to provide shelter,
protection, food, education and health and other
humanitarian services to a very large and persistent number of refugees in the Sudan,
Recognizing the heavy burden placed on the people and
Government of the Sudan and the sacrifices they are making in caring for the refugees and the need for adequate international assistance to enable them to continue their efforts to provide assistance to the refugees,
Gravely concerned at the continuing serious social and
economic impact of the massive presence of refugees, as
well as its far-reaching consequences for the country's development, security and stability,
Expressing its appreciation for the assistance rendered by
Member States and intergovernmental and nongovernmental organizations in support of the refugee programme in the Sudan,
Bearing in mind the tindings and recommendations of
the inter-agency mission to the Sudan reported to the General Assembly at its forty-first session, particularly the
suggestion that the international community should explore new and effective approaches to ensure that the burden ,1f dealing with refugees is shared more equitably, 150

Recognizing the need to view refugee-related development projects within local and national development
plan ...,
I Take.~ note of the report of the Secretary-General 149
on the implementation of resolution 41/139 and welcomes
the report of the inter-agency mission annexed thereto;
2 Commends the measures that the Government of
the Sudan is taking to provide material and humanitarian
assistance to refugees, in spite of the effects of the drought
and the serious economic situation it faces, and stresses
the need for additional resources to lessen the impact of
the presence of refugees on the economy of this least developed ,·ountry;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the l 1nited Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
do1101 countries and intergovernmental and non-

A·42/646.
'·o '>e<' 1\/41 /264. annex. l'ara. ~.1

1-1''

148 A/42/506.

223

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

General Assembl}'-Fnrt}-second Session

224

governmental organization" for their efforts to assist the
refugees in the Sudan;
4. Expresses grave concern at the serious and far
reaching consequences oft he massive presence of refugees
in the country for its security, stability and development,
as reflected in the reports of the inter-agency missions;
5. Also expresses grave concern at the shrinking re
sources available for refugee programmes in the Sudan
and the serious consequence', of this situation for the
country's ability to continue t<> act a" ho-.t ,tnd provide a-.sistance to refugees:
6. Requests the Secretary-lieneral, in following up n11
the reports of the inter-agency missions and furthering the
integration of developmental and refugee aid, to take concrete steps, in collaboration with the United Nations Development Programme and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, for the early
implementation of the recommendations contained in the
report of the 1987 inter-agency mission: 14Q
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to mobilize the
necessary financial and material assistance for the full implementation of ongoing projects in the areas affected by
the presence of refugees:
8. Appeals to Member States, the appropriate organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
and the international financial institutions to provide the
Government of the Sudan with the necessary resources for
the implementation of development assistance projects in
regions affected by the presence of refugees:
9. Requests the High Commissioner to continue coordination with the appropriate specialized agencies in order to consolidate and ensure the continuation of es~ential
services to the refugees in their settlements:
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session, through the
Economic and Social Council. on the implementation of
the present resolution.
93rd plenary meeting
7 Dect'mbcr J987
42/130.

Enlargement of the Executive Committee of the
Programme of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution
1987/89 of 9 July 1987 on the enlargement of the Executive Committee of the Programme of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees,

1. Decides to increase the membership of the Executive
Committee of the Programme of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees from forty-one to forty-three;
2. Requests the Economic and Social Council to elect
the two additional members at it~ first regular session of
1988;
3. Notes with satisfaction that the Executive Committee of the Programme of the High Commissioner has
begun to consider ways and means of improving the possibilities for observers to participate effectively in its work
93rd plenary meeting
7 December l987

42/131.

Fortieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights

/'he General Assembly,
Considering that the year 1988 will mark the fortieth anrnversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 2
which, conceived as a common standard of achievement
for all peoples and all nations and having provided the basis for the develorment of the lnt~rnational ~ovenants on
Human Rights, 1 has been and nghtly contmues to be a
fundamental source of inspiration for national and international efforts for the protection and promotion of human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Recalling, in this respect, its resolution 217 A (Ill) of
10 December 1948, by which it officially proclaimed the
L;niversal Declaration of Human Rights, its resolutions
Jb/169 of 16 December 1981 and 38/57 of 9 December
1983, relating to the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration, as well a~ its resolution 41/1 SO of 4 December
1986. relating to the fortieth anniversary of the Declaration.
Convinced of the continuing need to promote the universal observance and enjoyment of human rights, which
contribuk to peaceful and friendly relations among nations,
Recalling that in its resolution 41/150 it decided to celebrate in 1988 the fortieth anniversary of the Declaration,
I. Resolves that the celebration in 1988 of the fortieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights shall be used as an occasion to highlight the
achievements of the United Nations in its efforts to promote and protect human rights universally, to renew the
commitment of the Organization in this area and to encourage Member States to ensure the promotion and protection of the rights enshrined in the Declaration;
2. Once again invites Member States, the specialized
agencies, regional intergovernmental organizations and
non-governmental organizations to take appropriate measures, such as those set forth in the annex to resolution
41/150, and to support appropriate activities aimed at encouraging the promotion of the universal observance and
enjoyment of civil and political rights, as well as economic,
social and cultural rights:
3. Urges the Secretary-General to carry out the activities indicated in the annex to resolution 41/ 1SO in order to
assure the success of the activities commemorating the
fortieth anniversary of the Declaration:
4. Reiterates its request to the Department of Public
Information of the Secretariat to disseminate appropriate
public information, broadcasting and audio-visual
material designed to draw attention to, and emphasize the
importance of, the Declaration and the role played and the
work done by the United Nations to ensure the effective
enjoyment of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
5. Urges the United Nations Postal Administration to
give special attention to the issuance of commemorative
postage stamps on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary
of the Declaration;
6. Confirms its decision to include in the provisional
agenda of its forty-third session the item entitled "Fortieth
anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights";
7. Further confirms its decision to devote one plenary
meeting during its forty-third session to the celebration of
the fortieth anniversary of the Declaration, which falls on
10 December I 9S8, and requests the Secretary-General to
