212

General Assembly-Forty-third Session

6. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its forty-fourth session a report on the
status of the Convention.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988
43/139.

Situation of human rights in Afghanistan

The General Assembly,
Guided by the principies embodied in the Charter of the
United Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, 2 the International Covenants on Human Rights 20
and the humanitarian rules set out in the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, 14 2
Aware of its responsibility to promote and encourage respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for ali
and resolved to remain vigilant with regard to violations of
human rights wherever they occur,
Emphasizing the obligations of ali Governments to respect and protect human rights and to fulfil the responsibilities they have assumed under various international
instruments,
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1984/37 of 24 May 1984, in which the Council requested
the Chairman ofthe Commission on Human Rights to appoint a special rapporteur to examine the situation of human rights in Afghanistan, with a view to formulating
proposals that could contribute to ensuring full protection
of the human rights of ali residents of the country before,
during and after the withdrawal of ali foreign forces,
Recalling ali other relevant resolutions, in particular its
resolution 42/135 of 7 December 1987,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolution 1988/67 of 10 March 1988 27 and Economic and Social Council decision 1988/136 of 27 May 1988,
Welcoming the Agreements on the Settlement of the
Situation Relating to Afghanistan 143 signed at Geneva on
14 April 1988 as a positive development, which, when
fully implemented, should contribute to the creation of a
situation that will permit the full enjoyment of human
rights, including the right to self-determination, by ali the
people of Afghanistan,
Welcoming the co-operation that the Afghan authorities
have extended to international organizations, in particular
to the specialized agencies of the United Nations, to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and to the International Committee of the
Red Cross,
Having carefully examined the interim report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan, 144 in which, while it is recognized that there
have been sorne improvements in the human rights situation in the area controlled by the Afghan authorities, continuing violations of fundamental human rights within the
country are revealed,
Recognizing that a sitllation of armed conflict continues
to exist in Afghanistan, leaving large numbers of victims
without protection or assistance and contributing to violatim,:· of human rights and humanitarian law throughout
the country,

142 Uníted Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75. Nos. 970-973.
143 Official Records of the Security Council. hmy-third

Year.
Sufllement far April, May and June J98íi. documenl S/19835, annex l.
A/43/742, annex.

Regretting that the Special Rapporteur was unable to
visit areas not under the control ofthe Afghan authorities,
1. Commends the efforts of the Special Rapporteur to
fulfil his mandate and takes note of his interim report on
the situation of human rights in Afghanistan;
2. Welcomesthe co-operation that the Afghan authorities extended to the Commission on Human Rights by permitting its Special Rapporteur to visit Afghanistan from
11 to 19 September 1988;
3. Expresses its serious concern that, in spite of improvements identified by the Special Rapporteur, acts of
war continue and violations of human rights persist with
the same frequency as in the past, especially affecting the
civilian population and threatening the life and security of
innocent men, women and children;
4. Expresses its concern that, despite the significant reduction in the numbers of political prisoners as a result of
various measures, over two thousand persons are still in
prison for political reasons, and urges the Afghan authorities to pursue the policy of amnesty and to guarantee that
released prisoners are not placed under surveillance or
harassed following their release;
5. Notes with grave concern the continuing allegations
of torture and ill-treatment of prisoners on remand and
política! prisoners;
6. Notes with equal concern the reports of disappearances and urges the Afghan authorities to investigate the
fate of ali missing persons;
7. Notes a/so with concern indications that the economic, social and cultural situation in Afghanistan has
deteriorated over the years of conflict and has now become
critica!;
8. Expresses its great concern that more than five million refugees remain outside the country because they fear
the climate of insecurity in Afghanistan, the extensive
presence of mines and explosives, and the continued bombardments of the civilian population;
9. Calls once again upon all the parties to the conflict,
in order to alleviate the suffering of the people of Afghanistan, to apply fully the principies and rules ofinternational
humanitarian law and to co-operate fully and effectively
with international humanitarian organizations, in particular to facilitate the protection activities of the International Committee of the Red Cross;
10. Underlines that in post-war Afghanistan it will be
essential to adopt concrete measures aimed at securing the
observance of human rights;
11. Urges the authorities in Afghanistan to continue to
co-operate with the Commission on Human Rights and its
Special Rapporteur:
12. Requests the Secretary-General to give ali necessary assistance to the Special Rapporteur;
13. Decides to keep under consideration, during its
forty-fourth session, the question ofhuman rights and fundamental freedoms in Afghanistan in order to re-examine
this question in the light of additional elements provided
by the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic
and Social Council.
75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988
