S/2018/89*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 January 2018
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to resolution 2303 (2016), in which the
Security Council requested me to report to it on the situation in Burundi every three
months, including on any public incidents of incitement to hatred and violence.
Further to his appointment on 5 May 2017 and his subsequent visits to Burundi and
the region, my Special Envoy briefed the Council on 26 July and 20 November 2017
to provide his assessment of the situation in that country and of the outcome of his
meetings with government officials, political party leaders and civil society
representatives, as well as with the President of Uganda, Yoweri Museveni, and the
former President of the United Republic of Tanzania, Benjami n Mkapa, the mediator
and the facilitator, respectively, of the East African Community-led dialogue process.
2.
The present report covers the period since the briefing by my Special Envoy of
20 November 2017 and provides details on the latest political de velopments in
Burundi, regional efforts to convene an inclusive dialogue and the activities of my
Special Envoy and the United Nations system in that country.

II. Major developments
A.

Political developments
3.
More than two and a half years after the beginning of the latest crisis in Burundi,
the political situation remains tense. The Government continues to seek constitutional
amendments, exacerbating tensions with the opposition. Meanwhile, stymied by
persistent mistrust between the Government and the opposition, regional efforts to
bring together the parties to the conflict have been unsuccessful thus far. Rather than
seeking common ground, the stakeholders continue to wrangle over the dialogue
process itself.
Developments within Burundi
4.
The Government of Burundi has continued on its course to revise the
Constitution. On 24 November 2017, the Government adopted recommendations of
the National Commission for the Inter-Burundi Dialogue. Expected to be put to
referendum in May 2018, the proposed revisions include: (a) extending the
* Reissued for technical reasons on 28 February 2018.

18-01202* (E)

280218

*1801202*

S/2018/89

presidential term to seven years; (b) providing a five-year period for a possible review
of the ethnic quota of 60 per cent Hutu to 40 per cent Tutsi in the executive branch,
the Parliament and the judicial branch; (c) creating the post of Prime Minister and
removing the post of Second Vice-President; and (d) replacing the two-thirds majority
necessary to pass basic bills in Parliament with a simple majority. Many stakeholders
and partners of Burundi have raised concerns that the proposed revisions could
reverse some of the gains made as a result of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi. Providing an opportunity to abolish the ethnic quota
enshrined in the accord is of particular concern.
5.
In Bugendana, in the province of Gitega, on 12 December, the President of
Burundi, Pierre Nkurunziza, launched a campaign in favour of the revisions. Joined
by government officials, leaders of registered political parties associated with the
ruling party, Conseil national pour la défense de la démocratie -Forces pour la défense
de la démocratie (CNDD-FDD), diplomatic representatives and a crowd numbering
in the thousands, the President applauded the amendments for providing Bur undi with
a modern Constitution and warned those seeking to oppose the changes, vocally or
actively, of crossing a red line. In response, leading opposition figure Agathon Rwasa
of the coalition Amizero y’Abarundi, who is also the First Vice-President of the
National Assembly, boycotted the ceremony and denounced it as a violation of the
law. The Vice-President of the opposition party Sahwanya -Front pour la démocratie
du Burundi (Sahwanya-FRODEBU), Léonce Ngendakumana, described the campaign
as a development that could further exacerbate the sociopolitical climate in Burundi.
6.
On 5 November, President Nkurunziza extended by six months the mandate of
the Independent National Electoral Commission, a decision that was contested by the
opposition. On 15 December, the President of the Commission met with political
party leaders, civil society organizations and religious representatives to request their
participation in the provincial and communal electoral commissions.
7.
Meanwhile, on 11 December, the Minister for the Interior and the Minister for
Finance signed a joint ordinance outlining a system of payment of voluntary
contributions from the public to a Government-run fund for the 2020 elections. The
fund was launched in June 2017 by President Nkurunziza, who contributed
F Bu 5 million, or $2,850, and called upon the population to join him in what he
considered to be fulfilling one’s patriotic duty. Lauded as symbolic of the financial
autonomy of Burundi vis-à-vis donor nations, the fund has been described by
President Nkurunziza as the recovery of national political independence in unity.
Several ministers, high-profile government officials and civil society organizations
have publicly contributed to the fund. Employees, students and unemployed persons
have been requested to pay a set amount, ranging from the equivalent of 50 cents to
one month’s salary per year, beginning in January 2018. Contributions from civil
servants are to be withdrawn automatically from their salaries. Those who are unable
to pay must provide the reason in writing.
8.
The chairs of the civil society organization Parole et action pour le réveil des
consciences et l’évolution des mentalités, Faustin Ndikumana and Gabriel Rufyiri,
and the anti-corruption watchdog group Observatoire de lutte contre la corruption et
les malversations économiques denounced the campaign as illegal. Mr. Rufyiri went
further, describing the system as the organized daylight robbery of the world ’s poorest
people. The opposition umbrella group Conseil national pour le respect de l’Accord
d’Arusha pour la paix et la réconciliation au Burundi et la restauration de l ’état de
droit (CNARED) and Sahwanya-FRODEBU also denounced the campaign.

2/10

18-01202

S/2018/89

Inter-Burundian dialogue led by the East African Community
9.
The East African Community-led inter-Burundian dialogue did not make
significant progress. During a fourth dialogue session, held in Arusha, United
Republic of Tanzania, from 27 November to 8 December, the parties failed to engage
in a genuine and direct dialogue to reach an agreement or issue a statement,
notwithstanding efforts made by the facilitator. Instead, the facilitator compiled a
summary of convergent and divergent points to present to the mediator.
10. On 7 November, prior to the dialogue session, the Permanent Representative of
Uganda to the United Nations visited President Nkurunziza on behalf of President
Museveni to discuss efforts to move the political process forward. On 20 October, the
facilitator also met with the Secretary-General of CNDD-FDD as part of consultations
held before the dialogue session. Meanwhile, the Minister for Interior and Civic
Education convened a meeting of the Political Party Forum on 21 November,
comprising leaders and representatives of registered political parties , in preparation
for the session. During that meeting, the Secretary-General of CNDD-FDD appealed
to the participants to lobby the facilitator in order to prohibit civil society
representatives from taking part in the meeting, arguing that discussions shou ld be
held between politicians only.
11. Nonetheless, some 32 registered political parties and identified civil society
organizations, along with members of the media, women, young persons and religious
groups, with the exception of the Catholic Church, a ttended the session. The
Government was represented by the Assistant to the Interior Minister and CNDD FDD by senior members of the party. The Ombudsman and Domitien Ndayizeye and
Sylvestre Ntibatunganya, two former Presidents, were also present. Leaders o f
Burundi-based opposition groups, including Agathon Rwasa and Evariste
Ngayimpenda of Amizero y’Abarundi and Léonce Ngendakumana of Sahwanya FRODEBU also attended. CNARED was not invited as a bloc and, as a result, its
members declined to attend. In addition, 34 individuals on the Government’s arrest
warrant list were not invited. In a statement and letter to the mediator of 18 November,
CNARED dismissed the session as a ploy to support President Nkurunziza in his
efforts to bury the Arusha Agreement and the Constitution. Leaders of the “Halte au
troisième mandat” (“Stop the third term”) campaign also refused to attend, arguing
that the process lacked inclusivity and that security was not guaranteed for
participating civil society representatives. The leaders also criticized the leadership
of the East African Community for not matching their rhetoric to their values, arguing
that a party to the conflict had successfully diverted the objective of the process to its
advantage, rendering the dialogue meaningless.
12. On 8 December, the session was concluded with a summary of 19 points of
convergence, including: (a) the sovereignty of Burundi and the political and social
rights of all Burundians; (b) the commitment to the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement and the Constitution as the foundation for sustainable peace, security and
stability; (c) the political nature of the crisis and the need for a political solution; and
(d) the need to create a secure environment for the return and reintegration of refuge es
and exiled political actors, as well as for the resettlement of internally displaced
persons, with the support of other stakeholders and the international community.
13. The facilitator also summarized 11 points of divergence, issues on which
participants were unable to agree, as follows: (a) the depoliticization of the security
organs; (b) basic freedoms for individuals and legally organized groups, such as
freedom of association, assembly, speech and movement; (c) the release of political

18-01202

3/10

S/2018/89

prisoners; (d) constitutional amendments; (e) the move from a two -thirds majority to
a simple majority in the Parliament; (f) the disarming of civilians and groups;
(g) personal security and the protection of property belonging to returning exiled
political actors; (h) security sector reforms; (i) engagement with armed groups ready
to renounce violence and pursue a peaceful settlement; (j) the opening up of the
political space; and (k) the lifting of arrest warrants and the offer of amnesty to
political detainees.
14. The facilitator pledged to meet with the mediator in order to brief him on the
session and seek his views on the way forward, with a view to planning an additional
session in the coming months. The Government, however, continued to insist that the
process be moved to Burundi, arguing that there was no crisis in that country. On
11 December, the Spokesperson for the Government issued a statement asserting that
the meeting had been the last to be held outside the country. In the statement, the
Spokesperson called upon refugees and exiled Burundians who were not facing
prosecution to return home and contribute to the organization of the 2020 elections.
As for those for whom an arrest warrant had been issued, the Government continued
to call upon them to return in order to face justice.
15. Conversely, political opposition leaders maintained that the security situation in
Burundi was poor, human rights abuses continued and a genuine and inclusive
dialogue would be needed to provide a sustainable solution to the c risis, while also
stressing the dire socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in the country. On
8 December, CNARED issued a communiqué in which it urged regional leaders,
namely President Museveni and the President of the United Republic of Tanzania,
John Magufuli, to exert political, diplomatic and economic pressure, including a
possible embargo, on President Nkurunziza in order to compel him to join the
dialogue. It called upon the African Union, the East African Community and the
United Nations to recognize that President Nkurunziza did not want to negotiate and
requested the United Nations to further involve itself in the resolution of the crisis. It
also warned of the risks of a civil war caused by the pursuit by President Nkurunziza
of lifetime presidency.

B.

Security situation
16. The overall security situation remained calm but volatile and was marked by
isolated incidents, which the Government often attributed to banditry or land disputes.
Following a decrease in reported grenade attacks and kidnappings in September,
seven grenade attacks were reported in Bujumbura Mairie and in the province of
Muramvya between 20 November and 20 December.
17. On 22 October, four leaders of the recently created opposition movement,
Forces populaires du Burundi, were reportedly arrested by the security forces of the
United Republic of Tanzania and transferred to security agents of Burundi. That
opposition group and others have called upon the authorities of the United Republic
of Tanzania to provide information on the leaders’ whereabouts. Neither the
Government of the United Republic of Tanzania nor the Government of Burundi has
confirmed the arrests.
18. The security situation was also characterized by ongoing house search
operations by police, notably in neighbourhoods of Bujumbura Mairie, where
anti-Government demonstrations in 2015 had been most pronounced. Frequent arrests
were made during such operations of those not registered in the cahier de ménage (a
visitors’ book required to be kept by each household); some of those arrested were

4/10

18-01202

S/2018/89

detained and interrogated. Arrests of real or perceived opposition members continued,
notably of the party Forces nationales de libération (FNL)/Rwasa, and the party
Mouvement pour la solidarité et la démocratie. In the east ern province of Ruyigi, on
18 December, five supporters of FNL/Rwasa were arrested and accused of having
held an unauthorized meeting on the proposed referendum. On 10 January, a
spokesperson for FNL/Rwasa said that more than 45 FNL members had been arrest ed
since the beginning of the campaign in favour of the constitutional amendments.
19. Cross-border incidents were also reported during the period under review. On
25 November, a police spokesperson announced that six fishermen of Burundi had
been kidnapped by the military of Rwanda on Lake Rweru, in the province of
Muyinga, on 24 November and later released. No official reaction from the authorities
of Rwanda was reported.
20. Local residents and civil society organizations, in particular in the provinces of
Kirundo, Ngozi and Makamba, continued to denounce an alleged intensification of
paramilitary training of the Imbonerakure, the youth wing of the ruling party, and the
politicization of young people, prompting fear in local communities. Some media,
civil society activists and political actors in exile also reported the unconfirmed
forced disappearances or assassinations of notorious Imbonerakure members, who
were allegedly silenced to prevent them from reporting their criminal activities.

C.

Socioeconomic developments
21. The socioeconomic situation in Burundi continued to deteriorate. According to
the World Bank, in 2017, economic growth remained at 1.5 per cent, while there was
no change in key macroeconomic indicators. Public investment a nd foreign exchange
reserves dropped sharply during that year. Inflation soared from 5.6 per cent in
December 2016 to 18 per cent at the beginning of December 2017. The shortage of
United States dollars increased the cost and decreased the availability of imported
items, including food, medicine and electricity, and depreciated the national currency.
Unemployment among young people was another cause for serious concern, given
that 65 per cent of young people were estimated to have been out of work in Decemb er
2017. The Government of Burundi claims that its budget will increase by 6.2 per cent
in 2018 and has pledged to finance more than 80 per cent of the budget through
internal resources in order to end its reliance on foreign assistance and protect its
sovereignty.
22. According to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, Burundi
has made progress in combating those diseases. On 8 December, the Government and
the World Health Organization declared the end of the malaria epidemic that had
begun in March 2017, affecting more than 7 million people. The country successfully
used a community-based approach, supported by the United Nations Children’s Fund
and its partners, to expand prevention, diagnosis and care services rapidly, including
by distributing 15 million insecticide-treated nets, in order to contain the outbreak.
Meanwhile, some 7,000 community health workers were trained in 2017 to provide
integrated care in treating HIV, tuberculosis, malaria, malnutrition and gender -based
violence. The Executive Director of the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS announced on 16 December, during a visit to Burundi, a reduction in cases
of mother-to-child transmission of HIV. Chronic malnutrition, however, rema ined
prevalent in most provinces.

18-01202

5/10

S/2018/89

D.

Humanitarian situation
23. The humanitarian situation in Burundi has continued to be a cause for serious
concern. The number of internally displaced persons stood at 188,000 in November,
with 58 per cent under the age of 18 years. The number of refugees in neighbouring
countries stood at more than 400,000 in December, with some 254,000 living in the
United Republic of Tanzania. The number of new arrivals in the United Republic of
Tanzania, however, substantially decreased after the Government of that country
rescinded prima facie status for refugees of Burundi in February. Furthermore, some
13,000 refugees of Burundi have returned voluntarily following a tripartite
agreement, on 30 August, among the Government of Burundi, the Government of the
United Republic of Tanzania and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. Some 60,000 additional refugees are expected to return in 2018, mostly
from the United Republic of Tanzania. In order to facilitate the sustainable
reintegration of returnees and to avert possible conflict with local populations, the
United Nations and its humanitarian partners in Burundi will employ a joint response
plan.

E.

Human rights and judicial cooperation
24. During the reporting period, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) continued to receive allegations of serious human rights violations
and abuses, primarily by the State and affiliated actors, including killings, enforced
disappearances, torture and ill-treatment, more than 1,000 arbitrary arrests and
detentions and restrictions on the freedoms of association, expression and movement.
Members of the political opposition, in particular, have been arbitrarily arrested and
detained. Most opposition parties, independent non-governmental organizations and
the media have remained banned or suspended. The ongoing political impasse has
also had a devastating impact on economic and social rights.
25. The reports received by OHCHR are consistent with the findings of the Human
Rights Council-mandated Commission of Inquiry on Burundi, which has documented
the persistence of extrajudicial executions, arbitrary arrests and detentions, enforced
disappearances, torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment an d sexual
violence in Burundi since April 2015, committed by members of the National
Intelligence Service, the police, the army and the Imbonerakure. 1 On 26 October, the
Commission of Inquiry presented its report to the Third Committee of the General
Assembly, concluding that there were reasonable grounds to believe that crimes
against humanity have been committed and continue to be committed in Burundi since
April 2015. Throughout the work of the Commission of Inquiry, authorities of
Burundi rejected its repeated attempts to establish a dialogue and obtain information
from the Government, and did not allow its members to travel to Burundi. The
Permanent Representative of Burundi to the United Nations delivered a statement
threatening legal action against the independent experts on charges of “offense and
attempt to destabilize Burundi”.
26. Despite the serious allegations of human rights violations and abuses reported
by state agents or the Imbonerakure, little effort has been made to investigate and
combat impunity. During the reporting period, the issue of accountability for alleged
crimes and the engagement of the International Criminal Court continued to prompt

__________________
1

6/10

See A/HRC/36/54.

18-01202

S/2018/89

debate in Burundi and within the region. On 27 October, the decision of Burundi to
withdraw from the Rome Statute of the Court entered into effect, although the Court
retains jurisdiction over crimes committed while Burundi was a State party. On
9 November, the Court announced that on 25 October, its Pre -Trial Chamber III had
authorized the Court Prosecutor to launch a formal investigation into alleged crimes
against humanity committed in Burundi from 26 April 2015 to 26 October 2017. In a
statement, the judges cited alleged perpetrators as members of the police, the
intelligence service, the army and the Imbonerakure.
27. Government sources harshly criticized the decisions of the Court. On
11 November, in a statement issued by the presidency of the United Republic of
Tanzania, Presidents Museveni and Magufuli were reported as regretting that the
Court decision would undermine the East African Community-led peacemaking
efforts. The statement was welcomed by representatives of the Government of
Burundi. In contrast, on 12 November, in a further public statement, the then -leader
of CNARED urged Presidents Magufuli and Museveni to advocate for an end to
killings and to prevent constitutional amendments. The statement also included a call
for the peace process to continue to be pursued outside of Burundi itself.
28. The cooperation of the Government of Burundi with OHCHR has remained
suspended since October 2016. Discussions on the signing of a new memorandum of
understanding were held in September 2017. On 18 October, OHCHR submitted to
the authorities of Burundi a revised version of the draft memorandum of understanding,
addressing all pending matters, followed by a reminder on 1 December. On 12 January
2018, the Minister for External Relations and International Cooperation of Burundi
requested that OHCHR propose a date for the resumption of negotiations on the draft
memorandum of understanding. While indicating its readiness to resume negotiations,
OHCHR requested that the Government provide its official response on the draft
document that had been transmitted in October 2017. Separately, on 18 January 2018 ,
the Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review of the Human Rights Council
examined the human rights record of Burundi.

III. Activities of my Special Envoy and his office
29. My Special Envoy travelled twice to Burundi and the United Republic of
Tanzania, in November and December, to continue his engagements with national
stakeholders, including the authorities of the Government of Burundi, and to consult
with the East African Community facilitator of the inter-Burundian dialogue.
30. In Bujumbura, my Special Envoy met with government officials, including the
Minister for External Relations and International Cooperation and the Ombudsman,
with whom he discussed the dialogue process, the revision of the Constitution and the
progress of the status-of-mission agreement. The Ombudsman insisted on the need to
conclude the East African Community-led dialogue rapidly and relocate it to
Bujumbura. From 11 to 14 December, my Special Envo y met again with the Minister
for External Relations, as well as with the Swedish Special Envoy to the Great Lakes
Region and European Union ambassadors to Burundi. He also met with the Special
Envoy to the Great Lakes Region of the International Organization of la Francophonie
and the Special Representative of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
for the Great Lakes Region, with whom he discussed the outcome of the most recent
dialogue session and prospects for further sessions.

18-01202

7/10

S/2018/89

31. My Special Envoy concluded each of his visits to Burundi by briefing the
facilitator in Dar es Salaam, the United Republic of Tanzania, on his meetings with
various stakeholders. In that context, they exchanged views on the resumption of the
dialogue in the light of the Government’s ongoing plans to amend the Constitution
and the request made by the ruling party to conclude and relocate the East African
Community-led dialogue to Burundi. On 16 December, my Special Envoy and the
facilitator discussed the conclusions of the fourth session of the dialogue and next
steps. They also exchanged views on how the United Nations, in partnership with the
African Union, can best continue to provide support with a view to revitalizing the
East African Community-led mediation.
32. A team from the Office of the Special Envoy in Bujumbura joined the joint
technical working group in Arusha on 23 November to assist the facilitator at the
fourth dialogue session. Upon assuming the position on 27 November, the new head
of the Office made courtesy calls to partners and other members of the international
community. The Office continued its engagements with political actors and other
major stakeholders in order to encourage participants to remain committed to the
spirit of an inclusive dialogue.
33. It should be recalled that a draft status-of-mission agreement was submitted to
the Government of Burundi on 27 June 2016. In October, the Government expressed
its readiness to discuss the draft with a United Nations legal expert. On 18 December,
the Ministry of External Relations and International Cooperation addressed a note
verbale to the Office of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
requesting, inter alia, that: (a) the format of the status -of-mission agreement be
reviewed in order to specify the rights and obligations of each party; (b) the length
and duration of the mission be indicated, now that the external dialogue was over;
and (c) further discussion be conducted to conclude the status -of-mission agreement.

IV. Observations and recommendations
34. I am deeply concerned that, notwithstanding the facilitator ’s relentless efforts,
and the strong support of my Special Envoy, to reconvene the inter-Burundian
dialogue, the process remains deadlocked. It is crucial that al l parties, most especially
the Government, commit to the East African Community-led process and reach an
agreement before the 2020 elections. To that end, we need to revitalize our collective
efforts to bring an end to the crisis and the resulting sufferin g of the people of
Burundi. I therefore continue to count on the leadership of the subregion, the East
African Community and the African Union to redouble their efforts in order to ensure
that stability is restored in Burundi. I also urge the guarantors of the Arusha
Agreement to meet their obligations in that regard. During my recent meeting in Addis
Ababa on the margins of the African Union summit, on 27 January, I was able to
reiterate my concerns to all those who are engaged in the Burundi dossier.
35. I reiterate the full support of the United Nations for the East African
Community-led dialogue through enhanced cooperation with the African Union, in
particular within the framework of the joint technical working group. I commend the
East African Community mediator, President Museveni, and the facilitator, former
President Mkapa, for their tireless efforts and resolve to bring various stakeholders to
the table, as was again witnessed during the recent dialogue session. Furthermore, I
was encouraged by the report of the facilitator and his efforts to bring the region
together to further examine the possibilities of a peaceful solution to the crisis.

8/10

18-01202

S/2018/89

36. While it is the sovereign right of Burundi to amend its Constitution, I strongly
believe that such an important undertaking must be conducted in an inclusive manner
that involves achieving maximum participation and consensus among the key
political stakeholders. It requires a political and security environment that inspires
the confidence of all political actors involved. Convening an inclusive dialogue is the
only way in which Burundi can restore trust between opposing stakeholders and
strengthen national unity and democratic values. Several of the proposed changes
have already been challenged by the opposition as attempts by the ruling party to
consolidate its hold on power, which may cause unrest. It is worth recalling that the
Arusha Agreement clearly defined the nature and causes of conflict in Burundi, in
particular the struggles of its political class to accede to and remain in power. That
historic accord fostered stability and unity in the wake of a decade of war. It is on that
basis that Burundians, working together with the support of the region and the
international community, can build a stronger future for their country.
37. I note the improvements in the security situation in the country, and I urge the
Government to continue its efforts in that direction. There should be no grounds for
complacency. Neither the absence of an overt military confrontation nor the voluntary
repatriation of refugees is a sufficient indication of sustainable security and stability
in the country. Durable peace comes with addressing the underlying root causes of
the crisis, not by jeopardizing the foundations of relative normalcy, such as the Arusha
Agreement, which brought a decade of peace to the country. This is particularly
important leading into the 2020 electoral cycle.
38. I am deeply concerned by the state of the economy of Burundi, which has been
exacerbated by the political crisis. Addressing the economic challenges will require a
renewed effort to restore confidence and trust between the Government of Burundi
and its development partners.
39. In order to build a stronger and more stable nation, cooperation betwee n Burundi
and the United Nations is essential in all areas of common interest, including
socioeconomic development, humanitarian assistance, democracy and governance,
the rule of law and respect for and the promotion of human rights. My Special Envoy,
together with the Resident Coordinator, the United Nations country team in Burundi,
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Support Office, will continue
to work actively with the authorities of Burundi and other stakeholders in order to
combat impunity and protect the rights of all Burundians. Sustained development is
not feasible without an enabling political environment in which human rights,
democratic principles and basic freedoms are respected. I once again urge the
Government of Burundi to continue to collaborate with the humanitarian community
in the identification of needs, planning and humanitarian response. In addition, I call
upon the international community to prioritize the provision of assistance to Burundi
on health-related issues.
40. I commend the generosity of neighbouring countries in their hosting of refugees
of Burundi. It is important that the voluntary return of refugees be carried out in line
with the agreed principles of respect and dignity enshrined in the Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees of 1951. I am also aware of the lack of capacity and funding
for the reintegration of returnees to their communities. To that end, I appeal to the
partners of Burundi to support the sustainable reintegration of returnees further and
to ensure their protection.
41. Reports of ongoing crimes against humanity must be treated with the utmost
seriousness. It is particularly worrying that reporting indicates that many violations

18-01202

9/10

S/2018/89

by the State and the Imbonerakure continue to be targeted against political opposition
actors and their supporters.
42. I am also concerned by the lack of progress regarding relations between the
Government and OHCHR. I call upon the authorities of Burundi to cooperate with
United Nations human rights mechanisms. I encourage the authorities of Burundi to
implement the Human Rights Council resolutions adopted in September 2017 and
conclude discussions with OHCHR towards the discharge of its full mandate in
Burundi. I also call upon the Government to sign the memora ndum of understanding
with the African Union on the deployment and activities of that organization ’s human
rights observers and military experts, which will allow them to operate fully in the
country in fulfilment of their mandated responsibilities.
43. The United Nations remains committed to continuing to work closely with
Burundi, as has been the case in the past. In that regard, I urge the Government to
work with my Special Envoy to expedite the finalization of the status -of-mission
agreement.
44. I am grateful for the determined efforts of my Special Envoy and the United
Nations system in Burundi. The United Nations system is acutely aware of the deep
need of Burundi and its people for long-term peace, development and human rights.
This is not an impossible situation. With national and international leadership, real
progress can be made almost immediately. Two years after the eruption of the current
crisis, and with no end in sight, I strongly believe that all parties, in particular the
Government, must constructively engage in the political process, avoid further
instability in the country and find a solution in the larger interest of the people of
Burundi. In doing so, they should be guided by the spirit and the letter of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi. I call upon the Security Council
and the international community to engage with all urgency in this end, and stand
ready to support it in this regard.

10/10

18-01202
