S/2016/215

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 March 2016
Original: English

Letter dated 3 March 2016 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General
Further to Ambassador Rafael Darío Ramírez Carreño’s letter of 10 February
2016, I have the honour to inform you that the members of the Security Council
have agreed to send a mission to Mali, Guinea -Bissau and Senegal during the period
from 3 to 9 March 2016. The members of the Council have agreed on the terms of
reference of the mission, which are annexed hereto.
The Mali leg of the mission will be co-led by Ambassador François Delattre
(France) and Ambassador Fodé Seck (Senegal). I will lead the Senegal leg and
co-lead the Guinea-Bissau leg with Ambassador Fodé Seck (Senegal).
Following consultations with the members, it has been agreed that the
composition of the mission is as follows:
Ambassador Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins (Angola)
Mr. Zhao Yong (China)
Ambassador Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta (Egypt)
Ambassador Francois Delattre (France)
Ambassador Yoshifumi Okamura (Japan)
Ambassador Ramlan Bin Ibrahim (Malaysia)
Ambassador Phillip Taula (New Zealand)
Mr. Petr V. Iliichev (Russian Federation)
Ambassador Fodé Seck (Senegal)
Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain)
Ambassador Volodymyr Yelchenko (Ukraine)
Ambassador Peter Wilson (United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland)
Ambassador David Pressman (United States of America)
Ambassador Luis Homero Bermúdez Alvarez (Uruguay)
Ambassador Henry Alfredo Suárez Moreno (Venezuela, Bolivarian
Republic of).
I should be grateful if you could have the present letter and its annex
circulated as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ismael Abraão Gaspar Martins
President of the Security Council
16-03485 (E)

090316

*1603485*

S/2016/215

Annex
Terms of reference of the Security Council mission to Mali,
Guinea-Bissau and Senegal, March 2016
Mission to Mali, 4 to 6 March 2016,
led by France and Senegal
References:
Security Council resolution 2227 (2015)
Security Council press statement of 12 January 2016 (SC/12198-AFR/3300-PKO/555)
Effective implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali
1.
To recall the primary responsibility of the Government of Mali, t he Plateforme
and Coordination armed groups for achieving lasting peace in Mali and to reaffirm
its intention to facilitate, support and follow closely the implementation of the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
2.
To welcome the first positive steps taken to implement the Agreement and to
urge the Government of Mali, the Plateforme and Coordination armed groups to
continue to engage constructively with sustained political will and in good faith to
fully and effectively implement the Agreement without further delay.
3.
To urge the Government of Mali, the Plateforme and Coordination armed
groups to prioritize the implementation of key provisions of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali in order to bring concrete peace dividends to the
populations of Mali and to urge them, in this regard, to take without delay the
necessary measures to advance the deployment of joint security patrols in the North
of Mali and the cantonment, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
armed combatants, as well as the decentralization process, consistent with the
provisions of the Agreement.
4.
To reiterate the Security Council’s full support to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Mali and the United Nations Multidimensional Integr ated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to support the Government of Mali, the
Plateforme and Coordination armed groups in the implementation of the Agreement.
5.
To reiterate the Security Council’s request to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali, through his good offices mandate, to play a key role to
support and oversee the implementation of the Agreement, notably by heading the
secretariat of the Comité de suivi de l’Accord (CSA) and to assess the fulfilment by
MINUSMA of its mandate to support the implementation of the Agreement,
including the ceasefire arrangements and defence and security measures, and to
exercise good offices and facilitation at the national and local levels.
6.
To urge the Government of Mali, the Plateforme and Coordination armed
groups to cooperate fully and to coordinate with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Mali and MINUSMA, in particular on the implementation of
the Agreement.

2/8

16-03485

S/2016/215

7.
To reiterate its call on the members of the Comité de suivi de l’Accord and
other relevant international partners to support the implementation of the Agreement
and coordinate their efforts with the Special Representative of the Secretary -General
for Mali and MINUSMA, as well as to stress the need for cl ear, detailed and
concrete oversight mechanisms to support the implementation of the Agreement.
8.
To assess the capacities of Malian Defence and Security Forces and the
contribution of international partners, including the European Union through its
missions, the European Union Training Mission (EUTM) in Mali and the European
Union Capacity Building Mission in Mali (EUCAP Sahel Mali), to provide training
and advice to the Malian Defence and Security Forces.
9.
To assess the contribution of Malian civil society, notably through women’s
organizations, in the Malian peace process and in the implementation of the
Agreement, including through the actual representation and full and effective
participation of women at all levels in the monitoring committees of the Agreement,
as well as in the peace, reconciliation and electoral processes, in line with relevant
Security Council resolutions and the minimum gender representation quota voted by
Mali in 2015.
10. To assess the performance of MINUSMA to assist the Malian authorities to
ensure that conflict-related violence, in particular sexual violence crimes, is taken
into full account: (a) in the implementation of the peace agreement; (b) in the
context of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and security sect or
reform; (c) in any cease reverification mechanism; and (d) in any transitional justice
arrangements.
11. To assess the performance of MINUSMA to provide specific protection for
women and children, including through the monitoring and reporting of confli ctrelated sexual violence and grave violations against children by child protection
advisers and women protection advisers, and to take into account gender
considerations and child protection as a cross-cutting issue throughout its mandate.
Security situation
12. To receive a briefing on the security situation in Mali and in the Sahel region,
to express the Security Council’s concern about the security situation, including the
expansion of terrorist and criminal activities into central and southern M ali, as well
as its support to the French forces who support MINUSMA, and to stress that the
full implementation of the Agreement can help to contribute to improving the
security situation across Mali.
13. To assess the level of cooperation of Mali and countries in the region to tackle
the terrorist threat in the Sahel region, in particular through the Group of Five for
the Sahel, and to consider the prospects for further cooperation, including the
African Union proposals for the establishment of a counter -terrorist force in Mali
and in the region.
14. To assess the fulfilment by MINUSMA of its mandate to protect, without
prejudice to the primary responsibility of the Malian authorities, civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence.
15. To assess the fulfilment by MINUSMA of its mandate, in support of the
Malian authorities, to stabilize the key population centres and other areas where

16-03485

3/8

S/2016/215

civilians are at risk, notably in the North of Mali, including through long -range
patrols, and, in this context, to deter threats and take active steps to prevent the
return of armed elements to those areas.
16. To stress the importance of ensuring adequate protection of MINUSMA
personnel, in the light of the evolution of security threats MINUSMA faces, to
effectively implement its mandate, to assess the level of equipment and training of
MINUSMA personnel in this regard and to reiterate its call on the Secretary -General
and all MINUSMA troop- and police-contributing countries, as well as bilateral
donors, to continue their efforts to ensure that MINUSMA contingents have the
necessary equipment and training to fulfil their mandate.
Peace dividends to the populations of Mali
17. To reiterate its call upon the Malian authorities to address immediate and long term needs, encompassing security, governance reform, development and
humanitarian issues, to resolve the crisis in Mali and to ensure that the Agreement
translates into concrete benefits for the local populations, notably through the
priority projects outlined in the Agreement.
18. To assess the impact of the Agreement on the living conditions of the
populations of Mali, especially in the north, to assess the efforts of the Government
of Mali to restore basic services to the populations in the north of Mali and to cal l
for the immediate fulfilment of the commitments made during the International
Conference for the Economic Recovery and Development of Mali, held on
22 October 2015 in Paris.
19. To assess the fulfilment by MINUSMA of its mandate, in support of the
Malian authorities, to contribute to the creation of a secure environment for projects
aimed at stabilizing the north of Mali, including quick -impact projects.
20. To assess the further need of institution-building and development projects
with a view to consolidating the peace process.
21. To assess the fulfilment by MINUSMA of its mandate to support cultural
preservation, in collaboration with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization.

Visit to Guinea-Bissau, to be co-led by Senegal and Angola
1.
The Security Council will carry out its mission to the Republic of Guinea Bissau, within the framework of Council resolution 2267 (2016), the press statement
of 12 August 2015 (SC/12005-AFR/3195), the press statement of 14 August 2015
(SC/12007-AFR/3196) and the press statement of 21 September 2015
(SC/12054AFR/3212).
2.
The Security Council will meet with the President of the Republic of Guinea Bissau, the Prime Minister and his government, the President of the Parliament and
his Vice-President, leaders of the political parties with seats in the Parliament and
leaders of the political parties without seats in the Parliament, as well as civil
society organizations and the leadership of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), among others.

4/8

16-03485

S/2016/215

3.
In line with the framework set out in paragraph 1 above, the Security Council
will deliver the following messages:
(a) To express deep concern with the continuous rise of political tensions in
Guinea-Bissau among the President, the Prime Minister, the Parliament and the
heads of the political parties, which are blocking the country’s progress;
(b) To make a strong appeal to the parties involved to respect the country’s
laws and Constitution while endeavouring to solve the current impasse;
(c) To reaffirm its strong commitment and respect for the sovereignty,
political independence, territorial integrity, unity and consolidation of peace in
Guinea-Bissau;
(d) To call on leaders to seek dialogue and consensus in resolving the crisis
in order to preserve the interests of the people of Guinea -Bissau;
(e) To call on the President to work with the Government to complete the
appointments of ministers to head the only remaining ministries without leadership
(Interior and Natural Resources);
(f) To stress that the judiciary should resolve the status of the
15 parliamentarians expelled from the ruling party and barred from their National
Assembly seats;
(g) To invite the President to accept the Stability Pact facilitat ed by the
United Nations as a tool for focusing dialogue and negotiation among political
players as they build a framework for the proper functioning of government
institutions.
(h) To commend the important efforts of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and encourage the Community to continue extending its
political support to the authorities and political leaders of Guinea -Bissau through
the use of good offices and mediation (see Council resolution 2267 (2016), para. 8);
(i) To encourage ECOWAS and the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP) to take the necessary steps towards organizing a meeting of the
International Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau, in consultation with the United
Nations, the European Union and all stakeholders (see resolution 2267 (2016), para.
9) and, in that regard, to urge the Bissau-Guinean authorities to demonstrate the
necessary commitment to re-establish momentum for progress in key areas (see
resolution 2267 (2016), first part of paragraph 18);
(j) To reiterate its call for the non-interference of the army and security
forces in the political situation;
(k) To commend the crucial role of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau
(ECOMIB) in securing the state institutions and in supporting security sector
reform, supports its continuation, in accordance with the expressed will of the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau and urges bilateral, regional and international partners
to consider providing financial assistance to support ECOWAS in sustaining the
deployment of ECOMIB, as requested by the 48th ordinary session of the Summit
of Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African
States (see resolution 2267 (2016), para. 13);

16-03485

5/8

S/2016/215

(l) To deliver a clear message on the importance of maintaining peace and
preventive diplomacy, and express the intention of the Security Council to follow
the situation closely and respond appropriately in case the current situation becomes
a threat to peace and security in Guinea-Bissau.
4.

Council members will also perform the following tasks:

(a) To assess the consequences of the political tensions on the living
conditions of the populations in Guinea-Bissau;
(b) To access the progress achieved in the reforms sectors, such as in
security sector reform, justice reforms, and so on;
(c) To assess the fulfilment by UNIOGBIS of its mandate, in support of the
authorities of Guinea-Bissau, to contribute to the creation of a secure environment
for the implementation of the priority projects aimed at stabilizing the country;
(d) To assess efforts made by the authorities of Guinea-Bissau to implement
and review national legislation and mechanisms to more effectively combat
transnational organized crime, including drug trafficking and money -laundering,
which threaten security and stability in Guinea-Bissau and in the subregion (see
resolution 2267 (2016), para. 15);
(e) To reiterate the Council’s support for the key role and active engagement
of Miguel Trovoada, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), including his good offices and close coordination with
the international community;
(f) To reiterate the Council’s support to the subregional, regional and
international organizations that are actively engaged in the stabilization of Guinea Bissau.

Visit to Senegal, to be led by Angola
I.

Meeting with the Senegalese authorities
• Role as the Chairman of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS):
References:
Security Council press statement of 15 January 2016 (SC/12207)
Presidential statement of 11 June 2015 (S/PRST/2015/12)
– To raise the political and security situation in West Africa and actions of
goodwill and mediation undertaken by Senegal, including the African Union
visit to Burundi and in view of the upcoming ECOWAS summit meeting to be
held in mid-2016.
– To welcome the positive political developments in West Africa, in particular
the holding of free and peaceful elections in Nigeria, Togo, Burkina Faso,
Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire.

6/8

16-03485

S/2016/215

– To stress the importance of free, fair, peaceful, inclusive and credible
presidential elections in the Niger, Benin, Cabo Verde, Ghana, th e Gambia and
Chad.
– To reiterate the Security Council’s strong condemnation of the recurrent
terrorist threat in the region, in particular in Mali and the Sahel, as well as in
the Lake Chad Basin region, notably by Boko Haram and to assess the efforts
of ECOWAS and other regional organizations, including the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, to combat the terrorist threats. To reiterate the need for the
region to adopt a comprehensive approach in order to successfully tackle the
threat presented by Boko Haram to the region.
– To express the support of the Council to encourage cooperation between
ECOWAS, the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA),
the Lake Chad Basin Commission, and other relevant multilateral and regional
organizations to assist the region to address its political and security
challenges.
– To consider the presence of ECOWAS in Guinea-Bissau, particularly the
future of ECOMIB.
– To discuss the preparation by ECOWAS of the meeting of the International
Contact Group on Guinea-Bissau.
II.

Meeting with the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sahel
References: Presidential statement of 8 December 2015 (S/PRST/2015/24)
Letter dated 28 January 2016 from the President of the Security Council addressed to
the Secretary-General (S/2016/89)
– To exchange views on the political and security situation in West Africa and in
the Sahel region, including the preventative diplomacy engagement of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS).
– To express its full support to the Special Representative and welcome the
activities undertaken by UNOWAS in the areas of good offices, the
enhancement of subregional capacities to address cross-border and
cross-cutting threats to peace and security, as well as the promotion of good
governance, respect for the rule of law and human rights, and gender
mainstreaming.
– To encourage the continued engagement of UNOWAS with regional and
subregional organizations, in particular the African Uni on, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the Group of Five for the
Sahel, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the Mano River Union, in order
to promote peace and stability in West Africa and the Sahel region.
– To reiterate its support to the Secretary-General to proceed with the full
and immediate merger through a unified management and structure of
the United Nations Office for West Africa (UNOWA) and the Office of the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy for the Sahel.

16-03485

7/8

S/2016/215

– To receive an update on the implementation of the United Nations integrated
strategy for the Sahel and to encourage UNOWAS to make further progress
towards the implementation of the strategy and to continue to work closely
with the States of the region, including the Group of Five for the Sahel, to
tackle the threats to peace, security and development in the Sahel, as well as
their root causes.
– To stress the efforts to strengthen subregional capacities to fight against
cross-border and cross-cutting threats to peace and security, promote good
governance, the rule of law and human rights and take into account the gender
issues.

8/8

16-03485
