S/PV.9141

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9141st meeting

Thursday, 29 September 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De Rivière. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. Wazima Szatmari
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Brady
Mrs. Toroitich
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Syed
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Eckersley
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 August 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2022/658)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-60546 (E)
*2260546*

S/PV.9141

The situation in the Middle East

contravention of its declaration-related obligations as
well as its obligations to cooperate with the OPCW as
stipulated under the Chemical Weapons Convention,
the decisions of the OPCW policymaking organs
and relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
Consequently, the OPCW Technical Secretariat’s
attempts to organize the twenty-fifth round of
consultations between the DAT and the Syrian National
Authority in Damascus continue to be unsuccessful.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 30 August 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/658)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2022/658, which contains the text of a
letter dated 30 August 2022 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Security Council
members for the opportunity to brief them again on
the implementation of Security Council resolution 2118
(2013), on the elimination of the chemical weapons
programme of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Since the previous consideration of this matter by
the Council, and consistent with established practice,
the Office for Disarmament Affairs has been in regular
contact with its counterparts at the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on its
activities related to this matter. Per established practice,
I held a monthly call with the OPCW Director-General
on 23 September to receive an update on developments
and ascertain his views.
Efforts by the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT) to clarify all the outstanding issues regarding the
initial declaration and subsequent declarations of the
Syrian Arab Republic remain as previously outlined.
Unfortunately, the Syrian Arab Republic continues
to place conditions on the DAT’s deployment, in
2/13

29/09/2022

In the light of that situation, and subject to a change
in attitude by the Syrian Arab Republic, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat has proposed to address the
shortcomings of Syria’s initial declaration through the
exchange of correspondence, even if such exchanges
demonstrably bring about fewer outcomes when
compared to the DAT’s deployments to the Syrian Arab
Republic, as was the case for the period between June
2016 and April 2019.
With the aim of assisting the Syrian Arab Republic
in resolving the 20 outstanding issues, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat has provided the Syrian Arab
Republic with the list of pending declarations and other
documents requested by the DAT since 2019.
I have been advised that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat has not yet received the requested
information from the Syrian Arab Republic regarding
the unauthorised movement of the two cylinders related
to the chemical weapon incident that took place in
Douma on 7 April 2018, which were destroyed in an
attack on a chemical weapons production facility. The
Syrian Arab Republic must respond with urgency to the
OPCW Technical Secretariat’s requests.
Full cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic
with the OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to
closing all outstanding issues. As has been stressed
on a monthly basis for many years now, due to the
identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that
remain unresolved, the Technical Secretariat continues
to assess that, at this stage, the declaration submitted
by the Syrian Arab Republic cannot be considered
accurate and complete in accordance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat remains fully
committed to ensuring the full implementation by the
Syrian Arab Republic of all its declaration requirements
and to assisting Syria in fulfilling its obligations under
the Convention. I take this opportunity to reiterate
my full support for the integrity, professionalism,
22-60546

29/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

impartiality, objectivity and independence of the work
of the OPCW.
I have been informed that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat is currently planning the 2022 rounds of
inspections of the Scientific Studies and Research
Centre. With regard to the detection of a schedule 2
chemical at those facilities in November 2018, I regret
to inform the Council that the Syrian Arab Republic
has yet to provide sufficient technical information or
explanations that would enable the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to close this issue.
With regard to the invitation extended for an
in-person meeting between the OPCW Director-General
to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of
the Syrian Arab Republic, I note that, while the Syrian
Arab Republic has suggested the meeting place in
Beirut, the OPCW Technical Secretariat has requested
clarifications from the Syrian Arab Republic, as it has
not yet received a response on the latest version of the
proposed agenda submitted on 20 December 2021.
Further to previous updates to the Council, the
OPCW Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) remains in the
process of studying all information available related
to allegations of the use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic. I have been advised that the
FFM is continuing its engagement with the Syrian
Arab Republic and other States parties to the Chemical
Weapons Convention with regard to a number of
incidents and is preparing for upcoming deployments.
The Investigation and Identification Team (IIT)
continues its investigations into incidents in which the
FFM has determined that chemical weapons were used
or likely used in the Syrian Arab Republic. The IIT will
issue further reports in due course.
On the decision entitled “Addressing the possession
and use of chemical weapons by the Syrian Arab
Republic” (C-25/DEC.9), adopted on 21 April 2021,
I have been informed that, unfortunately, the Syrian
Arab Republic has not yet completed any of the
measures stipulated in paragraph 5 of decision EC-94/
DEC.2. The OPCW Technical Secretariat will continue
to engage with the Syrian Arab Republic with regard
to their completion and will continue to report to the
OPCW Executive Council as mandated.
The preamble of the Chemical Weapons Convention
calls on us to exclude completely the possibility of the
use of chemical weapons. Such use is indefensible and

S/PV.9141

constitutes a threat to international peace and security.
Those responsible for the use of chemical weapons must
be identified and held accountable. It is an obligation
that applies to all of us. I reiterate my call for unity
in the Council, a body that has demonstrated how
much it can accomplish when it is determined to work
towards a common goal. The Office for Disarmament
Affairs stands ready to provide whatever support and
assistance it can.
The President: I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Before I address the topic of the meeting
directly, I would like to express my bewilderment at
the fact that you, Mr. President, did not see fit to grant
our urgent request to convene a meeting today on the
situation regarding the sabotage of the Nord Stream
pipeline. As a result, we will now be discussing the
report of the Director-General of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
on the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) (see
S/2022/658), which was issued back in August and
clearly has no urgency whatsoever. And the meeting on
the situation concerning Nord Stream, which threatens
the energy security of an entire continent, will not take
place until tomorrow. We are deeply disappointed with
that decision.
We have already repeatedly voiced our concerns
that the Security Council’s discussions on the Syrian
chemical weapons issue are going around in circles.
The reports of the Director-General of the OPCW on
the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) repeat
the same set of unfounded accusations against the
Syrian side time and again. Those reports, which are
extremely unbalanced and do not take into account the
progress made on the part of Damascus, have the sole
aim: to give the impression that the dialogue between
the OPCW and Syrian Arab Republic is stalled solely
because Syria is not cooperating.
At the same time, our numerous questions to
the leadership of the Technical Secretariat remain
unanswered. In July, Mr. Fernando Arias, DirectorGeneral of the OPCW, once again declined an
invitation to address the Security Council, citing the
holiday period. And as far as we understand, he has
done the same thing this time. However, Mr. Arias’

22-605463/13

S/PV.9141

The situation in the Middle East

29/09/2022

busy schedule, which time after time prevents him from
briefing Council, does not prevent him from travelling
abroad — for example, to the United States. He has
never ever been to Syria himself during his entire
tenure as head of the Technical Secretariat. How is
that possible? It begs the comparison with Mr. Rafael
Grossi, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, who personally visits the facilities
that are under Agency safeguards, engages in dialogue
with Member States and appears before the Council at
very short notice, even in inconvenient locations — for
example, on an aeroplane. That is how a responsible
head of an international specialized agency should
behave if he claims to be the impartial guardian of the
non-proliferation regime.

to smear Damascus, continues to be a shameful stain on
the reputation of the OPCW leadership.

Despite the non-constructive attitude of the
leadership of the Technical Secretariat, which is
harping on the far-fetched issue of the non-issuance of
a visa to just one expert of the Declaration Assessment
Team (DAT), Syria continues to cooperate in good
faith with the OPCW and to fulfil its obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). A clear
example of that is the visit of the Technical Secretariat’s
inspectors to the Basra and Jamrayah research facilities
on 11 to 19 September. Syria has agreed, as an interim
measure, to change its format of cooperation with
the DAT and continue it in the form of an exchange
of documentation.

As long as the OPCW Technical Secretariat
leadership continues its approach, we see no point
in discussing the Syrian chemical weapons issue in
the Security Council every month. We believe that
meetings conducted in an open manner once every
quarter are sufficient to ensure a transparent discussion
of the subject.

In addition, on 21 September, Syria offered to hold
consultations in Beirut between those responsible for
preparing the meeting between Mr. Arias, DirectorGeneral of the OPCW, and Mr. Mekdad, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab
Republic. But there is not a word about that in the
report of the Director-General that was presented today,
and once again the Syrians are asked to change their
attitude as a precondition for continuing consultations
with the Technical Secretariat.
We believe that it is up to the leadership of the
Organization, not Damascus, to change its attitude. It
has stubbornly refused to correct the basic mistakes in
the methodology of its work on the Syrian file. It is a
kind of original sin to violate the requirements of the
CWC in terms of the principles of investigation, above
all with regard to the collection and preserving of
evidence in the chain of custody. The FFM’s infamous
2018 report on the incident in Douma, whose conclusions
were redacted under pressure from Western delegations
4/13

The fact that Mr. Arias is simply running from
the Council like a first-grader from a school principal
gives us no reason to hope that he is willing to work
on his mistakes. The same flawed methodology is used
by the illegitimate Investigation and Identification
Team (IIT), whose establishment was forced through
the OPCW Executive Council, in violation of the
principle of consensus and the CWC. Its reports have
one goal — not to establish the real picture of events,
but to fit them into a conclusion that puts the blame
on the Syrians. We reject the IIT’s previously released
products, as well any illegitimate fodder it may release
in the future.

Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank the
High Representative for her briefing. My delegation
appreciates her persistent efforts and the efforts of
the experts of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to provide independent,
thoroughly researched, detailed information about
Syria’s chemical weapons programme and its use of
chemical weapons.
As we noted last month, August 2022 marked the
ninth anniversary of the Al-Assad regime’s vicious
deployment of the nerve agent sarin on Syrian civilians
in the Ghouta district of Damascus. Since then, the
OPCW, the Security Council and the global community
have witnessed many egregious violations of the
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and continued
malign behaviour by the Syrian regime. Those violations
include not only the use of chemical weapons, but also
the Al-Assad regime’s failure to completely declare its
entire chemical weapons programme and its continued
interference with the work of the OPCW’s Declaration
Assessment Team.
Our desire to end the outrageous behaviour of
the Al-Assad regime and its Russian enablers is what
brings us to these meetings each month, to speak
truth and urge the Al-Assad regime to comply with its
international obligations.
22-60546

29/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

Here are a number of difficult truths that no volume
of denial can counter. Over the past nine years, the
OPCW-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
and the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team
have independently confirmed that the Al-Assad regime
used chemical weapons on eight separate occasions.
Our own assessment is that the Al-Assad regime has
used chemical weapons at least 50 times since Syria
joined the Convention.
Despite our knowledge of those horrors and our
numerous efforts to reduce the risk that such an attack
might ever happen again, the Al-Assad regime and
its backers, especially Russia, continue to stonewall
efforts to account for Syria’s chemical weapons.
The regime’s continued refusal to provide answers
or information requested years ago by the Declaration
Assessment Team is an affront to the Security Council
and to the OPCW. The fact is that Syria has not
declared its entire chemical weapons programme and
it retains a hidden stockpile — a stockpile of chemical
weapons. The risk remains that the Al-Assad regime
will again use chemical weapons against its own
people. Syria continues to deny a visa to a member of
the OPCW’s Declaration Assessment Team, preventing
its deployment. We again call on the Syrian regime to
immediately permit the Declaration Assessment Team
to return to Syria, resolve all discrepancies and help
ensure the verified elimination of Syria’s chemical
weapons programme.
After nine years and 24 rounds of consultations,
the Director-General of the OPCW tells us that Syria’s
declaration cannot be considered accurate and complete.
The regime has shown it is willing to deploy inhumane
measures. The threat of future attacks will remain until
the regime clearly and thoroughly answers the questions
that have been posed by the OPCW, fully declares its
chemical weapons programme in accordance with its
obligations under the CWC and ceases its obstruction
and provides visas to the OPCW experts so they can
deploy to Syria.
In conclusion, our commitment to hold actors
accountable for their use of chemical weapons is
universal and shared — so it is said — by everyone
on the Security Council, and it is not limited to Syria.
We condemn in the strongest possible terms the use
of chemical weapons anywhere, by anyone, under any
circumstances. In that spirit, we call on the regime
to end its intransigence and simply meet its chemical

S/PV.9141

weapons obligations as quickly as possible. Doing so
will reduce the risk of further chemical weapons use
and help to ensure that we will never again be faced
with the horrific scenes we have witnessed over the
past nine years.
Mr. Wazima Szatmari (Brazil): At the outset, I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing. I would also like to thank
the Director-General of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for his
latest report (see S/2022/658).
Once again, we meet in this Chamber in a context
where little seems to have changed in the situation on
the ground or in the relationship between the Syrian
Arab Republic and the organization. It seems by now
incontrovertible that the frequency of these meetings
has to change. While regular OPCW reports continue
to be a valuable tool for monitoring this file, holding
monthly meetings with the Council when the reports
point to little or no relevant new developments on the
ground does not seem efficient in terms of both time
and resources.
In the face of the absence of new developments in
the Syrian chemical weapons file, allow me once again
to reaffirm our traditional positions on the matter.
Chemical weapons are utterly incompatible with
international humanitarian law, and therefore must
have no place in the practices and doctrines of today’s
world. The use of such weapons violates international
agreements and poses serious threats to international
peace and security. Incidents must be addressed with
transparency and be subject to thorough and impartial
investigations in accordance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
Mr. Stastoli (Albania): I would like to thank the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, for her briefing on the total elimination of
the Syrian chemical weapons programme.
We find ourselves today faced with a situation
that has hardly changed since the previous meeting
(see S/PV.9097). There has been no progress in
the discussions between the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the
Syrian Government, no progress either on the next
inspection in Syria and no progress on the face-to-face
meeting between the Director-General of the OPCW
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Syria.

22-605465/13

S/PV.9141

The situation in the Middle East

The situation of eternal deadlock in the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and the serious
chemical weapons programme continues to remain
out of the international community’s control. Since
February 2021, all attempts by the Technical Secretariat
to organize the twenty-fifth round of consultations
between the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and
the Syrian National Authority have been unsuccessful,
because Syria continues to impose conditions on the
deployment of the DAT and refuses the issuance of
visas to the Declaration Assessment Team, in violation
of its obligation and Security Council resolutions. We
deeply regret the observation of the deliberate lack of
cooperation by Syria with the OPCW.
The 107th monthly report of the OPCW (see
S/2022/658) is clear on the gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies identified in the Syrian regime’s
declaration on its chemical weapons programme.
As a result, the OPCW still cannot confirm that the
declaration is accurate and complete in accordance
with the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution
2118 (2013).
Albania reiterates its full support for the objective,
impartial and professional work of the OPCW technical
team. Syria’s obtuse refusal to cooperate with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat, with the support of its
allies, is unacceptable.

29/09/2022

one of the most successful disarmament regimes in the
world, and it has ensured the destruction of over 98 per
cent of declared stockpiles of chemical weapons.
We reject any attempts to politicize the work of
the OPCW. Such an attitude only serves to delay the
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) by Syria,
which also damages the reputation of the Security
Council. We call on the members of the Security Council
to be united in demanding the full implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013).
Finally, we remain convinced that the rapid closure
of the investigations into the use of chemical weapons in
Syria primarily serves that country and its citizens and
would allow the Security Council and the international
community to continue to support the Syrian people
more effectively in their quest for a peaceful future.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this joint statement on behalf of the three African
countries members of the Security Council (A3),
namely, Gabon, Kenya and my own country, Ghana.
We thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing. We
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Syria, Iran and Türkiye at this meeting.

Therefore, we continue to expect that Syria
demonstrate its willingness to cooperate with the
OPCW on all the requests required by the OPCW
reports in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013).

We take note of the report of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see
S/2022/658), highlighting the unchanged situation
since the previous briefing (see S/PV.9097), which has
become characteristic of the Syrian chemical weapons
file in recent times.

As nine years have passed since the chemical
massacre in eastern Ghouta, let me be clear that we
owe it to the victims to ensure that there is no impunity
for the chemical weapon attacks. Impunity for the
use of chemical weapons must not — and will not
be — tolerated.

As we also take note of the submission of the 108th
monthly report by the Syrian national authorities on the
country’s chemical-weapons programme, we remain
concerned that there has not been any significant
headway in the attempts to fully address the issue, in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.

In that context, we welcome the OPCW FactFinding Mission, which continues its activities in
the determination of the use of chemical weapons in
Syria, as well as the Investigation and Identification
Team, which continues its activities to identify the
perpetrators of the use of chemical products as weapons
in Syria. We look forward to their report.

The A3 collectively reiterates its position against
the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and
under any circumstances. We remain committed to the
established norms against the use of chemical weapons
and support all efforts to end their production, storage
and use.

The Security Council and its members are responsible
for protecting the international non-proliferation
regime, which involves our collective security. It is
6/13

We reiterate our support for resolution 2118 (2013),
which provides the framework for the expeditious and
verifiable destruction of Syria’s chemical weapons. For
that reason, we regret the persistent divergence between
22-60546

29/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

the positions of the OPCW and the Syrian authorities
regarding the outstanding gaps, inconsistencies
and discrepancies.
It seems that the momentum that initially galvanized
the international community, including the Security
Council, into action on this issue is dissipating. But it is
worth bearing in mind that, without a definite closure
of the matter by the OPCW, the lingering danger of
the production and possible use of chemical weapons
in Syria or elsewhere cannot be completely ruled out.
The expeditious resolution of the investigation will
also allow us the opportunity to focus our time and
resources on the other existing challenges facing the
Syrian people.
The A3 hopes that, as part of the efforts to
de-escalate the current rise in hostilities in Syria, the
international community will act collectively to uphold
the tenets of the Chemical Weapons Convention and
ensure a world free of such deadly weapons.
It is our considered view that constructive
cooperation between the Syrian National Authority and
the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW will facilitate
the conclusive resolution of all the outstanding issues,
including the organization of the twenty-fifth round of
consultations with the Declaration Assessment Team.
In that regard, we encourage the early convening of
the high-level in-person meeting between the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab
Republic and the Director-General of the OPCW, as it
would help to revive efforts towards the final resolution
of the issues.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate our call for
enhanced engagement between the OPCW Technical
Secretariat and the Syrian National Authority in order
to address all outstanding issues, which constrain
meaningful progress in the full implementation of
resolution 2118 (2013) in a satisfactory manner.
Ms. Syed (Norway): I thank High Representative
Nakamitsu for her briefing on the progress in the
elimination of Syria’s chemical-weapons programme.
It is unfortunate that we must convene amid no
progress made on this file, not just in the past month,
but, in reality, for the entirety of 2022. It is clear that
Syria is still not fulfilling its obligations in line with
the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 2118
(2013).

S/PV.9141

First, Syria has an obligation to cooperate with the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW). However, there have been no consultations
between the Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and
the Syrian authorities since the spring of 2021. That
is due to the Syrian authorities’ refusal to issue a visa
to the DAT’s lead technical expert. Such stagnation is
simply not tenable. We urge Syria to follow up on the
offer for an exchange of correspondence, provide the
information requested and again engage with the DAT.
Secondly, Syria must provide the sufficient
technical information and explanations requested by
the OPCW. There still remain 20 outstanding disparities
and inconsistencies from Syria’s initial declaration.
Furthermore, the OPCW has requested additional
information related to several former chemical-weapon
production facilities. We urge Syria to comply with
those requests for information.
Thirdly, and finally, it is critical that Syria undertake
the measures necessary to lift the suspension of its
rights and privileges as a State party to the Chemical
Weapons Convention. We must not tolerate impunity
and allow the essential global prohibition against the
use of chemical weapons to erode.
Mr. Brady (Ireland): I would like to thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Ireland remains deeply concerned about the
lack of progress towards the closure of this file. The
reason for that stasis is Syria’s failure to cooperate
with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) in a real and meaningful way. Syria
continues its efforts to block the twenty-fifth round of
consultations with the Declaration Assessment Team
and to place conditions on the OPCW’s work, contrary
to resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC).
Equally, Syria continues its deplorable efforts,
supported by Russia, to undermine the work and
reputation of the OPCW and its investigation teams.
We remain confident that the Technical Secretariat
is carrying out its vital work with the highest degree
of professionalism, integrity and impartiality, and we
reject any baseless claims to the contrary.
The Security Council has given the OPCW a clear
mandate to resolve such issues with Syria, and the
OPCW should have the full backing of the Council
in carrying that out. The importance of that work is

22-605467/13

S/PV.9141

The situation in the Middle East

made clear by the fact that the OPCW and the United
Nations have so far found that, since 2013, the Syrian
authorities have used chemical weapons against its
citizens on eight occasions, with further instances still
being investigated.
At the same time, the OPCW has set out 20
significant areas that need to be clarified regarding
Syria’s initial declaration. Those areas go to the heart
of whether Syria retains, or is looking to reconstitute,
its chemical-weapons capacity. Those are issues that
the Council cannot, and must not, ignore given their
ramifications for the people of Syria and the region.
Ireland is resolute that there can be no impunity for
the use of chemical weapons. It is essential that Syria
end its pretence at cooperation and engage in a serious
and meaningful way with the Technical Secretariat.
The proposed meeting between Director-General Arias
and Foreign Minister Mekdad has been outstanding for
almost a year despite the best efforts of the DirectorGeneral. That meeting must take place urgently,
focusing on achieving concrete outcomes.
Syria must take real steps to resolve the outstanding
issues urgently and without prevarication. It is only
through genuine engagement with the OPCW that it
can provide real assurance that its chemical-weapons
programme is verifiably and definitively destroyed.
Until we see real movement in that direction, it
remains essential that the Security Council uphold the
international legal norm against chemical weapons by
holding Syria to its obligations under resolution 2118
(2013) and the CWC and by supporting the OPCW in its
mandated task.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing. I welcome the representatives of Syria,
Iran and Türkiye.
A little more than nine years ago, Syria applied
for membership to the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), but to date it has
been impossible to ascertain if its initial declaration
is accurate; 20 outstanding issues remain. Mexico
regrets that the Security Council is once again meeting
to discuss this dossier without any major progress
having been made. As was said earlier here, the twentyfifth round of consultations between the Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT) and the Syrian National
Authority has yet to take place.
8/13

29/09/2022

Technical information explaining the detection
of chemical residue at the Barzah facilities of the
Scientific Studies and Research Centre has not yet
been received, and neither has light been shed on the
unauthorized transfer of the chlorine cylinders related
to the April 2018 Douma incident. The flexibility of
the Technical Secretariat to share information on the
outstanding issues through written correspondence
has so far also failed to produce results. However, my
delegation underscores that correspondence in writing
is not a substitute for in-person consultations. As such,
and in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013), Mexico
once again urges the Syrian authorities to cooperate
constructively with the OPCW and the United Nations.
Mexico takes note of the inspections carried out
this month at the Barzah and Jamrayah facilities of the
Scientific Studies and Research Centre, and we look
forward to the publication of the corresponding reports.
Furthermore, we also take note of the proposed meeting
between the OPCW Director-General and the Minister
for Foreign and Expatriate Affairs of Syria to be held
in Beirut, although its agenda and date have yet to be
confirmed. We hope that such a meeting will provide
an opportunity for substantive discussions to allow for
genuine progress to be made.
We commend Member States’ contributions to the
Trust Fund for Syria Missions, which, among other
things, enables the DAT, the Fact-Finding Mission
and the Investigation and Identification Team to carry
out their mandates. We await further reports from
those missions.
In conclusion, my delegation once again expresses
its support for the Technical Secretariat and its
technical teams, which observe the highest standards
of professionalism and impartiality. Mexico reiterates
its condemnation of the use of chemical weapons by
any actor, under any circumstance.
Mr. Almazrouei (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
In line with today’s discussion, we reiterate the
position of the United Arab Emirates represented by
the explicit rejection and condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons, by anyone, anywhere and under any
circumstance. We all agree that the use of such weapons
constitutes a flagrant violation of the provisions of the
Chemical Weapons Convention and international law.
22-60546

29/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

I would like to remind everyone that the ultimate
goal of the Syrian chemical dossier is to address the
gaps and outstanding issues between the Syrian
authorities and the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). That goal should continue
to guide our discussions. In that regard, we regret that
the two parties were unable to decide on the visit by the
Declaration Assessment Team to Syria or on holding
limited consultations in Beirut. While we understand
the concerns of the relevant authorities concerning the
required arrangements for the visit, the issue of one
particular expert’s participation in the consultations is
insufficient reason not to convene them.
We understand that every organization includes
personnel with extensive experience, and, while it is
difficult to avoid relying on them for certain tasks, that
does not mean that the work cannot be accomplished
without them. Ensuring the continuation of the work
should be the principal objective. We also regret
that written correspondence is the only means of
communication between the two parties, as opposed to
an in-person visit and holding constructive discussions.
We therefore look forward to the upcoming meeting
between the Syrian Foreign Minister and the DirectorGeneral of the OPCW.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses
the need to make tangible progress on the chemical
dossier in accordance with resolution 2118 (2013). We
will continue to support the Security Council’s efforts
to achieve those objectives. We also look forward to
having a meaningful discussion related to the meetings
of the Security Council on that dossier.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): I will be brief in
my remarks. At the outset, I would like to thank the
Under-Secretary-General and High Representative
for Disarmament Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for
her update.
We note the consistent lack of progress on this track
of discussions on Syria in the Security Council. We
continue to encourage sustained engagement between
Syria and the Technical Secretariat of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons to resolve
all outstanding issues. India attaches a high level of
importance to the Chemical Weapons Convention and
stands for its full, effective and non-discriminatory
implementation. India is against the use of chemical
weapons by anybody, anywhere, at any time and under
any circumstance. India has consistently maintained

S/PV.9141

that any investigation into the use of chemical weapons
must be impartial, credible and objective.
We have repeatedly cautioned against the possibility
of terrorist entities and individuals gaining access to
chemical weapons, including in the region. Therefore,
any allegation of the use of chemical weapons needs to
be dealt with the utmost attention. India continues to
believe that progress on other tracks would also help in
facilitating the overall political peace process in Syria,
as advocated by resolution 2254 (2015)
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation would like to thank High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
China is firmly opposed to the use of chemical
weapons by any country, organization or individual,
under any circumstance. The world should be free of
all chemical weapons as soon as possible. Dialogue
and consultation are the only way to resolve this
Syrian chemical weapons issue. The latest monthly
report of the Director-General of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see
S/2022/658) indicates that, from 11 to 18 September,
the Technical Secretariat conducted the ninth round
of inspections of the Scientific Studies and Research
Centre, which China welcomes.
We have taken note that the Syrian Government
and the Technical Secretariat have begun consultations
through written correspondence on the declaration
assessment. We call on the Technical Secretariat
to give its full attention to the concerns issue of the
States parties concerned regarding the visa issue. We
also encourage both sides to continue discussions on,
inter alia, the proposed meeting between the OPCW
Director-General and the Syrian Foreign Minister. We
reiterate that the OPCW’s investigation and attribution
of the alleged use of chemical weapons should be
strictly limited to the framework of the Chemical
Weapons Convention, with compliant procedures,
reliable evidence and credible conclusions. We hope
that the Director-General and the Technical Secretariat
will take practical measures to maintain the technical
integrity of the OPCW.
In conclusion, like most members of the Security
Council, China would like to see the Council meet
less frequently to consider the Syrian chemical
weapons issue.

22-605469/13

S/PV.9141

The situation in the Middle East

29/09/2022

Mr. Eckersley (United Kingdom): I would like
to thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs for her very clear briefing and all the efforts of
the United Nations team.

protect the Syrian regime from accountability for its
crimes. We must not accept any erosion of the rules we
have all agreed. We must continue to work together to
push Syria to meet its obligations in full.

Month after month, we hear the same story. Syria
is refusing to make any progress to fulfil its obligations
under the Chemical Weapons Convention and
resolution 2118 (2013). That is a crystal-clear reminder
of Al-Assad’s disregard of international norms and the
threat that his regime poses. This is not a dormant issue.
This is an active refusal to implement the Security
Council’s resolutions.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

We have heard countless excuses for Syria’s
non-compliance; none stand up to scrutiny. We must
all be clear about the fact that, given Syria’s behaviour
and the many inconsistencies in its declarations to the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), there is a real and ongoing risk from its
chemical weapons programme to international peace
and security.
We also all know that Syria’s failings are only part
of the story. The actions of Russia, in continuing to
protect the Al-Assad regime in its use and stockpiling
of chemical weapons, show that Russia has no genuine
interest in implementing the Chemical Weapons
Convention or in protecting international security.
We have just sat through another assault on the
integrity of the OPCW. However, it is not just about
disinformation and distraction in the Security Council.
For several years now, Russia has also systematically
blocked or attempted to block mechanisms related to
the investigation of chemical weapons use in Syria.
It blocked the Joint Investigative Mechanism from
operating in 2017 and 2018. It tried to block the
creation of the Investigation and Identification Team
(IIT) in 2018. It tried to block the OPCW budget that
funded the IIT in 2018. It blocked the adoption of the
outcome document at the Review Conference of the
States Parties to the OPCW, over references to the Joint
Investigative Mechanism and the IIT. It tried to block
the OPCW budget again in 2019. Russia voted against
an Executive Council decision on Syria in 2020. It
again tried to block the OPCW budget in 2020. It voted
against the decision of the Conference of States Parties
on Syria in 2021. It tried to block the OPCW annual
report that mentioned the IIT in 2021.
The Council must not be distracted by tactics that
are designed to undermine the international system and
10/13

I too thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Nine years ago, in August 2013, the Syrian regime
deliberately murdered more than 1,000 of its own
civilians — women, children and older persons — on the
outskirts of Damascus, with sarin gas. No one has ever
disputed the fact that that attack took place. Following
that attack, the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2118 (2013).
The repetitive nature of our meetings should not
make us lose sight of what is important. The perpetrators
of that attack must be identified and held to account.
Regrettably, once again, we deplore the complete
lack of progress. The regime refuses to cooperate and
continues to obstruct the work of the Organization for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW).
Syria’s initial declaration remains incomplete.
Some 20 questions are still pending. After six refusals
by the regime, the Technical Secretariat finally gave
up deploying the Declaration Assessment Team to the
country. Syria must shed light on its stockpile. It must
comply with its international obligations if it wants to
restore the rights and privileges that were suspended in
April 2021.
Despite the obstacles, OPCW teams have continued
their work with independence and professionalism,
and I want to commend them once again. The smear
campaigns against them discredit their authors. We
will pay very close attention to the conclusions of the
next two reports of the Investigation and Identification
Team on the Douma and Marea attacks.
The fight against impunity and the total ban on the
use of chemical weapons remain our priorities, as they
are the foundation of the credibility of the prohibition
regime. That is why we continue to mobilize in support
of the international partnership against impunity for
the use of chemical weapons.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
22-60546

29/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9141

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

cooperation and facilities that Syria granted to the
inspection team during that round.

Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic has reiterated,
time and again, its unequivocal condemnation of the
use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere, at
any time and under any circumstance. Therefore, we
categorically reject all the baseless accusations made
by some countries, first and foremost the United States
of America, which supports the terrorist groups that
use chemical weapons in Syria.

Fourthly, the Syrian Arab Republic reiterates that
it welcomes the twenty-fifth round of consultations by
the Declaration Assessment Team. We stress that there
are no restrictions on the deployment of that Team. We
believe that excluding one member of the Team should
not prevent that round of consultations from taking
place, especially as the organization has so many
qualified experts who can carry out the same tasks.

Since its voluntary accession to the Chemical
Weapons Convention, even before its entry into force,
the Syrian Arab Republic has been keen to fully
cooperate with the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW). My delegation would like
to provide some updates, which were not included in
Mrs. Nakamitsu’s briefing.
First, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted to
the Director-General of the OPCW its 106th report,
dated 15 September. The report includes information
on the activities of the Syrian Arab Republic related
to the destruction of chemical weapons and their
production facilities.
Secondly, the Syrian Arab Republic underscores
its eagerness to hold the expected high-level meeting
between the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Expatriates, Head of the Syrian National Committee,
and the Director-General of the OPCW as soon as
possible, in line with an agenda agreed upon by both
parties, which would contribute to settling outstanding
issues. In that regard, I note that the Syrian National
Committee has proposed to the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to convene a coordination meeting for
both parties in Beirut. Just to be clear, it would be a
coordination meeting, not the actual meeting between
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates and
the Director-General, to agree on the agenda for the
high-level meeting.
Thirdly, the Syrian Arab Republic facilitated a visit
by the OPCW Technical Secretariat to the Scientific
Studies and Research Centre, from 11 to 19 September,
to conduct the ninth round of inspections. In that regard,
my delegation is surprised that the monthly report of
the Director-General did not mention the report of
the eighth round of inspections, which underlined the
absence of any banned activities in accordance with
the Convention. It also commended the significant

We remind members of the Council that the Syrian
party had expressed its readiness to hold that round in
Damascus, The Hague or even in Beirut. However, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat insisted on including that
person on the Team. Therefore, the Syrian National
Committee agreed to the Technical Secretariat’s
proposal to exchange correspondence and information
on matters within the mandate of the Declaration
Assessment Team, even though we believe that such an
approach would limit results.
Fifthly, turning to the work of the Fact-Finding
Mission, Syria is still awaiting the publication of the
Mission’s delayed reports on the incidents reported
by the Syrian Arab Republic since 2017. Syria calls
upon the Mission to abide by the reference working
paper and the provisions of the Convention, especially
the verification annex. We also call upon the Mission
to undertake its task with professionalism, neutrality
and objectivity.
Sixthly, the Syrian Arab Republic once again
stresses its position that the Investigation and
Identification Team was established illegitimately. We
reject the Team’s erroneous and unprofessional working
methods, which naturally lead to false conclusions
that serve only the hostile agendas of certain Western
countries that are exploiting the Team as a tool against
Syria. The statements delivered by some countries
today, particularly the United States of America,
provide clear evidence in that regard. Syria therefore
considers it necessary to denounce and condemn any
reference to the reports of the Team or its conclusions.
Lastly, the Syrian Arab Republic reiterates its
astonishment that the OPCW Technical Secretariat and
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) insist on disregarding the
information submitted regarding the possession and
use of chemical weapons by terrorist groups in Syria, as
well as their fabrication of incidents in order to accuse

22-6054611/13

S/PV.9141

The situation in the Middle East

the Syrian army of perpetrating them. That is a flagrant
sign of selectivity and double standards, reflecting the
politicization that controls this dossier.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): As the
main victim of most of the systematic uses of chemical
weapons in modern history, the Islamic Republic of Iran
once again condemns, in the strongest possible terms,
the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and
under any circumstance. We share the view that the
use of such inhumane weapons, which pose a serious
threat to international peace and security, must not
be tolerated. The only way to guarantee that chemical
weapons are never used again is to destroy and
eliminate all chemical weapons on a global scale and
take all necessary measures to prevent the production
of such weapons of mass destruction.
We reiterate our call for the full, effective and
non-discriminatory implementation of the Chemical
Weapons Convention. We believe that politicizing
the implementation of the Convention and using
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) for political ends endangers both the
legitimacy of the Convention and the OPCW, which is
as equally deadly as a chemical weapon. We emphasize
that any investigation into the use of chemical weapons
must be impartial, professional, credible and objective
in order to establish the facts and reach evidence-based
conclusions. In doing so, it must strictly adhere to all
provisions and procedures within the framework of
the Convention.
We acknowledge the critical importance of the
Syrian Arab Republic’s efforts to uphold its obligations
under the Convention. We encourage continued
communication and interaction between the OPCW
and the Syrian Arab Republic. In that context, we
commend the Syrian Arab Republic for submitting its
106th monthly report to the OPCW Director-General
on 15 September, detailing activities on its territory
related to the destruction of chemical weapons and
their production facilities.
In line with that constructive cooperation, the
Syrian Arab Republic also facilitated a visit of the
OPCW Technical Secretariat to Syria to conduct the
ninth inspection tour of the Syrian Scientific Studies
and Research Centre. We hope that a high-level meeting
between the Syrian Minister for Foreign Affairs and
12/13

29/09/2022

Expatriates and the Director-General of the OPCW will
take place as soon as possible, with an agenda agreed
upon by both parties that will contribute to resolving
the outstanding issues.
While the Syrian Arab Republic has met the
Convention’s requirements and continues to cooperate
constructively with the OPCW, handling this file in a
political manner and applying double standards will
only divert discussions away from its technical nature
and could undermine the Security Council’s credibility
and authority. We believe that it is high time for the
Council to return discussions on the issue to the
technical track within the OPCW in order to foster a
constructive dialogue between Syria and the OPCW to
resolve outstanding issues.
Furthermore, by focusing on the technical rather
than the political aspect, the OPCW will be able to carry
out its functions in an impartial, professional, credible
and objective manner in order to draw conclusions
based on factual evidence.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Türkiye.
Mr. Keçeli (Türkiye): We would like to thank
High Representative Nakamitsu and her team for the
briefing. We are grateful for their efforts.
The Al-Assad regime’s failure to respect its
international obligations is well documented in the
reports of the Joint Investigative Mechanism, as well as
of the Fact-Finding Mission (FFM) and the Investigation
and Identification Team (IIT). The latest monthly
report (see S/2022/658) of the Director-General of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) confirms once again that no progress has been
made on any of the outstanding issues regarding the
regime’s chemical weapons declaration. In that regard,
the identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies
in that declaration remain unresolved, and hence
the declaration cannot be considered accurate and
complete. We call on the Syrian regime to fully
cooperate with the OPCW Technical Secretariat and
provide the necessary information required under the
Chemical Weapons Convention. In that regard, issuing
visas to the members of the Declaration Assessment
Team remains an urgent priority.
We appreciate the OPCW Director-General’s
efforts to establish a direct line of contact in order to
resolve the outstanding issues. We also commend the
22-60546

29/09/2022

The situation in the Middle East

work of the Fact-Finding Mission and the Investigation
and Identification Team, which is essentially in
unearthing the truth and holding the perpetrators of
chemical-weapon attacks to account. We look forward
to the conclusion of the ongoing investigations and the
issuance of the next reports of the FFM and the IIT. We
stand firmly against any attempt that aims to discredit
the valuable work of the OPCW Technical Secretariat
and its investigative bodies.

S/PV.9141

It is our collective responsibility to ensure
accountability for the chemical weapons used in Syria.
Genuine political reconciliation in Syria will be possible
only through justice and accountability, and unity in
the Council is essential for the realization of that goal.
We owe it to the countless victims that have suffered
from the atrocities committed by the Al-Assad regime.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

22-6054613/13
