46

General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

----

3. Further invites the Government of the United
Kingdom to put into effect the General A~se1;1bly r~solutions on the questirm of Southern Rhodesia, m particular resolutions 1747 (XVI) and 1760 (XVII).
1241st plenary meeting,
14 Ortobrr 1063.

1889 (XVIII). Question of Southern Rhodesia
The General Assembly,
Having examined the question of Southern Rhodesia,
Recalling its resolutions 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, 1747 (XVI) of 28 June 1962 and 1760 (XVII)
of 31 October 1962, the resolution adopted on 20 June
1963 by the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the J?eclaration_ on the
Granting of Independence to Colomal Countries and
Peoples 1 and General Assembly resolution 1883
(XVIII) of 14 October 1963,
II aving considered the report of the ?Pe~ial Co1:1mittee on the question of Southern ~hodesia, 3 m part!cu!ar
with re"ard to the continued dcmal to the vast maionty
of the Xfrican population of their basic political rights,
Bearing in mind the contents of the reports of the
Secretary-General submitted on 19 December 196~ and
6 June 1963, 5
B caring also in mind the oral petitions presented to
the Fourth Committee,
Tal~ing into consideration the ?ecisions concerning
decolonization taken at the Summit Conference of Independent African States he!? in May 1963 at Ad~is
Ababa, particularly those relating to Southern Rhodesia,
Deeply concerned at th~ explosive sit~ation exi~t!ng
in Southern Rhodesia owmg to the demal of political
rio-hts to the vast majority of the African population
a;d the entrenchment of the minority regime in power,
Mindful of the aggravation of the situati?n in S~uthern Rhodesia, which constitutes a threat to mternat1onal
peace and security,
Being aware that the settler minority government of
Southern Rhodesia has requested the Government of
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to grant independence to the Territory under
the 1961 Constitution, the abrogation of which has been
requested by the General Assembly,
1. Approves the report of the Special Co~mittee on
. the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, particularly its conclusions and
recommendations, and expresses appreciation for its
work;
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
Southern Rhodesia to self-determination and independence;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his efforts in connexion with the question
of Southern Rhodesia ;
4. Expresses deep regret that the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
has not implemented the various resolutions of the
General Assembly on Southern Rhodesia ;
8 Official Records of tht General Assembly, Eighteenth Session, Annexes, addendum to agenda item 23, document A/5446/
Rev.I, chapter III.
4 [bid., Seventeenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 56, document A/5396.
II Ibid., Eighteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 75, document A/5426.

-------------------

5. Calls upon the Government of the United Kingdom not to accede to the request of the present minority
government . of Southern Rhode~ia for independence
until majority rule based on universal adult suffrage
is established in the Territory;
6. Once more invites the Government of the United
Kingdom to hold without ~e:ay a constit~!ional c~nfen·nce in which representatives of all political parties
of the Territory will take part with a view to making
constitutional arrangements for independence, on the
basis of universal adult suffrage, including the fixing
of the earliest possible date for independence;
7. Urges all Member States, in particular those
having the closest relations with the Government of the
United Kingdom, to use their influence to the utmost
with a view to ensuring the realization of the legitimate
aspirations of the people of Southern Rhodesia;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
lend his good offices to promote conciliation in the
Territory, as stated in paragraph 4 of resolution 1760
(XVII), and to report both to the General Assembly
during the eighteenth session and to the Special Committee on the results of his efforts ;
9. Decides to keep the question of Southern Rhodesia
on the agenda of its eighteenth session.
1255th plenary n:eeting,
6 November 1963.

1899 (XVIII). Question of South West Africa
. The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of South West Africa,
Having considered the report on this question submitted by the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 6
Having heard the statements of the petitioners,
Bearing in mind the principles of the Declaration on
the granting of independence to colonial countries and
peoples, set forth in General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling all its resolutions relating to South West
Africa, especially resolutions 1702 (XVI) of 19 December 1961 and 1805 (XVII) of 14 December 1962,
Considering the decisions relating to decolonization
adopted at the Summit Conference of Independent
African States, held in May 1963 at Addis Ababa,
particularly those concerning South West Africa,
Deeply regretting that the Government of the Republic of South Africa has taken no steps to implement
the resolutions of the General Assembly on South West
Africa and, in particular, that it has refused to allow a
United Nations technical assistance resident representative to be stationed in that Territory,
Further deploring the refusal of the Government of
South Africa to co-operate with the Special Committee,
which has prevented the Committee from discharging
the tasks assigned to it by General Assembly resolution
1805 (XVII),
Noting with deep concern the continuing deterioration of the situation in South West Africa resulting from
the intensification of the policies of apartheid, which
has been unanimously censured and categorically con6 Jbid., addendum to agenda item 23, document A/5446/Rev.l,
chapter IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the :Fourth Committee

demned by the General Assembly in resolutions 1761
(XVII) of 6 November 1962 and 1881 (XVIII) of
11 October 1963,
Observing with profound regret that the Government
of South Africa has persistently and deliberately failed
to fulfil its international obligations in the administration
of the Mandated Territory of South West Africa,
Considering that any attempt by the Government of
South Africa to annex a part or the whole of the
Territory of South \Vest Africa would be contrary to
the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice
of 11 July 1950 7 and would constitute a violation of
that Government's obligations under the J\fandate and
of its other intermtional ob!igations,
Considc1-ing further that the continuing support received by the Government of South Africa from certain
Powers or certain financial groups encourages it to
persist in its attitude and embles it to do so,
Decplv concrrncd at the present critical situation in
South \Vest Africa, the continuation of which constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security,
Takinq into consideration the special responsibilities
of the Pnited Nations with regard to the Territory of
South West Africa,
1. A />frnves the report of the Special Committee on
the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Grantimr of Jndenendence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples on "'the question of South West
Africa, r;i.rticularly its conclusions and recommendations. and expresses keen appreciation for the work
of the Committee;
2. Solemnly rraffirms the inalienable right of the
people of South \Vest Africa to self-determination and
independence;
.3. Condemns the Government of the Republic of
South .A frir:a for its persistent refusal to co-operate with
tJ-,e United Nations in applying the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and implementing the
resolutions of the General Assembly;
4. Considers that any attempt to annex a part or
the whole of the Territorv of South West Africa constitutes an act of aggression ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To continne his efforts with a view to achieving
the obiectives stated in naragraohs 5 and 6 of General
Assemblv resolution 1805 (XVII);
( b) To invite the Gove1 nment of South Africa to
inform him of its decision regarding the provisions of
those p;iragraphs not later than 30 November 1963;
( c) To report to the General Assembly immediately
after he has received the reply of the Government of
South Africa;
6. Decidrs to draw the attention of the Security
Council to the present critical situation in South West
Africa, the continnation of which constitutes a serious
threat to international peace and security;
7. Urges all States which have not yet done so to
take, separately or collectively, the following measures
with reference to the question of South VJ'est Africa:
(a) Refrain forthwith from supplying in any manner
or form any arms or military equipment to South
Africa;
7 foternational status of South-West Africa, Advisory Opinion: I.C.J. Reports 1950, p. 128.

47

( b) Refrain also from supplying in any manner or
form any petroleum or petroleum products to South
Africa;
( c) Refrain from any action which might hamper
the implementation of the present resolution and of the
previous General Assembly resolutions on South \Vest
Africa;
8. Requests the Special Committee:
( u:) To continue its efforts with a view to discharging the t;,sks assigned to it by resolution 1805 (XVII);
( b) To consider, in co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral and the agencies of the United Nations, the
implications of the activities of the mining indttstry and
the other international companies having interests in
South \Vest Africa, in order to assess their economic
and political influence and their mode of operation;
( c) To rerort on these questions to the General
i,ssembly at its nineteenth session;
9. Derides to maintain the question of South West
Africa on the agenda of its eighteenth session and to
n·sume consideration of this question in the light of
the rrn 1v of tlw Government of Sonth Africa, given in
accordance with p;i.ragraph 5 above, and immediately
after receipt of that reply.
1257th f•lenarv meetin(I,
13 ·N uve111bcr 1963.

1900 (XVIII). Petitions concerning the Territory
of South West Africa
The General Assembly,
Noting th;i.t the Special Committee on the Situation
with re~ard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Grnnting of Independence to Colonial Conntries
and Peon1es has received nnd examined ninetv-four
petitions 'concerning South \Vest Africa, in acco;dance
with parag-r;i.ph 3 of General Assembly resolution
1805 (XVII) of 14 December 1962,
N otinq further that those petitions dealt, inter alia,
with the general situation .:ind the events occurring
within the Territorv of South West Africa, the establishment of a United Nations presence in the Territory
in accordance with paragr;-,,ph 6 of resolution 1805
(XVII). the attitttde of th" Government of the Republic
of ~ 0uth Africa towards the resolutions of the General
Assembly, the problems frtced by South \Vest Africans,
inclml;ng students, travelling through the Federation
of Rhodesia and Nvasaland, and the consideration of
the question of South ·west Africa in the United
Nations,
Draws the attention of the petitioners concerned
to the report on South \Vest Africa submitted to
the General Assembly by the Special Committee on the
Situation w;th regard to the Implementation of the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial·
Countries and Peoples, 6 to the report of the SecretaryGeneral on special education;il and training programmes
for South \Vest Africa, 8 and to the resolutions on the
question of South West Africa adopted by the Assembly
at its eighteenth session.
1257th plenary meeting,
13 November 1963.
8 Official .Records of the General Assembly, Eiohtee11th Session, Annexes, agenda item SS, documents A/5526 and Add.l.
