General Assembly-Twenty-eighth Session

84

2. Emphasizes the jmportanoe of increased co-ordination between United Nations organs and the specialized agencies in the activities and programmes relating
to youth and of continuing co-operation with the Governments of Member States, in order to achieve an
effective and harmonious approach to the problems
confronting youth;
3. Solemnly invites all young people to affirm their
faith in the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations in order to further the ideals of
peace, mutual respect and understanding among
peoples;
4·_ Reaffirms the importance for the administering
Powers of urgently undertaking aII necessary measures
to_ further by all appropriate means and in conformity
with the Charter the education and training of youth
in the countries and territories still under colonial
and alien domination and foreign occupation, with a
view to expediting their liberation and the full exercise
of their right to self-determination;
5. Urges Governments to ensure to youth:
(a) More favourable conditions in the fields of
education, training, health, social welfare and employment;
(b) An appropriate opportunity to participate in
the preparation and implementation of national development plans and in programmes of international cooperation;
( c) The possibility of participating in decisions on
questions of national interest, particularly those which
concern youth;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the implementation of the present resolution.

2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973
3142 (XXVDI). Status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights

The General Assembly,
Having noted the report of the Secretary-General"
on the status of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
{?ovenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant ~n Civil
and Political Rights,49
Convinced that the coming into force of the International Covenants on Human Rights will greatly enhance the ability of the United Nations to promote and
encourage respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion, and will contribute to the attainment of the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations,
Recalling its resolution 3025 (XXVII) of 18 December 1972, and in particular the hope expressed
that Member States would find it possible to take apo A/9140 and Add, 1.
4.11 Resolution 2200 A

(XXI), annex.

propriate action with a view to accelerating the process
of ratification or accession to the International Covenants on Human Rights,
Noting with appreciation that following its appeal
some Member States have acceded to the International
Covenants on Human Rights,
Recalling also that, in its resolution 3060 (XXVIII)
of 2 November 1973 relating to the observance of the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration
of ~uman Rights, the General Assembly invited States
which_ had not yet done so to ratify, inter alia, the International Covenant on Economic Social and Cultural
Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Optional Protocol to the Inter- ·
national Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
l. Reiterates its hope that such action on the part
of Member States will be further continued;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, pursuant to
General Assembly resolutions 2200 A (XXI) of 16
December 1966 and 2788 (XXVI) of 6 December
1971, to prepare, on the basis of reports from Gov~
e~ments, . and submit to the Assembly at its twentyn~th session a report on the measures taken or envisaged_ by ~ember States with a view to accelerating
the ratification of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International
Covenant on Civil and P~litical Rights and the Optional
Protocol to the Internat10nal Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973
3143 (XXVID). Report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
1-p~ Com1?1issioner50 for Refugees concerning the activities of his Office and having heard his statement,n
_Noting with appreciation the manner in which the
High Commissioner has, in accordance with the relevant re~olutions of the General Assembly and the
Econoffilc and Social Council and the directives of
the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's
Programme, carried out essential humanitarian actions
Bearing in mi~d the importance of the increasingly'
useful co-operation between the High Commissioner
and. oth~r members of t~e United Nations system, resulti?g ID. better co-ordmation of action and greater
effic1ency ID fields of common interest
'
Recognizing the importance of voluntary
repatriation as a permanent solution to the refugee problem
and the useful role played by the High Commissioner
in co-operation with other members of the United
~ a~ions system and non-governmental agencies in assist mg them,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing number of
Governments contributing to the High Commissioner's
Programme and the generous attitude adopted by Govr,o_official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-eighth
Sesswn, Supplement No. 12 (A/9012 and Corr.I), Supplement
No. 12A (A/9012/Add.1) and Supplement No. 12B (A/9012/
Add.2).
51 Ibid., Twenty-eighth Session, Third Committee, 2038th
meeting, paras. 1-8.

85

Resololion11 adopted on the reportll of the Third Committee

emrnents in supporting various activities of the High
Commissioner,
Commending accessions to the Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees of 1951, 52 the Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees of 1967118 and other
relevant instruments,
1. Expresses its deep satisfaction at the efficient
manner in which the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and his staff continue to accomplish their
humanitarian task, and appeals to him to consider
favourably his re-election in view of the unflagging
dedication which he has manifested since he assumed
the responsibilities of his present post;
2. Requests the High Commissioner to continue his
assistance and protection ,activities in favour of refugees within his mandate as well as for those to whom
he extends his good offices or is called upon to assist
in accordance with relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly;
3. Requests the High Commissioner to continue his
efforts, in co-operation with Governments, United Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote permanent and speedy solutions through voluntary repatriation, assistance in rehabilitation where necessary,
integration in countries of asylum or resettlement in
other countries;
4. Urges Governments to continue to lend their support to the High Commissioner's humanitarian action
by:
(a) Facilitating the accomplishment of his task in
the field of international protection;
(b) Co-operating in the promotion of permanent
solutions to refugee problems;
( c) Providing the necessary means to attain the
financial targets established with the approval of the
Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

3144 (XXVIII). Human rights in the
administration of justice
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2858 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971, concerning human rights in the administration of justice and, in particular, the draft principles
relating to equality in the administration of justice:!•
and the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners,1111
Noting Commission on Human Rights resolution 5
(XXIX) of 20 March 1973 58 and Economic and Social
Council resolution 1785 (LIV) of 18 May 1973,
Considering that the comments received from Governments57 pursuant to Commission on Human Rights
112 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 189, No. 2S4S, p. 137.
113 Ibid., vol 606, No. 8791, p. 267.
114 E/CN.4/1077, annex.
GIi First United Nation:, Congress on the Prevention of Crime

and the Treatment of Offenders: report by the Secretariat
(United Nations publication, Sales No.: 1956.IV.4), annex I.A.
116 See 0/Jicial Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/5265), chap. XX.
111 See E/CN.A/1112 and Add.1-8.

resolution 8 (XXVIII) of 4 April
show the
diversity of approach and the variety of issues faced
by Government'> in relation to the draft principles relating to equality in the administration of justice set
out in resolution 3 (XXIII) of the Sub-Commission on
Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities,
1. Expresses its deep appreciation to the Special
Rapporteur, Mr. Abu Rannat, for his study;59
2. Calls upon Member States to give due consideration, in formulating legislation and taking other measures affecting equality in the administration of justice,
to the above-mentioned draft principles, which may be
regarded as setting forth valuable norms, with a view
to arriving at an elaboration of an appropriate international declaration or instrument.
197258

2201st plenary meeting
14 December 1973

B
The General Assembly,
Noting with satisfaction that the Working Group of
Experts on the Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners recommended 60 that attention should
be given to their further dissemination and effective
implementation,
Noting also that the treatment of offenders in cus-"
tody will be considered by the Fifth United Nations
Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, with special reference to the Standard Minimum Rules,
1. Recommends that Member States should make
all possible efforts to implement the Standard Minimum
Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners in the administration of penal and correctional institutions and take
the Rules into account in the framing of national legislation;
2. Requests the Secretary-General, in preparing the
report on the situation of crime prevention and control requested by the General Assembly in paragraph
4 of its resolution 3021 (XXVII) of 18 December
1972 and to be submitted to the Assembly at its thirtyfirst session, to take particularly into account the current application of the Standard Minimum Rules for
the Treatment of Prisoners and to make suggestions
about the measures needed to ensure their most effective implementation.
2201 st plenary meeting
14 December 1973
3145 (XXVIII). Assistance to the developing
countries in the field of narcotics control

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2859 (XXVI) of 20 December 1971 and 3012 (XXVII) of 18 December
1972,
Considering that some developing countries owing
to the lack of technical and financial means, 'are un118 See Of!icial Records of the Economic and Social Council
Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 7 (E/5113), chap. XIII'.
119 Study of Equality in the Administration of Justice (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: E.71.XIV.3).
eo See E/ AC.57 /8, para. 63.
