S/PV.8028

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8028th meeting

Tuesday, 22 August 2017, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Ciss
Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-26448 (E)
*1726448*

S/PV.8028

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite Mr. Miroslav Jenča, Assistant
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I now give the floor to Mr. Jenča.
Mr. Jenča: I thank the Security Council for this
opportunity to brief it on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
As detailed last month by the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov (see S/PV.8011), the recent crisis in Jerusalem
once again highlighted the unsustainable nature
of the current situation and the need for a political
horizon and a clear recommitment by the international
community and both parties to ending the occupation
and to realizing a two-State solution that meets the
legitimate national aspirations and security needs of
both Palestinians and Israelis.
Following the deadly 14 July attack in which two
policemen were killed by three assailants in the Old
City, three Israelis were stabbed to death in a terror
attack and six Palestinians were killed during primarily
peaceful protests, as a result of live ammunition, which
raises concerns about the use of force by Israeli security
forces. I join the Secretary-General in commending
the State of Israel and the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, in line with the latter’s special and historic
role, for bringing that crisis to a conclusion. I also
note positively the calls for de-escalation by prominent
religious leaders on both sides. We encourage continued
discussion among all parties concerned to ensure the
safety and security of all worshippers and visitors while
upholding the historic status quo in the holy sites. In
that context, continued security coordination between
Israel and the Palestinian Authority is paramount, and
the official resumption of contact between the parties
is vital.
2/5

22/08/2017

In other incidents in recent weeks, two Palestinians
were killed and more than 150 injured were by
Israeli security forces. Four Israelis were injured by
Palestinians, including one civilian. On 28 July, a
Palestinian man was shot dead by Israeli security forces
for reportedly attempting to stab a soldier at the Gush
Etzion Junction of the West Bank. On 2 August, an
Israeli civilian was seriously wounded during a stabbing
attack by a Palestinian in the Israeli town of Yavneh. On
8 August, militants in Gaza fired a rocket that landed
in an open area in southern Israel. The following day,
the Israeli Air Force retaliated with missile fire at two
Hamas installations in Gaza, injuring three people. On
17 August, an alleged suicide bombing killed one and
injured five others in the southern Gaza strip.
Over the past month, developments occurred that
further undermined trust between the parties. On
26 July, the Israeli Knesset approved the first reading
of an amendment to the Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital
of Israel. If approved, that law would further cement
Israeli control of occupied East Jerusalem and would
limit the ability of both sides to reach a negotiated
solution that is in line with General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and prior agreements.
Jerusalem is the final status issue that must be resolved
through negotiations between the parties. Any move
that could have an impact on demographics in the city
is extremely worrisome and could spark violence.
On 25 July, 15 Israeli settler families illegally
occupied the so-called Machpela House, in the divided
city of Hebron, despite an ongoing Israeli legal
process regarding ownership of the House. We urge
Israeli authorities to resolve the situation quickly to
avoid further tensions in that already highly charged
town. Settlers reportedly also placed mobile homes
near the settlement of Halamish in response to last
month’s deadly attack there, as well as within the
Shvut Rachel neighbourhood of the Shilo settlement.
On 3 August, the Israeli Prime Minister delivered an
inaugural speech at the launch of the construction of
1,000 new housing units in the Beitar Ilit settlement.
In the speech, he praised the achievement of his
Government in promoting settlements. Such actions
only fuel perceptions that those working to obstruct the
two-State solution are gaining the upper hand. I must
reiterate that settlements are illegal under international
law and an obstacle to peace.
In a few days’ time, we will mark the third
anniversary of the ceasefire that ended the most recent
17-26448

22/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

round of hostilities between Hamas and Israel in the
Gaza Strip in 2014, in which close to 1,500 civilians
were killed. Since then, the overall humanitarian
conditions in Gaza have worsened. That was clearly
documented in a recent United Nations country team
report that looked at the state of Gaza’s population since
Hamas’ takeover of the Strip in 2007, thereby increasing
concerns that the Strip could become unlivable by
2020. The punishing measures taken against Gaza by
the Palestinian Authority since April only add to the
crippling humanitarian effect of Israel’s closures on the
population. Whatever the political differences between
the Palestinian factions, it is not the people of Gaza
who should pay the price.
Despite reconstruction efforts over the past three
years, approximately 29,000 people remain displaced,
while living in temporary shelters and in poor
conditions. Completing our collective reconstruction
effort in Gaza is within sight, but Member States
need to fulfil their funding commitments. The Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism, established by Israel and
the Palestinian Authority with support from the United
Nations in the aftermath of the conflict, has enabled
much of the reconstruction. I encourage Israel and the
Palestinian Authority to intensify their engagement
towards improving the Mechanism to reach its full
potential. It is also time for the parties to discuss the
future of that provisional instrument with the goal of
fully lifting all closures.
Despite the import of fuel from Egypt to run the
Gaza power plant, most residents are experiencing the
sweltering summer heat with only four to five hours of
electricity per day. The impact of the ongoing energy
crisis is far-reaching, while affecting the availability
of clean water, health care and sanitation services.
The United Nations continues to provide a lifeline
through its provision of emergency fuel in support
of a number of critical facilities. I call on Palestinian
leaders to address the destructive consequences of the
divisions. I encourage them to reach an agreement that
would allow the legitimate Palestinian authorities to
take up their responsibilities in Gaza, as a step towards
the formation of a united and democratically elected
Palestinian Government based on the principles of the
Palestinian Liberation Organization. Hamas must also
ensure that calm is maintained by stopping the militant
buildup against Israel and by doing its utmost to sustain
security at the border with Egypt. Israel should step-up
measures to lift the closures and facilitate development

S/PV. 8028

in Gaza as overall calm persists in the Strip in line with
resolution 1860 (2009). I also call on donors to respond
urgently to the $25 million humanitarian appeal made
in July in the wake of the electricity crisis so as to fill
the current 70 per cent funding gap.
Briefly with regard to Lebanon, the situation in the
area of operations of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has generally remained quiet.
On 31 July, Major General Beary chaired a tripartite
meeting with the parties, during which both sides
discussed violations of resolution 1701 (2006), Blue
Line marking and ongoing liaison and coordination
matters. UNIFIL protested the presence of unauthorized
weapons and uniformed personnel in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006) during a commemoration of
the 2006 war, organized by Hizbullah on 13 August.
Military operations against militants continue on the
eastern border with Syria. As a result of local deals,
a number of militants and refugees were evacuated
from the area of Arsal to areas in Syria. Support for the
Lebanese Armed Forces and other security institutions
of the State as the sole protectors of the security and
stability of Lebanon remains important.
In the Syrian Golan, the ceasefire between Israel
and the Syrian Arab Republic has been maintained,
albeit in a volatile environment attributable to the
ongoing conflict in Syria. Both Israel and the Syrian
Arab Republic have stated their continued commitment
to the Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli
and Syrian Forces and support for the full return of the
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force to the
area of separation, conditions permitting.
With regard once again to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, last month’s crisis in the Old City of Jerusalem,
which is home to sites holy to all three monotheistic
religions, demonstrated that tensions can ignite, thereby
threatening to transform the nature of the conflict and
spread across borders. It is therefore essential that
international and regional partners remain engaged in
ending the occupation and resolving all final-status
issues, in upholding and implementing the vision of two
States living side-by-side in peace and security based
of all the relevant United Nations resolutions and in
supporting both Israeli and Palestinian leaders to take
the necessary steps towards ensuring an enduring peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Jenča
for his briefing.

17-264483/5

S/PV.8028

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs
Miroslav Jenča for his briefing.
The position of Uruguay with regard to the conflict
between Israel and Palestine and, even more important,
on how to reach an agreement that will end it, is well
known, and I will therefore be very brief. Nevertheless,
we must not forego such opportunities to encourage
both parties in the search for peace. I will limit my
comments today to several recent developments that
have an impact on the peace process, and possible
courses of action for the future.
Uruguay is concerned about the lack of progress
in connection with the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, with
its humanitarian, political and security implications in
both countries and throughout the region. Unfortunately,
over the past several months there have been no major
developments with regard to the peace process. We
were hoping to see a quickened pace of action and
more substantial outcomes following the release of the
Quartet report (S/2016/595, annex) and the adoption of
resolution 2334 (2016), but that has not been the case.
The parties have not thus far taken any measure to
reverse the trends that threaten the two-State solution,
despite the valuable recommendations contained in
the Quartet’s report, published more than a year ago.
We look forward to the presentation, next September,
of the third quarterly report on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) by Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov. Although we do not expect major changes
with respect to his briefing made during the open debate
last June (see S/PV.7977), we reiterate our interest that
it be circulated in writing prior to next month’s meeting
so that we will be able to analyse the information
provided to us and to provide our impressions following
a very careful reading of the document.
A month ago (see S/PV.8011), we expressed
our condemnation and concern with regard to the
escalation in violence following the terrorist attack on
the esplanade of the mosques in Jerusalem. Fortunately,
some hours afterwards, the Government of Israel left
unimplemented the new security measures that the
Palestinian side viewed as having an impact on the
status quo of the holy sites. As a result, it was possible
to reduce exponentially the violence that had been
afflicting the Palestinian territories for more than
4/5

22/08/2017

10 days. In that regard, we ask the Israeli and the
Palestinian authorities to make every effort to avoid
unnecessary provocations that increase tension and
violence and that compromise the efforts made by the
international community to try to restart the bilateral
peace negotiations between Israel and Palestine with a
view to achieving the two-State solution.
With regard to Gaza, the situation that has been
eclipsed in the Security Council by the many other
humanitarian disasters facing the region, we remain
concerned about the serious crisis being suffered by the
population due to a cumulative process over many years
marked by the consequences of armed conflicts and
the negligence of regional authorities. The 2 million
Palestinians who reside in Gaza and are subsisting in
very hard conditions — for example, the electricity
crisis in the area — also face the possibility of a new
conflict that may result in a humanitarian disaster and
that may foster extremism in the whole region. We
therefore urgently call on the Palestinian and the Israeli
authorities, as well as the leaders of Hamas, to find a
solution to the various problems that threaten to plunge
Gaza into a downward spiral.
In conclusion, as we have done since 1947, we
reiterate the unwavering commitment of Uruguay to
peace in the Middle East and are concerned by the longstanding paralysis of the process. In order to achieve that
long-awaited objective, the accomplishment of the twoState solution, the parties must resume direct bilateral
negotiations. That is the only option that would allow for
the peaceful coexistence of Israel and Palestine and the
welfare and safety of their peoples. The international
community continues to clamour for a politically
negotiated settlement, which is the only way out of this
endless and dark tunnel. All mediation and facilitation
efforts on the part of Council members are welcome.
We ask once again that the voice of the international
community be heard and that we be allowed to help. It
should not be forgotten that in the coexistence between
States there is no asset more valuable than peace.
The potential for future cooperation and development
remains intact. Be an example. Be pioneers and
courageously negotiate peace, bringing stability to the
afflicted region of the Middle East.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, Bolivia wishes
to thank the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Miroslav Jenča, for his briefing this
morning. Bolivia is attending this meeting to make
17-26448

22/08/2017

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

known its concern regarding the latest developments in
the occupied Palestinian territories.
We are concerned about the information circulated
by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs that on the morning of 21 August Israel
demolished a nursery in the Bedouin community of Jabal
al-Baba, in the occupied territory of the West Bank. We
wish to make known our deep rejection of this type of
unilateral action taken by the Government of Israel, as
such are violations of international law, human rights
and international humanitarian law. As expressed by
the Council in resolution 242 (1967), of 22 November
1967, the fulfilment of Charter principles requires the
establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East, which should include, among other things, the
termination of all claims or states of belligerency and
respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and political independence of every
State in the area and their right to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries free from threats or
acts of force.
For Bolivia, the solution by which two States would
live side by side, with secure borders recognized by
both, is the only alternative that, based on dialogue, will
allow Palestine to achieve its full development in all
spheres — political, social, economic and cultural. In
that regard, we join in and commend all efforts aimed at
reaching a peaceful settlement of the conflict between
Palestine and Israel, such as the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Quartet road map and others, and at ensuring a just
and lasting peace for both peoples. We reaffirm our
full commitment to multilateralism and debate framed
in respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States.
However, it is essential that efforts to resolve the
conflict between Israel and Palestine continue to be a
matter of priority to be addressed by the Security Council,
with the understanding that it is our responsibility to be
the guarantor of international peace and security and
to take timely action to safeguard the integrity of both
peoples. We should not allow ourselves to be immersed
in delaying tactics that are used by the occupying
Power to continue with its colonizing activities. It is

S/PV. 8028

unacceptable that, under the pretext of security and
public order, the Government of Israel should blatantly
continue its policies and practices aimed at altering the
demographic composition, character and status of the
Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including
East Jerusalem. We must remember that such measures
were condemned by the Security Council in several
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). We
cannot allow, by our inaction, situations such as those
that occurred last July in the clashes in East Jerusalem
and the West Bank to be repeated. As Council members,
we cannot allow more violence that adds to the number
of dead, be they Israeli or Palestinian, to take place.
Bolivia reaffirms that the lack of accountability
for violations of international law committed by Israel
serves to reinforce a culture of impunity, leading to a
recurrence of violations and seriously endangering the
maintenance of international peace, as established in
Human Rights Council resolution S-21/1.
Once again, we express our commitment to the
immediate and timely implementation of resolution
2334 (2016), and we again call for the next report to be
circulated in advance and in writing to the members
of the Council for their thorough consideration. In that
context, all settlement activities being carried out by
the Government of Israel in the occupied Palestinian
territories must cease, as well as any expansionist
activities that undermine any possibility of dialogue
between Palestinians and Israelis.
We vehemently reaffirm that the only long-term
solution to the conflict is the two-State solution, with
an Israeli State and a free, sovereign and independent
Palestinian State, within the pre-1967 international
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and of the General Assembly.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on my list.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.30 a.m.

17-264485/5
