180

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace;
2. Calls upon Governments to continue taking the measures necessary for achieving substantial progress in the
implementation of the relev;mt recommendations of the Programme of Action with a view to ensuring equal participation by women as agents and beneficiaries in all sectors
and at all levels of the development process;
3. Calls upon the organizations of the United Nations
system, including the regional commissions, to reserve adequate resources for, and pay increased attention to, the
implementation of the Programme of Action, particularly
as regards the dissemination of information on the participation of women;
4. Urges the regional commissions to report in full to
the Economic and Social Council, at its first regular session
of 1982, on the evolution of the situation of women in all
the sectors of their development programmes, in order to
strengthen and reorient the programmes and reporting methods of those commissions, so as to reflect more adequately
the regional concerns of women;
5. Requests the Economic and Social Council, at its
first regular session of 1982, to consider the implementation
of the Programme of Action, giving high priority in this
regard to the report of the Commission on the Status of
Women;
6. Emphasizes the role of the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat as the
focal point for the organizations of the United Nations system with regard to the implementation of the Programme
of Action, in order to achieve the goals and objectives of
the Decade, and requests the Secretary-General to give the
Centre the assistance required to enable it to carry out its
mandate;
1. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
at its twenty-ninth session, to be held in February 1982, to
give priority to the question of the preparations for the World
Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of
the United Nations Decade for Women, to be held in 1985,
which will mark the end of the Decade, with a view to
submitting to the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session, through the Economic and Social Council, specific
proposals on that question;
8. Stresses the need for close and continued co-operation between the United Nations system and the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women and requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to allow the Institute to carry out its
mandate;
9. Takes note with satisfaction of the effective contribution made by the Voluntary Fund for the United Nations
Decade for Women to the implementation of the Programme
of Action;
10. Invites the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, at its thirty-seventh session, a report on the
steps taken to implement the present resolution;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "United Nations
Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace".
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

36/127.

Consideration within the United Nations of
questions concerning the role of women in
development
The General Assembly,
Recalling the objectives of the United Nations Decade
for Women: Equality, Development and Peace,

Recalling further its resolution 3~/78 of 5 December 1980
in which it emphasized the need to integrate the objectives
of the United Nations Decade for Women into the International Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, 98
Having taken cognizance of the report prepared by the
Ad Hoe Working Group on the Social Aspects of the Development Activities of the United Nations, 99 established
pursuant to Economic and Social Council resolution 1979/
45 of 11 May 1979, and, in particular, of paragraphs 80 to
82 of the report,
Having also taken cognizance of the report of the Secretary-General, which contains a comprehensive outline of
a world survey on the role of women in development, 100
l. Recommends, in the light of paragraphs 80 to 82 of
the report of the Ad Hoe Working Group on the Social
Aspects of the Development Activities of the United Nations, that documents concerning the integration of women
in development should be made available to the Third Committee under the relevant agenda item;
2. Expresses the desire that the recommendation in
paragraph 1 above should be brought to the attention of the
General Committee of the General Assembly;
3. Expresses also the desire that the Third Committee
should be seized of the world survey on the role of women
in development, whose comprehensive outline is contained
in the report of the Secretary-General;
4. Requests the Commission on the Status of Women
to give special attention at its twenty-ninth session, to be
held in February 1982, to questions pertaining to the participation of women in development, under its agenda item
3 concerning the implementation of the World Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Women's Year; 101
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the
Commission on the Status of Women is consulted in the
preparation of the world survey on the role of women in
development requested by the General Assembly in paragraph 10 of its resolution 35/78 and, to the extent possible,
regarding any survey or proposed action concerning women.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 198/

36/128.

International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 31/135 of 16 December 1976, in
which it approved the establishment of the International
Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of
Women,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolution
1981/13 of 6 May 1981, in which the Council, inter alia,
took note of the progress made towards the full establishment of the Institute,
Convinced that the Institute can, with adequate resources,
make a valuable contribution to the implementation of the
Programme of Action for the Second Half of the United
Nations Decade for Women, 102 as well as to realizing the
9

"

Resolution 35156, annex.

99

E/1981/3.

A/36/590.
Report of the World Conference of the International Women's Year,
Mexico City, /9 June-2 July 1975 (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E 76. IV. I), chap. II, sect. A.
102
Report of the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace, Copenhagen, 14-30 July 1980
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 80. IV. 3 and corrigendum). chap.
I, sect. A.
l(X)

101

VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

objectives of the International Development Strategy for the
Third United Nations Development Decade, 103
l. Insists on the urgency of assuring the prompt establishment of the International Research and Training Institute
for the Advancement of Women in the host country;
2. Reiterates the guidelines set out in Economic and
Social Council resolution 1998 (LX) of 12 May 1976 regarding the activities of the Institute, in particular the need
for close collaboration with the regional centres and institutes which have similar objectives;
3. Underlines the importance of the contributions of the
Institute to the work of all United Nations bodies, agencies
and institutions involved with the advancement of women.
in particular the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat;
4. Urges all Governments to consider contributing financially to the United Nations Trust Fund for the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement
of Women or co-operating in other ways with the Institute
in order to assure its regular and effective financing so that
it can plan the expansion of its programmes;
5. Requests the regional commissions, the specialized
agencies and other organs and bodies of the United Nations
system to co-operate fully with the Institute in their respective fields of competence.
97th plenary meeting
14 December 1981

36/129.

Voluntary Fund for the United Nations Decade
for Women
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3520 (XXX) of 15 December
1975, by which it proclaimed the period from 1976 to 1985
United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development
and Peace,
Recalling its decision of 15 December 1975 to extend the
activities of the Voluntary Fund for the International
Women's Year so as to cover the period of the Decade,
Recalling its resolution 3 I /133 of I 6 December 1976,
containing the criteria and arrangements for the management
of the Fund,
Recalling its resolution 32/ I 38 of 16 December 1977,
Recalling also its resolution 34/ I 56 of 17 December 1979,
in which it expressed the desire to see the activities developed by the Fund continued beyond the United Nations
Decade for Women and decided to review at its thirty-sixth
session the decision regarding the location of the Fund in
New York,
Recalling further Economic and Social Council resolution
1980/3 of 16 April 1980,
Bearing in mind its resolution 35/136 of 11 December
1980, in which it endorsed the Programme of Action for
the Second Half of the United Nations Decade for Women, 10t
Conscious that the Fund is intended to supplement,
through financial and technical support, the activities for
implementing the goals for the United Nations Decade for
Women: Equality, Development and Peace,
Noting with appreciation the effective management and
coQtin~ing expansion_ of the Fund's activities and the cooperation extended by the relevant organs of the United
Nations, including the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Children's Fund and the regional commissions,
103

Resolution 35/56, annex.

181

Reaffirming the role of the Centre for Social Development
and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat as the focal
point for inter-agency co-operation towards the implementation of the Programme of Action,
Noting with appreciation the support given by the Fund
to projects in the developing countries,
Noting also with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the future of the Fund, 104
I. Notes with satisfaction the decisions of the Consultative Committee on the Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Decade for Women during its ninth and tenth
sessions; 105
2. Expresses its appreciation for the voluntary contributions pledged by Member States and urges them to contribute or increase their contributions to the Fund;
3. Decides that the Fund should continue its activities
beyond the United Nations Decade for Women;
4. Stresses the importance of the contributions of the
Fund towards the realization of the goals and objectives of
the United Nations Decade for Women;
5. Stresses also the interrelationship of the Voluntary
Fund with the Advancement of Women Branch of the Centre
for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the
Secretariat;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to invite the views
of Member States on how best the Fund can continue its
activities beyond the Decade and to submit a report thereon
to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session:
7. Requests also the Secretary-General, taking into account the views expressed by Member States on this matter.
to submit to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session
a report on the substantive and financial implications of,
and his proposals for the timing and modalities for. a relocation of the Fund within the Centre for Social Development and Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat in order
to enable Member States to take a decision in the matter.
97th plenary meeting
14 December /981

36/130.

Equal rights to work

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 34/ 155 of 17 December 1979, in
which it called upon Governments to take steps to ensure
the effective participation of women in the decision-making
process with respect to foreign policy and international economic and political co-operation, including steps to ensure
that they have equal access to diplomatic functions and that
they are represented in the United Nations and other international organizations,
Recalling also its resolutions 33/ 184 of 29 January 1979
and 34/ I 59 of 17 December 1979, in which it recommended
that States should envisage in their policies all appropriate
measures to create necessary conditions which will enable
women to participate in work on an equal footing with men,
Noting that in some countries legal and administrative
regulations hamper the possibilities of accompanying spouses
of members of diplomatic missions or consular posts and
of staff members of intergovernmental organizations to
work.
Concerned that women continue to be under-represented
in the professional staffs of international organizations. in-

"" N36/64 7 and Corr. I
10
' Ibid .. para. 13.
