S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6729th meeting
Monday, 5 March 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Sir Mark Lyall Grant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Azerbaijan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Musayev
Mr. Xing Jisheng
Ms. Moya
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Roessel
Ms. Leiva Roesch
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Iziraren
Mr. Siddique
Ms. Cortes Palma
Mr. Demin
Mr. Crowley
Mr. Waguena
Mr. Banks

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Special report of the Secretary-General on Somalia (S/2012/74)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-25146 (E)

*1225146*

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: Under rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Ethiopia to participate in this
meeting.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Japan.
Mr. Nishida (Japan): I would first like to extend
warm congratulations to His Excellency Sir Mark Lyall
Grant, Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom to the United Nations, on his assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and, of course, to express appreciation for his
leadership in convening this open debate on Somalia at
this timely juncture. I also would like to express my
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Elmi Ahmed Duale,
Permanent Representative of the Somali Republic, for
his statement, and to Ambassador Augustine Mahiga,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Somalia, for his briefing.
I wish to highlight that a large window of
opportunity has finally opened for Somalia, which has
seen more than 20 years of devastation. That was made
possible thanks to the efforts of the Somali Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), the Somali people and the
international community. Japan extends its sincere
appreciation to the forces of the Somali TFG and the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
recently joined by troops from Kenya and Djibouti, as
well as Ethiopia. They have spared no efforts to
combat Al-Shabaab despite huge sacrifices. It is high
time for the international community to echo those
efforts.
In that context, Japan welcomes the adoption of
resolution 2036 (2012), which allows for more
sustainable assistance to AMISOM operations. We
commend Ambassador Mahiga for his dedication to
Somalia, including his mediation role and his decision
to relocate the United Nations Political Office for
Somalia to Mogadishu.
Japan congratulates all participants on the success
of the London conference on Somalia, held on
23 February, in which Japan also took an active part. It

2

was an important occasion for the international
community to reaffirm its strong commitment to
Somalia. Japan would like to express its appreciation
and respect to the United Kingdom for its leadership in
making that meeting successful and fruitful. Japan
intends to cooperate proactively with other partners, in
accordance with the communiqué adopted at the
conference.
It should be noted that, over the past year, Somali
stakeholders have made tremendous efforts in the
Somali political process. Japan expresses its sincere
appreciation for the series of agreements that they have
made, namely, the Kampala Accord, the road map and,
most recently, on 17 February, the second Garowe
accord, which paves the way for the end of the
transitional period in August. Now that the
commitment of the international community has been
reaffirmed, it is time for the Somali people to renew
their commitment. Japan has committed firmly to the
achievement of peace and stability in Somalia and has
made a wide range of substantive contributions.
First, together with the European Union, Japan
has taken a leading role in efforts for the reinforcement
of the Somali and AMISOM police sectors,
contributing a total of $38 million through two United
Nations trust funds. That contribution currently
provides for the stipends of 5,000 Somali police
officers, as well as the construction of police stations
and the procurement of equipment, including armoured
vehicles. Bearing in mind that the needs in that field
will increase as TFG and AMISOM forces advance in
expanding their control over areas, Japan remains
committed to maintaining such police sector assistance.
Japan is also extending assistance to ensure
improvement in the humanitarian situation in Somalia,
in particular $30 million in assistance to ease the
serious famine situation last year. Although the famine
crisis has receded, humanitarian needs still remain. We
must therefore continue to extend our support.
Furthermore, it is not too early to consider the
issue of the reconstruction of Somalia. In that regard,
Japan looks forward to taking part in the Istanbul
conference in June to discuss the issue. Japan is
already engaged in the improvement of infrastructure
and the promotion of good governance through various
projects, such as the rehabilitation of Mogadishu port
and border control training for Somali TFG officers, in
partnership with the World Food Programme and the

12-25146

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

United Nations Development Programme and the
International Organization for Migration, respectively.

Japan, of course, spares no efforts to continue to
support Somalia.

Piracy is not only linked to stability in Somalia,
but also continues to be a stand-alone, serious threat to
international security. We need to continue to conduct
anti-piracy operations. Japan is proud of its participation
in these vast maritime peace operations, in close
collaboration with other coalitions over the past three
years, through the continuous deployment of two
vessels and two patrol aircraft in the Gulf of Aden. Our
escort and surveillance activities have contributed
significantly to the safe passage of merchant ships
through these areas. Moreover, in June of last year,
Japan established its own facility in Djibouti to
accommodate its personnel and equipment in order to
more effectively conduct these operations. Those
efforts clearly demonstrate Japan’s strong commitment
to the fight against piracy.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.

While it is commendable that the anti-piracy
operations have greatly contributed to the effective
prevention of attacks by pirates, Japan has become
increasingly concerned about the recent expansion of
the area of pirate activity to the western part of the
Indian Ocean. As stated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral submitted in January (S/2012/50), the issue of
piracy prosecution remains a major task for the
international community. Japan is one of 20 countries
that prosecute apprehended suspected pirates in their
respective countries, and has recently pledged to make
an additional contribution amounting to $2 million to
the Trust Fund to Support Initiatives of States
Countering Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, managed
by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in
support of the prosecution of suspected pirates in
Somalia and neighbouring States. Also, Japan supports
neighbouring coastal nations in enhancing their
maritime security and enforcement capacity so that
they can tackle Somali piracy on their own.
The TFG can be transformed to become a more
democratic and legitimate Government for Somalia. To
that end, the upcoming months will be very crucial.
Japan urges all Somali stakeholders to implement
without further delay the road map and the Garowe
Principles adopted at the second Somali National
Consultative Constitutional Conference. The next
milestone will be the adoption of a new Somali
constitution. All stakeholders should play an active role
in this important task, and the international community
should extend assistance to ensure its realization.

12-25146

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
fully associate myself with the statement made this
morning by the observer of the European Union. We
commend the United Kingdom for having taken the
initiative of organizing this debate on the situation in
Somalia, following the important London conference,
which the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg had the opportunity to
attend.
The next six months will be decisive for Somalia.
We welcome the progress made in Somalia at the
political level with the adoption of a road map and the
Garowe Principles, which set ambitious milestones for
finalizing the constitutional process and establishing
legitimate, stable and representative institutions. It is
now primarily up to all Somali political actors, in
particular the Transitional Federal Government, to
demonstrate their will to seize this opportunity to
complete the transition process by August, with the
support of the international community, so that the
reconciled Somali people may live in peace and
security and the Somali authorities may establish the
rule of law and leave no room for pirates and terrorists.
In terms of security, we note with satisfaction the
recent retreat of the Al-Shabaab militia from certain
strategic towns in the south and centre of the country.
However, Al-Shabaab continues to pose a serious threat
to the security and stability of the country. We
welcome the essential contribution and sacrifices of the
personnel deployed in the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the operations of neighbouring
countries to support the Somali security forces. We
commend the Security Council’s adoption of resolution
2036 (2012) on 22 February, authorizing an increase in
AMISOM’s troop ceiling and the deployment of a
substantial logistical support package. It is now
imperative to ensure the full implementation of that
decision, including its financing.
The humanitarian situation remains worrying.
Although the World Food Programme has recently
announced that the famine is over, close to one third of
the population, of which the majority lives in areas
controlled by Al-Shabaab, remains in need of emergency
humanitarian assistance. We call on all parties to allow

3

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

unhindered humanitarian access. The denial of access
imposed by Al-Shabaab to the main humanitarian
organizations is unacceptable.
A sustainable solution that would help to stabilize
Somalia will require a holistic approach combining
security, political, humanitarian and development
components. We wish to underline, in this regard, the
European Union’s adoption in November 2011 of its
strategy for the Horn of Africa.
Our national engagement is articulated along
three lines: political, security and humanitarian.
Luxembourg has contributed €750,000 to the United
Nations Trust Fund for the Somali security institutions.
In parallel, Luxembourg participates actively in the
European maritime mission, Operation Atalanta, by
providing two reconnaissance planes based in the
Seychelles. Luxembourg has also deployed military
instructors to the European military training mission,
which is training Somali security forces. Luxembourg
also remains an important and reliable donor of
humanitarian aid. Over the past few years, more than
€11 million has been disbursed for the Horn of Africa,
more than half of which has gone to Somalia.
To conclude, allow me to affirm that, as pledged
by the Deputy Prime Minister in London on
23 February, Luxembourg will continue to support
Somalia on the road to stabilization and peace in its
national capacity, as well as in the context of the
efforts undertaken by the European Union and the
United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my appreciation for your
initiative, Mr. President, to convene this open debate
on the situation in Somalia. It comes at a critical
moment in which the efforts of the Somali parties and
other regional and international efforts are mobilized to
restore peace and stability in Somalia. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his participation and
his valuable contributions to this debate, as well as his
Special Representative for Somalia, Mr. Mahiga, for
his tireless efforts and important briefing today.
Our meeting today comes just a few days after
the London high-level conference on Somalia, held
through an important initiative of the United Kingdom.
The conference enjoyed wide-scale regional and

4

international participation and crowned the relevant
efforts of the Somali people and the international
community, including the meeting of the International
Contact Group on Somalia, held in Djibouti; the Somali
National Consultative Constitutional Conferences, held
in Garowe; and the adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2036 (2012). All of these efforts were
expressions of the determination of all parties
concerned to create a new reality in Somalia that will
lay a solid foundation for peace, stability, development
and the prospect of a better future for all Somalis.
Furthermore, the relocation of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia to Mogadishu demonstrated
the commitment of the United Nations, in cooperation
with relevant regional organizations, such as the African
Union, the League of Arab States and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, to intensify their work on the
ground and to work closely with all Somalis. It also
demonstrated the significant gains made in recent
months, particularly in the consolidation of security and
stability in Mogadishu. That could not have been
achieved without the huge sacrifices made by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and the
Somali security forces, which had led to unprecedented
gains for Somalis and for the international community
and whose impact on resolving the situation in Somalia
should be maximized and put to use.
The adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) — which
extended the mandate of AMISOM, increased the
number of troops, including enablers and force
multipliers, improved the logistical support package
provided by the United Nations to AMISOM, and
supported the efforts to build the capacity of the
Somali forces — was an important step towards
consolidating the military gains on the ground in
Mogadishu and beyond. However, military action alone
cannot resolve the situation in Somalia unless it is
supported by a broader strategy to achieve peace and
stability that is based on strengthening the political
process and reconciliation efforts. In this regard, Egypt
reiterates the need to implement the tasks laid out in
the road map to end the transition in Somalia, including
the adoption of a new constitution and the reform of
the parliament, as well as the implementation of the
Garowe Principles, adopted in February, all of which
are key elements for promoting the political process.
Addressing the development and humanitarian
needs of Somalis is also closely linked to efforts to
achieve security and stability in Somalia. Therefore,

12-25146

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

the international community is required now more than
ever to redouble its efforts to support the endeavours of
the Transitional Federal Government, supported by
AMISOM, to extend State authority beyond Mogadishu,
enhance security and State authority, and provide basic
services to the Somali citizens. By the same token,
efforts should be redoubled to address the dire
humanitarian situation in Somalia. Despite the end of
the famine that hit a number of regions in Somalia,
more than 2 million Somalis are still in need of urgent
humanitarian assistance. All parties should commit
themselves to facilitating access of humanitarian relief
to all those in need.
Piracy and armed robbery off the coast of
Somalia are the results of chaos, the absence of State
authority and the lack of development that prevailed in
Somalia for two decades. Despite the success of the
international community’s positive efforts to combat
acts of piracy at sea by reducing the number of attacks
and lowering the rate of successful attacks, efforts to
combat piracy at sea alone will not be able to eliminate
the threat it poses to regional and international peace
and security unless they are part of a broader strategy
that involves addressing the underlying causes of
piracy at sea, with all its political, security, economic
and humanitarian dimensions directly related to the
situation in Somalia.
In this context, Egypt, as a member of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and
the Board of the Group’s Trust Fund, as well as
through its chairmanship of the Contact Group’s
working group IV, has always emphasized and
reiterates again today the importance of the adoption
by the international community of a comprehensive
approach to addressing piracy off the coast of Somalia.
Such an approach must build on the progress achieved
on the security and political tracks through serious and
genuine development efforts to create a new reality in
Somalia that meets the needs and aspirations of Somali
youth for job opportunities and better standards of
living in order to prevent the risk of their involvement
in the ranks of armed groups or acts of piracy.
Finally, Egypt will continue to lend its support to
all efforts aimed at resolving the crisis in brotherly
Somalia in order to allow that country to restore its role
in the Arab, African and Islamic spheres. Egypt shall
spare no effort to support the Somali people and its
institutions, including the security forces and the Coast
Guard, particularly by organizing training courses for

12-25146

the Somali cadres, providing humanitarian and medical
assistance, and dispatching educational missions from
Al-Azhar Al-Sharif in order to contribute to creating a
better future for the state of Somalia and for all Somalis.
The President:
representative of Italy.

I

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): First of all I want to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and to thank you for convening this
open debate on the situation in Somalia. I also thank
the Secretary-General and his Special Representative,
Ambassador Mahiga, for their statements.
Italy fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
would like to add few remarks in its national capacity.
Today’s open debate is taking place just a few days
after the London conference on Somalia, which was
attended by a large representation of Somali leaders
and by the major stakeholders on the Somali issue. We
are focusing international attention once again on a dire
situation that affects millions of Somalis and threatens
peace and stability in the Horn of Africa and worldwide.
The announced partnership between Al-Shabaab and
Al-Qaida was also a troubling development affecting
us all and requiring urgent action.
Italy will continue to play an advocacy role for
the Somali cause and to support the Somali peace
process through concrete initiatives that fully respect
Somali ownership and sovereignty. We will host the
next meeting of the International Contact Group on
Somalia in Rome and ensure an Italian diplomatic
presence in Mogadishu. In the field of security, Italy
continues to provide funds for the payment of the
salaries of over 3,000 Somali security personnel.
Indeed, we believe that the Somalis have the
primary responsibility for achieving peace and security
in their country. Concrete opportunities exist for the
Somalis to reconstruct a viable State at peace with its
neighbours. Seizing them requires a strong political will
and commitment on the part of the central Government
and of regional entities that are committed to achieving
successful reconciliation. Italy deems it important to
include in the process those Somali groups that clearly
renounce violence and terrorism and allow unhindered
humanitarian access. The Djibouti peace process
provides a framework that is open to all potential
Somali stakeholders and continues to be our reference.

5

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

The current status quo is not an option, and
neither are further extensions of the transition. The
road map and the Garowe Principles are positive steps
in the peace process. Their full and timely
implementation will in due course grant Somalia a
new, inclusive and stable governance. To maximize
their positive effects and improve the living conditions
of the local population, the political strategy should go
hand in hand with the military and civilian initiatives.
We welcome the adoption of resolution 2036
(2012), which expands mandate of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and raises the troop
ceiling in order to counter Al-Shabaab and other armed
opposition groups and establish conditions for effective
and legitimate governance across Somalia. We
encourage partners, especially new donors, to contribute
to funding for AMISOM. We underline once again the
importance of strengthening the Somali security forces,
which is vital to ensuring Somalia’s long-term security
and stability. We therefore invite the international
community to provide support to the Somali authorities
in that critical sector as well.
Security, stability and effective governance will
foster Somali development and thereby attack the root
causes of terrorism and the scourge of piracy off the
coast of Somalia. As we have stated in the past, Italy
believes that terrorism and piracy cannot be solved by
military means alone. They require a comprehensive
and coordinated strategy that combines deterrence,
prosecution and the rule of law, capacity-building and
development.
Piracy off the coast of Somalia and in the wider
Indian Ocean affects the interests both of the people of
Somalia and of the international community. We
therefore expect a renewed commitment from the Somali
authorities. It should complement the international
counter-piracy efforts, including the European Union’s
Operation Atalanta and NATO’s Operation Ocean
Shield, and the work of the Contact Group on Piracy
off the Coast of Somalia. My country, which is a victim
of the phenomenon, is deeply committed to these efforts.
Hence we encourage our partners, traditional and new,
to continue to support all the activities and various
initiatives aimed at eradicating terrorism and piracy.
Only a collective, coordinated and continuous
effort can produce effective results and help our Somali
friends tackle the challenging tasks ahead. We therefore
encourage better coordination among the various

6

stakeholders. We expect the United Nations and the
African Union to play a more decisive leadership role
in promoting peace in Somalia in order to ensure
greater consistency between the political process and
the ongoing military operations. The enhancement of
the coherence, quality and impact of international
efforts in reconstructing a viable sovereignty depend
on their cooperation. We welcome the recent relocation
of the United Nations Political Office for Somalia to
Mogadishu as an important step in that direction. We
equally support a restructuring of the International
Contact Group on Somalia.
Somalia’s instability represents a threat to its
people, its region and the entire world, since it fosters a
multitude of problems. It needs a full sense of
responsibility on the part of Somali institutions and a
stronger response from the international community,
together with our ability to act in a united manner.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Staur (Denmark): First of all, I would like to
align myself with the statement made by the observer
of the European Union (EU) on behalf of the EU.
At this moment in time, Somalia faces a new
opportunity for progress, to which we must be able to
respond. The debate today is therefore very timely. The
Security Council has just adopted resolution 2036
(2012) on the situation in Somalia, providing the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) with
more troops and powers. Less than two weeks ago, we
completed the successful conference in London, where
we achieved the double objective of putting the plight
of Somalia at the top of the international agenda and of
providing traction in the political process.
This debate coincides with the end of the
monsoon season in the Indian Ocean and the beginning
of the piracy season. As a seafaring nation, Denmark is
deeply concerned by that scourge. Two Danish citizens
have been held hostage by pirates for more than a year.
The Secretary-General has said that piracy is not a
waterborne disease, it is a symptom of conditions on
the ground. I could not agree more.
There can be no impunity for pirates. Pirates must
be prosecuted. We recently have made progress in
bringing pirates to justice and in transferring them to
appropriate prisons in Somalia. It is important that we
continue to work with both the Transitional Federal

12-25146

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

Government (TFG) and the regional Government in
Hargeisa, and particularly in Garowe, to receive pirates
sentenced by courts in the region. It is essential that the
necessary legislation be adopted all over Somalia.
A lasting solution to the Somali crisis can only be
a political one. Political leadership is what is needed.
All stakeholders, especially the Transitional Federal
Institutions (TFIs), ultimately hold the primary
responsibility for bringing the process forward. Time is
of the essence, and it is now up to the TFIs to deliver
and to ensure that the political transition ends by
August 2012. The strong international message to
Somali leaders should be that they must take the
responsibility upon themselves, show determination
and use the opportunity provided to them by the
international community: basically, get to work.
Many actors are involved in finding a solution to
the crisis in Somalia. Harmonizing all those efforts is
at times complicated and time-consuming. For our
efforts to be efficient and effective, and in order to
limit transaction costs, it is of paramount importance
that coordination happen on the ground, preferably in
Somalia, and that it be led by Somalis in close
cooperation with the United Nations, the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
I would like to commend the United Nations for
expanding its footprint in Somalia under extremely
difficult conditions. However, no one else can lead the
process. I urge the United Nations to expand its
presence to all regions of Somalia.
Let me now raise another very important issue.
We need to do more to ensure that women are included
in the political process. Women have remained the
bread-winners and the backbone of Somali families
during the many years of war. As shown in other
conflict situations, peace processes stand a much better
chance of being sustainable when women are fully
involved. Women can make change happen.
It is of the utmost importance that AMISOM
receive sufficient funding. In that regard, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2036 (2012). Denmark has
from the very outset been a staunch supporter of the
critical functions that AMISOM is performing. As a
sign of Denmark’s continued support for AMISOM, my
Government recently approved an additional
unearmarked financial contribution of $5 million to the
AMISOM Trust Fund. We encourage others to
contribute as well. We are also stepping up our support

12-25146

for the East African Standby Force with a view to
facilitating their contribution to AMISOM.
There is an urgent need to fill the political
vacuum in the areas newly liberated from Al-Shabaab,
thereby strengthening local stability and institutionbuilding. The new stability fund can become a key
instrument for supporting long-term stabilization and
for consolidating peace in south-central Somalia.
Denmark stands ready to contribute to the new fund.
Our broad-based efforts to create stability are part
of our efforts to address the root causes of terrorism.
Al-Shabaab has shown that it is willing to brutally kill
innocent spectators of a soccer match abroad and
terrorize Somali people at home. Recently, Al-Shabaab
swore its allegiance to Al-Qaida. Obviously, that is
unacceptable. We will continue to fight terrorism and
prevent the travel, financing and recruitment of
terrorists.
Fortunately, the famine in the Horn of Africa is
over. However, 2 million people in Somalia are still
affected by the crisis. Also, rural communities across
the entire region have barely recovered from the last
drought and continue to live at the edge of their means.
We need to strengthen the resilience of those
communities across the region. We need a stronger,
more coordinated and longer-term response.
I would like to conclude my statement by
underlining Denmark’s continued commitment to our
common endeavours to seek a peaceful and stable
Somalia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Finland.
Mr. Haavisto (Finland): The observer of the
European Union has already spoken, and I associate
myself fully with his statement.
Finland is an active member of the international
contact group for Somalia, and we participated at last
week’s London conference at a high level. Finland has
been actively supporting the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia (UNPOS) and the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG), for example by supporting
the training of TFG security forces. In addition,
Finland has been participating with a military vessel in
anti-piracy activities on the Somalian coast. In Finland
we have a large Somali diaspora, which is also seeking
a peaceful solution to the crisis in Somalia in a
constructive manner. We have also been supporting the

7

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

process of including elders and traditional leaders in
the peace dialogue.

in furthering peace. Finland is willing to consider
further support for that work.

Finland wishes to thank the United Kingdom for
organizing the recently held Somalia conference in
London. It was a very timely meeting that produced
very good outcomes. We can see at least four results
achieved at the conference.

It is positive that 30 per cent of the Somalis
provisionally adopting the constitution should be
women. Gender issues and underlining equal
opportunities for all have been an essential part of
Finland’s development policy for a long time.

First, the conference highlighted that Somalia
must be put back on the agenda of the international
community, and it was successful in doing so.

It is obvious that both the new constitution as
well as the process leading to parliamentary reforms
need to be made explained to ordinary Somalis in clear
terms that make them feel familiar. Therefore, public
awareness campaigns, education and information are
called for. We wonder whether Somalis living in the
diaspora might also be involved in that work. We
believe that in addition to its important remittances to
Somalia, the diaspora has an important role to play.
The Somali diaspora in Finland supports various
development activities in Somalia with complementary
funding from the Finnish Government.

Secondly, due to the improved security and
humanitarian situation in Somalia, the overall message
of London was that it is possible to work towards
completing the transition period by the end of August
and to support reconciliation and development in
relatively safe areas. An additional funding mechanism,
the so-called local stability fund was created to
facilitate actions in those areas.
Thirdly, the London conference also boosted the
Security Council’s decision, in resolution 2036 (2012),
to strengthen AMISOM from 12,000 troops to nearly
18,000. That made it possible to include the Kenyan
forces in AMISOM. However, additional funds will be
needed. The EU has already announced a new
contribution of €100 million.
Fourthly, focus on the root causes of the conflict in
Somalia was underlined, and complementary proposals
were presented to intensify work on tackling piracy
and terrorism.
Finland welcomes all those achievements. It is
possible to assist Somalia in a constructive and
concrete way despite the challenges in security in
many parts of the country. For Finland, it is clear that
the future of Somalia is in the hands of Somalis.
We welcome the Garowe process in advancing a
new constitution and parliamentary reforms. Those are
key building blocks for Somalia in and after the
completion of the transition period. It is crucial that the
Garowe Principles are agreed among the Somalis. It is
positive that they are supported by the United Nations
and other partners.
The Garowe Principles emphasize the role of
recognized traditional elders in the process towards a
post-transition parliamentary structure. Finland’s
support for UNPOS has focused on utilizing Somali
elders and religious leaders as constructive contributors

8

Gradually strengthening Somalia’s own security
forces is essential when rebuilding Somalia as a nation
after two decades of non-functioning State structures.
Finland has been participating from the beginning in
the European Union training mission that trains
security personnel for the TFG.
After the end of the transition, there will still be a
great need to continue the reconciliation and peace
work. The peace process has to be inclusive, and all
who want to build Somalia and distance themselves
from terrorism should be welcome to contribute to
rebuilding the nation. That opportunity should
specifically be open to women and youth, who often
are excluded from these processes.
Finland values the United Nations and various
countries that have established their presence and
operations in Mogadishu, despite the obvious security
challenges. Only by operating from inside Somalia can
the international community fully earn the trust of the
Somali people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): Mr. President, at
the outset, on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) group, I would like to congratulate
your delegation, Sir, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and to express our thanks to Togo, an

12-25146

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

important OIC member country, for its excellent
stewardship of the Security Council in February.
As the OIC Secretary General, Mr. Ihsanoglu,
stated recently at the London conference, the
organization believes that after more than two decades
of conflict and chaos, Somalia today is at a critical
juncture. We believe that concerted and decisive actions
by the international community, in collaboration with
the Somali parties, are now urgently needed more than
ever to enable the country to make a new beginning. The
outreach efforts of the Transitional Federal Government
in the political field are a positive development.
Meanwhile, the expulsion of Al-Shabaab from
Mogadishu by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), the Kenyan military operation in southern
Somalia, the Ethiopian military offensive in central
Somalia, and the sustained fight against piracy have
created added momentum towards achieving the goals
of the transition.
As we highlight these important achievements,
however, we note with dismay the distracting crisis in
the Parliament, which could potentially derail the
transition. Therefore, we welcome the political
agreement reached by the Somalis at their National
Consultative Constitutional Conference in Garowe. We
are particularly encouraged by the commitment to
include a minimum of 30 per cent of women in the
Independent Electoral Commission, the Constituent
Assembly and the new Federal Parliament. Supporting
the empowerment of women and their full participation
in political processes in the OIC member States is an
important priority for us.
In view of the OIC’s comparative advantage, due
to its clear cultural and religious affinity and as a result
of consultations with a wide spectrum of Somali society
and some partners, the OIC has come to the conclusion
that there is a need to launch a peace and reconciliation
initiative with the relevant parties in order to provide
an opportunity to some moderates who are willing to
join the peace process and mainstream politics.
A genuine political process of reconciliation is
essential to complement the military action in Somalia.
Military measures alone will not deliver durable and
sustainable peace. We have noted with satisfaction that
the exploratory contacts of the OIC with some of the
Somali opposition elements have given hope and
reinforced the conviction in the necessity to press ahead.

12-25146

On its part, the international community must
ensure that the required support and assistance are
provided to the Government in a coherent manner in
order to deliver services and security and to extend its
authority in the recovered areas. The OIC wishes hereby
to reassure the Security Council and all stakeholders of
its unflinching support for the achievement of the major
priorities of security, constitution-making, reconciliation
and good governance in order to successfully conclude
the political transition.
On the humanitarian side, the lives of millions of
people, especially the weak and vulnerable groups,
continue to be at risk. While the United Nations has
officially declared the end of famine in Somalia, efforts
must be sustained to further stabilize the food situation
in the months ahead, which is critical if another
shortage is to be averted.
Despite the ongoing efforts of the international
community, including the generous response of the
OIC member States and its civil society, coordinated
and mobilized by the OIC, millions more remain in
need of humanitarian support. Nature is not the only
cause to be blamed for the Somali humanitarian crisis;
political dysfunction, military and security escalations
are also root causes of the crisis. Furthermore,
continued conflicts and lack of access to the neediest
people remain major operational challenges.
The expulsion of 16 humanitarian international
non-governmental organizations from Somalia recently
has severely impacted basic relief measures and created
a big gap that needs to be filled. The OIC urges the
international humanitarian community to work together
on how to overcome these lacunae by leveraging the
opportunity for the better access enjoyed by the OIC in
Somalia on account of its cultural considerations.
Conscious of its long-term commitment to the
Somali people, the OIC, through its Humanitarian
Coordination Office in Somalia, is set to proceed to the
next phase of its mandate. Shortly, it will move from
emergency relief to development by focusing on the
relocation of the internally displaced persons to their
villages and homes as a means of promoting
sustainable development. In that regard, a number of
water projects across the county are to be implemented.
In the field of capacity-building in the education
and health sectors, the OIC is in the process of
developing and finalizing a joint project with the
United Nations Development Programme. The OIC is

9

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

committed to continuing to support the Somali people
and stands ready to enhance its operational cooperation
with the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and other humanitarian stakeholders. It is also
committed to entering into meaningful engagement and
collaboration, and to working out a shared strategy for
the recovery phase in Somalia.
The OIC and its member States are determined to
be pace-setters, as displayed in their laudable
performance in addressing the recent famine. During
the most recent Council of Foreign Ministers in Astana,
OIC Foreign Ministers further endorsed the
establishment of a trust fund for Somalia to contribute
to the long-term development and peacebuilding efforts
in that country. Throughout their humanitarian actions
last year, OIC Member States pledged and are still
raising a total of $500 million to mitigate the
catastrophic humanitarian crisis in Somalia.
In conclusion, the OIC stands ready to expand its
cooperation and partnership with others for the benefit
of the Somali people. We are pleased to enhance our
constructive collaboration with the League of Arab
States and the United Nations within the framework of
the overall peacebuilding and reconstruction efforts in
Somalia.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): Mr. President, I thank
you for convening this timely open debate on Somalia.
Sweden aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union (EU) and would like, in addition, to
make four points.
First, the momentum gained at the London
conference for the political process must be upheld.
Support is required if the Somali-led reform process is
to produce an inclusive, broad-based, representative and
credible political dispensation when the mandate of the
Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) ends in August.
By that time, a democratic constitutional framework
must be in place to further unify and rally the Somali
people around a common purpose of reconciliation and
nation-building. Flexible, transparent and accountable
financial mechanisms need to be further developed and
operationalized.
At this crucial moment, the Somali leadership,
the TFIs and the signatories of the road map have a
particular responsibility to demonstrate inclusivity and

10

a constructive commitment. In those endeavours,
political and financial support must be forthcoming,
contingent on progress.
Secondly, ensuring safety and security is of
paramount importance for an enabling political
environment. While significant gains have been made,
much thanks to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) alongside Transitional Federal Government
and allied security forces, security and stabilization can
only be sustained if they are accompanied by peoplecentred governance, basic services and development.
The nexus between security, political progress and
recovery should be further strengthened. The protection
of civilians must be upheld at all times. We echo the
call made by the European Union that the resourcing of
AMISOM from the EU and its member States needs to
be complemented by other new donors. A more
reliable, streamlined and transparent support system is
called for.
Thirdly, the United Nations has a central strategic
leadership role, in partnership with the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
The United Nations integrated strategic approach
should bring more synergy and effectiveness into a
multipronged United Nations involvement. Transparency
is essential for trust and effectiveness.
As a participant at the London conference and
member of the International Contact Group, Sweden
looks forward to engaging to make our joint cooperation
more productive and effective. Coordination on policy
and operational response is vital. The United Nations
and the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, together with Somali authorities, are central
in facilitating that our joint efforts are being brought to
bear.
Finally, we welcome the announcement that
famine may have ended. However, the situation is
extremely fragile, with new alerts of recurring drought.
Now is the time to build resilience against future
shocks and to strengthen fragile livelihoods. Relief and
development are interlinked. Humanitarian actors must
be given full, safe and unhindered access to those in
need.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming

12-25146

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March and for convening this open debate on the
situation in Somalia. My delegation also thanks the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative
Augustine Mahiga for their respective briefings.
Indonesia associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Kazakhstan on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
For too long, violence and instability have
prevented the Somali people from living in peace and
normalcy. National authorities must be fully responsive
to the needs and aspirations of Somali citizens. The
regional community and the international community
must do better, by further strengthening their support
for Somali-identified aims and solutions.
Indonesia welcomes the London conference held
on 23 February 2012 and its communiqué, which
comprehensively addresses the challenges in Somalia.
The next steps to be taken by the United Nations and
the international community are extremely important,
and it will be critical that Somali stakeholders are fully
involved in the efforts. While we welcome political
progress in the country and the upcoming completion
of the transition period under Somalia’s Transitional
Federal Government, we also underscore the importance
of establishing a future Government that is fully
representative of the Somali polity. National
reconciliation is crucial, and we hope there is sufficient
realization of that fact in all quarters, leading to a
reinvigorated and well-supported political effort
towards that end.
Indonesia is deeply concerned by the terrorism
and violence in Somalia. We support the Security
Council’s decision to strengthen the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in order to ensure
security and stability in the region. However, the
increase in AMISOM troops needs to be supported
with adequate and predictable resources.
While the goal of preventing terrorism, violence
and piracy is imperative, and it is rightly receiving great
attention by partners from the international community,
there must also be equal attention given to the need for
rebuilding. The building of well-functioning and
accountable State institutions and capacities in Somalia
will go a long way towards creating an environment
conducive to ensuring that measures against terrorism,
violence and piracy produce lasting results.

12-25146

We should also be mindful of the fact that poverty
remains a very serious challenge. Efforts and support
should be increased to provide the people of Somalia
with sustainable livelihoods and to help them improve
their conditions. Piracy needs to be considered in a
comprehensive context as well, with greater focus on
revitalizing local economic activity and the national
economy as a whole.
We note that with the increasing international
efforts to combat piracy off the Somali coast, the issue
of prosecuting and trying pirates is becoming more
challenging.
Indonesia
supports
strengthened
international cooperation in the prosecution of piracy
and armed robbery under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea.
In conclusion, we believe that the United Nations
and the international community must continue to focus
attention on the situation in Somalia. We also believe
that there is a need to ensure that the solutions devised
are comprehensive and driven by the work of Somali
stakeholders, embedded in the process of national
reconciliation.
Indonesia reiterates its support for the unity,
sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of Somalia. We will continue to play our
part in helping to achieve peace, security and prosperity
for the Somali people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Wetland (Norway): From the talks we had
with Prime Minister Abdiweli Mohamed Ali in Oslo
last week, we believe that there is now far greater
commitment and determination by Somali leaders to
move towards lasting peace. While they bear the primary
responsibility, they will also need strong support and
commitment from the international community.
We are now entering a critical turning point, not
only for Somalia but also for that country’s relationship
with the international community. Together we may
now have a real opportunity to bring Somalia out of the
misery and political chaos that have plagued the
country for too long. If we are successful, it will be the
start of a new and more hopeful life for the Somali
people, and a major step towards ending the threat of
violence, terrorism and piracy, which affects both the
region and the wider international community.

11

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

It is of vital importance that the international
community seizes this opportunity to work together
with Somali leaders and the region in their effort to
ensure that this opportunity is not wasted. In addition
to the humanitarian and other assistance that we have
already provided — which in the past couple of years
has amounted to approximately $40 million annually —
Norway has decided to contribute $2 million to the
new stabilization fund for Somalia. We shall also
continue to support the process for establishing a new
Somali constitution and electing the new Parliament.
We strongly encourage both the members of the
Council and other countries to use the opportunity we
now have to go the extra mile in supporting the efforts
to bring peace and stability to Somalia and the region.
The new momentum that we now see in the
Somali situation has in large part been created by the
military achievement of AMISOM in pushing the
militant extremists out of Mogadishu. We should give
them full credit for that. We therefore welcome the
recent decision by the Council to expand support for
this important African Mission.
We must now ensure that the achievements in the
military field are followed up by appropriate political
measures and other measures, in order to avoid a
vacuum in the areas recovered from the militants.

encouraging developments in the country. No doubt,
most of the progress was made in the security domain,
but the series of defeats sustained by Al-Shabaab and
the expansion of the areas controlled by the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) represent
significant turning points on the road towards
stabilization of the situation in Somalia.
Those gains were not made without sacrifice. It is
therefore proper to express our gratitude to the African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Uganda and
Burundi, as well as to the TFG security forces. Kenyan
and Ethiopian forces have also been helping,
highlighting the increased cooperation for peace among
the countries of the region. The liberation of Baidoa on
the eve of the London Conference helped to validate
the view that the momentum has turned against
Al-Shabaab. Subsequent events in Baidoa have also
made it clear that Al-Shabaab has absolutely no
popular support, and the reception that the TFG and
Ethiopian troops received in the town also
demonstrates how much the people long for peace. It
needs no emphasizing how much Baidoa was used by
Al-Shabaab and its foreign supporters to violate
Security Council resolutions, and how much that
exacerbated the humanitarian tragedy in Somalia.

Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to hold this
meeting at the very beginning of your presidency. I
also wish to express appreciation to your great country
for organizing the conference on Somalia last month,
which was, by any standard, most successful. The
presence here of its Under Secretary of State for this
meeting is a further demonstration of the commitment
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to assisting the peace process in Somalia. I also
wish to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Mahiga for the excellent work he is doing and
the Secretary-General for the serious attention he has
always given to Somalia.

It is indisputable that, because the crisis in
Somalia is political, its resolution also requires a
political approach. On this front too, the TFG has been
moving in the right direction, even before the London
conference. The local peacebuilding strategy —
articulated by the TFG in January in a document on the
TFG approach to stabilization and reconciliation in the
newly liberated areas — appears to signify seriousness
of purpose on the part of the TFG authorities to take up
the political challenge with great determination. The
tasks that have to be undertaken by the TFG between
now and August are also clear and have been articulated
in the September 2011 road map. Furthermore, the
outcome of the second Somali National Consultative
Constitutional Conference, held in Garowe, has laid the
foundation for the successful completion of the
transition period and for the post-August 2012 political
framework.

The London conference did indeed help draw the
attention of the world to the urgent need to assist the
people of Somalia to bring to a close a tragedy that has
lasted too long. There are in fact hopeful signs of
progress in Somalia, and the London conference, far
from taking place amid despair, was preceded by some

Nevertheless, the challenges the TFG is grappling
with cannot be understated. That is why the enhanced
support of the international community is so critical in
virtually all areas. First of all, the security environment
needs to improve even further and Al-Shabaab must be
kept on the run without letup. Those challenges are not

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.

12

12-25146

S/PV.6729 (Resumption 1)

yet overcome. Resolution 2036 (2012) certainly goes a
long way in that regard. The increase in the authorized
force level of AMISOM to over 17,000 and the
reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment,
including force enablers and multipliers, is a major
move that could contribute to a much better opportunity
to stabilize the recently liberated areas.
No less significant is the ban on the export of
charcoal, which has until now been a major source of
revenue for Al-Shabaab. It is our hope that those sellers
who did not mind that funds were going to Al-Shabaab
through the charcoal trade will now be dissuaded from
continuing the practice. Let me add here our further
hope that the maritime component in the expanded
support for AMISOM will soon receive the approval of
the Council.
It would not be an exaggeration if one were to
say that there is now a window of opportunity for
consolidating peace in Somalia. At the country level,
Al-Shabaab is on the run and is unlikely to regain
momentum if the regional and the international effort
to marginalize the hardcore elements of the terrorist
group is pursued in a principled manner and in line
with what is called for by international law and Security
Council resolutions. Indeed, as our Prime Minister,
Meles Zenawi, said at the London conference,
“Al-Shabaab is a terrorist organization, espousing
an extreme interpretation of a great religion, and
is inimical to peace and stability in Somalia and
the wider region. That ideology of violence and
mayhem can and must be defeated. There is no
compromise with the hard core of Al-Shabaab

12-25146

and the things they stand for. Assisting Al-Shabaab
in any shape or form is not only in conflict with
many United Nations Security Council resolutions,
and hence with international law, but constitutes a
crime against the well-being of the peoples of our
region.”
The region is firmly united on this point, as it is
on doing whatever is necessary in the security area to
contribute to laying the foundation for peace in
Somalia. That, in fact, has been one of the major
developments in the Horn of Africa — the close
coordination and cooperation among the members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to help Somalia achieve peace and to ensure that the
region will have security. IGAD has also been working
in close cooperation with the African Union (AU) for
peace in Somalia. Moreover, the triangular cooperation
among the United Nations, the AU and IGAD has been
rather remarkable.
All those developments have been assets for the
effort to achieve peace in Somalia. The London
conference has contributed to the further strengthening
of that cooperation among stakeholders in the peace and
security of Somalia. We are hopeful that the upcoming
Istanbul conference will enhance that promising process.
The President: There are no more names
inscribed on the list of speakers.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

13
