S/PV.7541

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7541st meeting

Friday, 23 October 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Zhao Yong
Mr. Lamek
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Merican
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Rycroft
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
The situation in Somalia
Letters dated 9 October 2015 from the Chair of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2015/801)
(S/2015/802)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-33147 (E)
*1533147*

S/PV.7541

The situation in Somalia

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Somalia
Letters dated 9 October 2015 from the Chair
of the Security Council Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2015/801) (S/2015/802)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Eritrea and
Somalia to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2015/810, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by Lithuania, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
documents S/2015/801 and S/2015/802, which contain
letters dated 9 October 2015 from the Chair of the
Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions
751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and
Eritrea addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Angola, Chad, Chile, China, France, Jordan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Spain, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and United
States of America
Abstaining:
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
The President (spoke in Spanish): There were
14 votes in favour and one abstaining. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2244 (2015).

2/8

23/10/2015

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make a statement after the vote.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela abstained in
the voting on resolution 2244 (2015) because we feel
that the negotiating process that led to its adoption was
not broad enough to take into account the various points
of view held by delegations. Our request to extend the
consultations in order to produce a consensus text
was disregarded, and the text was drafted in a silent
procedure despite our reservations. Venezuela tried to
create a space conducive to understanding so that the
varied points of view might be reflected in a balanced
text that reflected the political and security dynamic
prevailing in the Horn of Africa.
After silence was broken on the draft resolution
so as to pursue dialogue and achieve a consensus
text, we were surprised when negotiations were
reopened among a small group of countries, without
the participation of Venezuela and the majority of the
non-permanent members of the Security Council. This
recurring practice affects the working methods of this
organ, in particular the transparency and inclusiveness
that should prevail at all stages of negotiation in order
to guarantee the participation of all its members and,
ultimately, the unity of the Security Council.
My country demands respect in the Security
Council — respect from the penholders for the opinions
and points of views of every country, whether permanent
or elected Council members. Speaking not only in
my capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
but also in my national capacity, we have reasonable
concerns that there is bad interpretation and a selfattributed expansion to the Committee when it comes
to what is set out in the resolutions that established the
Somalia/Eritrea Sanctions Committee.
Venezuela assumed the chairmanship of this
Committee with a belief in the need to move forward
constructively with all Member States to improve
the relations between the Committee and affected
countries, with a view to arriving at the ultimate goal of
finding a political solution to the conflict. That should
be the purpose of the sanctions instrument, which
cannot be used for hidden purposes to punish countries
and impact peoples. Sanctions committees make sense
only insofar as they contribute to a political solution to
conflicts. Their purpose is not to maintain or manage
conflicts indefinitely, but to help to end them.
15-33147

23/10/2015

The situation in Somalia

It is clear — and the fourteenth preambular
paragraph and paragraph 26 of the resolution, among
others, reflect this — that some permanent members
perceive this sanctions regime as an end in itsself, and
under that premise seek to continue to indefinitely
expand the mandate and scope of the resolution to new
areas, distorting any political goal that the sanctions
may have had at the time of their initial establishment.
Venezuela is committed to the peaceful settlement
of disputes throughout the world, in line with Article
2 of the Charter of the United Nations. Our position is
based on the importance of respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of States, their Governments
and their peoples, as well as confidence in their ability
to resolve their own problems without tutelage or
interference, but by choosing political and peaceful
means for resolving conflicts.
In conclusion, I should like to appeal to members
of the Committee. Our chairmanship has coincided
with the important task of reviewing the Committee’s
working methods. I believe that the goals and
functioning of sanctions committees should be subject
to a thorough review on the part of the Council.
Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation voted in favour
of the United Kingdom’s resolution 2244 (2015), on
Somalia and Eritrea, as for us and other members of the
Security Council the imperative is to swiftly achieve
peace and stability in the countries of the Horn of
Africa. However, we continue to have concerns about
the intrusive nature of a number of provisions of the
resolution that effectively undermine the principle of
State sovereignty.
I should also point out that, as was the case last
year, certain provisions of this resolution are based on
conclusions in the final report of the Monitoring Group
Committee pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907
(2009) that have not been substantiated by facts. Let me
reiterate that experts should not go beyond the purview
of their mandate during the preparation of their
documents. They must be guided solely by verified
facts, and not build their conclusions on the basis of
conjectures and unfounded accusations.
We are forced to reiterate that the use of sanctions is
an exceptional and rarely effective method. Resolving
conflicts must take place exclusively through political
and diplomatic means, on the basis of mutual respect

S/PV.7541

and multifaceted dialogue among all the States in the
region.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We welcome
the adoption of resolution 2244 (2015). We particularly
welcome the fact that it includes a specific provision to
reinforce Somalia’s ability to exercise sovereignty over
its natural resources. Disputes between illegal fishing
vessels, local fishermen and armed groups concerning
the illegal exploitation of Somalia’s natural resources
run the risk of becoming a driver of conflict.
Somalia’s concern about its ability to control
access to its resources is not unique. The governance
and exploitation of natural resources and the challenge
posed by illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
was also identified by many Member States during the
open debate (see S/PV.7499) held in July on peace and
security issues facing small island developing States.
On Eritrea, New Zealand recognizes that there are
important issues to address with regard to the scope and
focus of the sanctions regime in the light of the last two
reports (S/2015/802 and S/2014/727) of the Monitoring
Group. We hope that an improved relationship,
including on access between the Government of Eritrea
and the Monitoring Group, may enable the Council
to take clear decisions in future to determine if the
original purpose for which the sanctions were imposed
continues to apply.
Mr. Zhao Yong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
voted in favour of resolution 2244 (2015), which the
Security Council just adopted. Since the beginning
of this year, the Federal Government of Somalia, with
the vigorous support of the international community,
has been dedicated to the implementation of Vision
2016, actively safeguarded State security, promoted
economic development and improved the people’s
living standards, which China greatly appreciates.
We hope that resolution 2244 (2015) can be fully
and accurately implemented, and that it will play a
genuinely constructive role in promoting the peaceful
reconstruction of Somalia and safeguarding regional
peace and stability.
The final report (S/2015/802) of the Monitoring
Group under the Somalia and Eritrea Sanctions
Committee indicated that no evidence had been found
showing Eritrean Government support for Al-Shabaab.
In view of changes in the situation, the Security Council
should make corresponding adjustments to the relevant

15-331473/8

S/PV.7541

The situation in Somalia

sanctions measures so as to create conditions for the
eventual lifting of the sanctions.
China has always supported Africa in resolving
African issues in an African way and has encouraged the
relevant countries of the region to appropriately resolve
their differences through dialogue and consultation
and to jointly work for regional peace, stability and
development.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes today’s adoption of resolution 2244
(2015) and the 14 positive votes it received.
The Monitoring Group has a key role to play in
keeping the Security Council informed about sanctions
issues in a region that is so important to our collective
work. At the heart of the Group’s ability to do its
work is the willingness of Governments to cooperate.
Unfortunately, today’s resolution reflects two very
different approaches to that cooperation. On the one
hand, cooperation between the Monitoring Group and
the Government of Eritrea is on the wrong trajectory.
The Group has not been able to visit Eritrea since
February 2011, in spite of successive Security Council
resolutions that make clear the importance of the Group
being able to discharge its mandate fully by visiting
Eritrea. Today’s resolution could not be clearer on what
Eritrea needs to do: deepen engagement with the Group
and facilitate the Group’s regular entry into Eritrea.
Eritrea is the master of its own destiny and it is at a
crossroads, that is, either admit the Group to Eritrea and
show the Council that is has nothing to hide and then
engage in a serious discussion on the appropriateness
of sanctions, or choose continued isolation. The United
Kingdom very much hopes that it will choose the first
course of action.
On the other hand, in Somalia the Monitoring Group
has built a strong relationship with the Government.
We applaud the Group and the Government for their
constructive engagement throughout the course of the
Group’s mandate. We are pleased to see the Group
spending more time in Somalia. The United Kingdom
commends the progress that the Government of Somalia
has made in managing its weapons. There are still
some worrying reports of weapons being diverted for
Government stocks, but the trajectory is the right one.
On public financial management, again there is
progress. But much more needs to be done. Proper
management of public finances in the run-up to next
year’s elections is key to ensuring trust between the

4/8

23/10/2015

Government and its people. The United Kingdom will
continue to be at the forefront of efforts to support the
Somali Government to strengthen its management of
public resources.
The United Kingdom is a strong supporter of the
Monitoring Group. We look forward to its reporting
over the coming year. We hope that the Government of
Eritrea will choose cooperation over isolation.
Mr. Pressman (United States of America): The
United States strongly supports today’s resolution 2244
(2015), which targets many of the most serious causes
of instability and insecurity in Somalia and mandates
the United Nations Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea to continue its important work. The resolution
reflects the Security Council’s understanding that the
international response to the situation in the Horn of
Africa must be comprehensive in order to be effective.
As was highlighted during the Secretary-General’s
high-level meeting on Somalia during the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventieth
session, Somalia’s trajectory has turned from State
failure towards State-building. That is why the United
States strongly supported language in this resolution
that underscores the importance of stronger and more
transparent legal frameworks and of ensuring regional
administrations’ participation as Somalia continues to
make strides in its State-building process this year.
The United States continues to support the Security
Council’s commitment to eliminating all sources of
funding for Al-Shabaab, including by reauthorizing
the maritime interdiction of Somali charcoal exports
in order to enforce the Council’s ban on such exports.
Somalia is clearly a country blessed with rich natural
resources, but without stronger legal frameworks and
resource-sharing agreements, those potential sources of
wealth for all Somalis risk becoming drivers of conflict.
We therefore welcome the resolution’s attention to those
ongoing challenges to governance, and the importance
that the Federal Government of Somalia has placed on
addressing such issues expeditiously.
The Federal Government of Somalia has sought
greater international recognition and support for
Somalia’s challenges related to the extensive illegal
fishing occurring in waters where it has jurisdiction.
In recognition of that, today the Security Council
acknowledges its concerns about the matter and
encourages the Federal Government of Somalia,

15-33147

23/10/2015

The situation in Somalia

with the support of the international community, to
undertake efforts to better address this practice.
By supporting full implementation of the measures
reflected in today’s resolution, Member States will
help to promote the long-term peace and stability of
the wider region. Additionally, and importantly, we
call on all countries to cooperate with the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea so that this vital body
can carry out its mandate effectively. We also call on
Eritrea to respond to the Monitoring Group’s requests
for information and permit the Group to travel to
Eritrea. Eritrea’s refusal to engage constructively with
the Monitoring Group must change before we can take
seriously Eritrean calls for these sanctions to be lifted.
Somalis are laying the foundation for a more
stable, representative and inclusive Government. The
international community and the Security Council
must remain engaged in order to ensure that Somalia
and the region realize a more peaceful future, and we
thank Council members for joining with us in sending
that strong message today.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Somalia.
Mr. Duale (Somalia): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of October. I am
very grateful for this opportunity to brief the Council
today.
I would like to briefly address a few key points.
First, the Federal Government of Somalia has worked
tirelessly during the past year to reduce major threats
to peace, security and stability in Somalia, and has also
demonstrated its commitment to complying with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, as a number of
members of the Council have mentioned today.
I would like to draw the Council’s attention to
the stark differences between the Somalia of the
past — beginning in 1992, when the Committee pursuant
to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning
Somalia and Eritrea was established — and the Somalia
of 2015. Indeed, the Committee and its mandate were
established first when Somalia was in the middle of
civil unrest and subsequently, when the mandate was
expanded in 2009, during the administration of the
nascent Transitional Federal Government, a period when
the country lacked federal and regional institutions and
financial oversight mechanisms.

S/PV.7541

In contrast, Somalia today has functioning
institutions, including a board of directors for the
Central Bank of Somalia, parliamentary oversight
committees in the Somali Parliament, and the Office of
the Accountant General and the independent Office of
the Auditor General, as well as capacity support from
the Financial Governance Committee, whose members
are drawn from international financial institutions that
include the World Bank, the International Monetary
Fund and the African Development Bank. The
Financial Governance Committee’s role is to assist
the Federal Government in enhancing its capacities in
public finance management and to support the Central
Bank of Somalia in its efforts to recover and manage
assets, conduct procurement activities, review potential
contracts and concessions and establish federal revenue
and budget procedures, as well as enhancing the
effectiveness of the Central Bank’s governance.
Progress has also been achieved on the legislative
side. Today, there are four legislative instruments
pending before the Somali Parliament of particular
relevance to public finance management reform: an
audit bill, a public finance management bill, a public
procurement, concession and disposal bill and a bill
to combat money-laundering and counter-terrorist
financing. These institutional and legislative actions
demonstrate that the Federal Government is rapidly
improving its capacities and now has a proper mechanism
in place for overseeing its financial governance.
The Federal Government has also made tremendous
progress in establishing and implementing a framework
for State-building in Somalia. To that end, it has
established new interim regional administrations, a
national independent electoral commission and national
consultative forum, and has begun an extensive
constitutional review process. Three years ago, when the
Government was established, it created a vision for 2016
that identified three fundamental elements stipulated by
the Provisional Constitution: constitutional review and
implementation, completion of the federal system and
democratization. The Government is also committed to
a peaceful transition of political power in 2016.
Three years later, we are turning that vision into
reality. The process of reviewing and revising the
Constitution has started. Over the past three years, in
accordance with our Constitution, we have supported
the formation of three interim regional administrations,
and the formation of the last, for the Hiran and Middle
Shabelle regions, will proceed soon. That is the last

15-331475/8

S/PV.7541

The situation in Somalia

item remaining for the completion of the federalization
map of Somalia. I am also happy to inform the Council
that an agreement on resource-sharing between the
regions and the central Government has been reached
and signed.
Regarding democratization, earlier this week, on
19 October, we began the process of constructing the
third strand of statehood, our national consultative
forum, which is aimed at facilitating the process
of building a State, a task that must be citizen-led.
It cannot be exclusive in origin, implementation or
outcomes. It must be accessible, representative and
inclusive. The voice of the people who may have
struggled to be heard in the past must be strengthened,
and it is being strengthened. The National Consultation
Forum is also intended to facilitate the interest of
all the people of Somalia in reaching a common
destination, strengthening legitimacy through peaceful
and democratic means.
With respect to the security sector, we would
like to draw the Council’s attention to the fact that on
9 September, the President of Somalia, His Excellency
Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, announced sweeping
security sector reforms, committing the Government
to building a more integrated and accountable security
sector. We are currently in the process of carrying out
a comprehensive review of the security sector in order
to address structural imbalances and inefficiencies.
That pending review would include a national threat
assessment in order to rationalize and streamline the
roles, missions and resource allocations across the
security sector.
The Somali Government is committed to undertaking
a comprehensive biometric registration process and a
security sector financial governance review, with the
support of our international partners, in order to establish
a foundation on which we can build a transparent and
sustainable security sector. Moreover, the Somali
Government has made significant gains in liberating
nearly 80 per cent of Somalia from Al-Shabaab and,
more recently in beginning the process of national
troop integration.
Somalia has also made significant progress in
the past year in complying with the weapons and
ammunition management notification, reporting
and control requirements. By way of example, just
over the past six months the Somali Government has
marked over 4,500 weapons, established a weapons
and ammunition technical working group, and agreed
6/8

23/10/2015

upon the terms of reference for the joint verification
team. Furthermore, officials of the Somali Government
have held consultative meetings, to initiate the design
of a road map to develop a comprehensive national
framework governing the full life-cycle of weapons and
ammunition. That clearly demonstrates the significant
improvements made by the Somali Government in
complying with arms notification requirements.
The Somali Government has also been receptive
to the Security Council’s resolutions and welcomes
the reports of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and
Eritrea, (S/2015/801 and S/2015/802). The Government
of Somalia recognizes that it needs to work with
the Monitoring Group, and we reiterate that we do
not necessarily agree with all of the findings of the
Monitoring Group. However, we will work with the
Monitoring Group, and during the next mandate we
shall seek to strengthen this relationship further. Once
again, we would be pleased to welcome the Monitoring
Group to Mogadishu again on a more frequent basis.
Finally, I wish to highlight and underline my
Government’s appreciation and thanks for the support
given by international partners and community. We
express our particular appreciation and thanks to the
African Union and the countries that contribute troops
to the African Union Mission in Somalia.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Eritrea.
Mr. Tesfay (Eritrea): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, and the members of the Security Council
for giving my delegation the opportunity to participate
in a meeting on an agenda item that directly affects
my country. I wish to extend my sincere thanks to the
Chairman of the Committee pursuant to resolutions 751
(1992) and 1907 (2009) concerning Somalia and Eritrea
and those representatives of different countries who, in
defending the principles of impartiality and objectivity
and the procedures of the Security Council, have played
a constructive role in ensuring that resolution 2244
(2015) would reflect the reality in Eritrea, the Horn of
Africa and the Red Sea region.
The two justifications for the imposition of the
unjust sanctions against Eritrea were crystal clear. They
were Eritrea’s alleged support to Al-Shabaab in Somalia
and the Djibouti-Eritrean conflict, in the context of
their implications to regional and international peace
and security. They were nothing more and nothing less
than that.

15-33147

23/10/2015

The situation in Somalia

The Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea has
concluded that it has found “no evidence that Eritrea
was supporting al-Shabaab” in Somalia (S/2015/802.
p. 3). With regard to the disputes between Eritrea
and Djibouti, the Presidents of the two countries
have entrusted the State of Qatar to mediate their
disputes. Therefore, since the two justifications for the
imposition of the unjust sanctions against Eritrea are
non-existent, the correct, logical and legal action should
have been for the Security Council to immediately
and unconditionally lift the unjust sanctions against
Eritrea and terminate the mandate of the Monitoring
Group’s connection with Eritrea. Any other pretext is
unacceptable. It is a political agenda.
Unfortunately, because of the misguided
geopolitical agenda of the United States Administration
in the Horn of Africa and the Red Sea region, the
Security Council has sadly decided to maintain the
unjust sanctions against the people and the Government
of Eritrea for another year. Sanctions, as everyone
knows, affect the poor, especially those who are the
most vulnerable: women and children. Moreover,
sanctions restrict Eritrea’s capacity and capability to
maintain its security and defend its sovereignty and to
effectively contribute to the implementation of Security
Council resolutions calling on all of us to fight against
global terrorism and extremism.
Concerning resolution 2244 (2015), which has
just been adopted, it is a decision that defies logic and
legality. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Eritrea has
put out a statement, which I will share for the record.
The title of the press release is, “Security Council
action that undermines its own legal authority” and it
reads as follows:
“In a resolution adopted today, the United
Nations Security Council has sadly decided to
maintain yet for another year the unwarranted
sanctions that were originally imposed against
Eritrea on the Christmas eve of December 2009
and its follow-up resolution that was adopted in
December 2011.
“At the time, Eritrea was falsely accused of
dispatching 2000 troops to Somalia in support
of Al-Shabaab. The pattern of unsubstantiated
allegations was repeated in 2011 when Eritrea was
wrongly accused — just one month prior to the
adoption of resolution 2023 (2011) — of sending
three plane loads of arms to Al-Shabaab through
the airport of Baidowa.

S/PV.7541

“All these allegations were patently false. But
trumped up charges were vital for the architects
of the sanctions resolutions against Eritrea who
used their diplomatic clout to ram through the
unjust measures against Eritrea in a largely pliant
Security Council.
“Six years on, all Security Council members
and the international community as a whole, are
fully aware of the false testimonies that were
concocted against Eritrea to serve some political
ends.
“Indeed, the United Nations report this
year — as it was also the case last year — states
categorically that the ‘Monitoring Group’ has found
no evidence of Eritrean support to Al-Shabaab.
“Under normal circumstances, the United
Nations Security Council should drop its case
against Eritrea and rescind the sanctions resolutions
which were unjust in the first place. But these
are not normal times. And, instead of redressing
these injustices — and making due reparations to
Eritrea — the United Nations Security Council,
despite the reservations and objections of several
of its members, has opted to dwell on its misguided
course under the heavy-handed prodding of the
United States and its usual allies. As it happens,
the United Nations Security Council is invoking
non-existent facts and potential ‘threats to regional
peace and security’ in its dogged desire to harass
Eritrea.
“There is one unfathomable fact that the United
Nations Security Council cannot gloss over as it
unfairly victimizes Eritrea. Ethiopia continues to
occupy sovereign Eritrean territories, including the
town of Badme, in flagrant violation of the Charter
of the United Nations. Ethiopia’s acts also violate
the Algiers Peace Agreement — guaranteed by the
United Nations Security Council — and the final
and binding arbitral decision. This must surely be
an affront to the United Nations Security Council
in as much as it wishes to hide it.
“The United Nations Security Council is
mandated by Articles 39 to 41of the United Nations
Charter to take appropriate measures against
Ethiopia. But the United Nations Security Council
cannot contemplate this action as Ethiopia enjoys
the full protection and tutelage of the United States.
But in submitting to the United States political

15-331477/8

S/PV.7541

The situation in Somalia

wishes and preferences, the United Nations Security
Council is compromising and undermining its
own legal mandate and authority. Eritrea and the
region will suffer the consequences of unwarranted
United Nations action in the short-term. But in the

8/8

23/10/2015

long term, the real casuality is international law, as
well as the corrosion of the United Nations Security
Council’ legal authority in the maintenance of
international peace and security.”
The meeting rose at 10.40 a.m.

15-33147
