26

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

3. Dectlti!J to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Convention on
the prohibition of military or any other hostile use of
environmental modification techniques: report of the
Conference of the Committee on Disarmament".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3476 (XXX). Declaration and establishment of a
nuclear-free zone in South Asia
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3265 A (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which the General Assembly, while
recognizing, inter alia, that the creation of nuclearweapon-free zones could promote the cause of general
and complete disarmament under effective international
control, considered that the initiative for the creation of
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in an appropriate region of
Asia should come from the States of the region concerned, taking into account its special features and
geographical extent,
•,
Noting with appreciation the comprehensive study
of the question of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all its
aspects, 44 which has been prepared by the Ad Hoe
Group of Qualified Governmental Experts under the
auspices of the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament,
Having considered the basic principle unanimously
accepted by the experts that, wherever appropriate
conditions for a nuclear-weapon-free zone exist, the
initiative for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone
should come from States within the region concerned,
and participation must be voluntary,
Decides to give due consideration to any proposal
for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in an
appropriate region of Asia, after it has been developed
, and matured among the interested States within the region concerned.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3265 B (XXIX) of 9 December 1974, in which it endorsed, in principle, the
concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia,
Noting the note by the Secretary-General,411
Further noting that, in the introduction to his report
on the work of the Organization, the Secretary-General has urged the interested countries of the different
regions to consult together with a view to the establishment of additional nuclear-free zones, 46
1. Urges the States of South Asia to oontinue their
efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
South Asia, as recommended by the Geperal Assembly in resolution 3265 B (XXIX);
2. Further urges those States to refrain from any
action contrary to the objective of establishing a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
"'Ibid., Supplement No. 27A (A/10027/Add.1), annex I.
411 A/10325.
48See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth
Session, Supplement No. JA (A/10001/Add.1), sect. VIII.

.
,

3. Decides to include in the provisional agend::i. of
its thirty-4irst session an item entitled "Establishment
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3477 (XXX). Establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the South Pacific

The General Assembly,
Conscious of the urgent need for agreement on
measures to achieve the goal of general and complete
disarmament, inoluding nuclear disarmament, under
.effective international control,
Convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and the continuance of the nuclear arms race are
among the greatest threats to world peace and the survival of mankind,
Noting that article VII of the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons47 acknowledges the
right of any group of States to conclude regional treaties
in order to ensure the to~ absence of nuclear weapons
in their respective territories,
Noting further the declaration of the Review Confereru::e of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons that the establishment
of internationally recognized nuclear-weapan-free
zones, on the initiative and with the agreement of the
directly concerned States of the zone, represents an effective means of curbing the spread of nuclear weapons
and could contribute significantly to the security of
those States,48
Endorsing the declaration of the Review Conference
that the co-operation of the nuclear-weapon States is
necessary for the maximum effectiveness of any treaty
arrangements for establishing a nuclear-weapon-free
zone, 49
Recalling, in particular, the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa, 50 adopted by the Assembly of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of
African Unity at its first ordinary session, held at Cairo
from 17 to 21 July 1964, and the notable progress
achieved by the Latin American States towards the denuclearization of their region,
Noting, in addition, that the Heads of Government
of the independent or self-governing States members
of the South Pacific Forum emphasized in their communique of 3 July 1975 the importance of keeping the
South Pacific region free from the risk of nuclear contamination and of involvement in a nuclear conflict
and commended the idea of establishing a nuclearweapon-free zone in the South Pacific as a means of
achieving that aim,
1. Endorses the idea of tlie establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the South Pacific;
2. Invites the countries concerned to carry forward
consultations about ways and means of realizing this
objective;
3. Expresses the hope that all States, in particular
the nuclear-weapon States, will co-operate fully in
achieving the objectives of the present resolution;
47 Resolution 2373 (XXII), a.mi.ex.
48 See A/C.1/1068, annex I, p. 9.
49 Jbid.
50 See Official Records of the General Ass,mbly, Twentieth

Session, Annexes, agenda item 105, document A/5915 •

27

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

4. Requests the Secretary-General to render all necessary assistance to the States of the region in giving
effect to the purpose of the present resolution.
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
3478 (XXX). Conclusion of a treaty on·the com•
plete and general prohibition of nuclear
weapon tests

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the urgent need for the cessation everywhere and by all of nuclear weapon tests, including
underground tests,
Expressing its deep concern over the fact that an
international agreement on the cessation of nuclear
weapon tests of all kinds has not yet been reached,
Convinced that the cessation of such tests would contribute to the reduction of the nuclear arms race as
well as to the further relaxation of international tension,
Reaffirming that the potential benefits of any peaceful application of nuclear explosions should be available to nuclear as well as non-nuclear States, in conformity with the provisions of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 51 in such a
way as to exclude any possibility of peaceful nuclear
explosions being used for purposes incompatible with the
complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon
tests and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons,
Also convinced of the need again to exert every effort for the early cessation everywhere and by all of
nuclear weapon tests, including underground tests,
l. Takes note of the draft treaty on the complete
and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests submitted to the General Assembly by the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, the text of which is annexed to
the present resolution;
2. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to enter
into negotiations, not later than 31 March 1976, with
a view to reaching agreement on the complete and
general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests, and invites twenty-five to thirty non-nuclear-weapon States,
to be appointed by the President of the General Assembly after consultations with all regional groups,112 to
participate in those negotiations, and to inform the
Assembly, at its thirty-first session, of the results of the
negotiations;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to render such
assistance as may be necessary for the negotiations
with a view to reaching agreement on the complete and
general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests and to
transmit to the group referred to in paragraph 2 above
all documents relating to the consideration by the General Assembly at its thirtieth session of agenda items
37 and 122;53
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the item entitled "Conclusion of
a treaty on the complete and general prohibition of
nuclear weapon tests".
2437th plenary meeting
11 December 1975
151 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
15 2 For the report of the President of the General Assembly

on this matter, see A/10509.
53 For the wording of the items, see below pp. 162 and 168.

ANNEX
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics: draft treaty on the
complete and general prohibition of nuclear weapon tests

The States Parties to this Treaty,
Proclaiming their intention to bring about, as speedily as
possible, the cessation of the nuclear arms race, the adoption
of effective measures towards nuclear disarmament and the
conclusion of an agreement on general and complete diliarmament under strict and effective international control,
Taking into account the appeals by the General Assembly
of the United Nations to put an end to nuclear weapon tests
in all environments,
Noting that the prohibition of all nuclear weapon tests
would be in the interests of strengthening peace and slowing
the arms race and would be a contribution to the process of
international detente,
Reaffirming that the potential benefits of any peaceful application of nuclear explosions should be available to nuclear as
well as non-nuclear States in conformity with the provisions of
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 54
and of ,the present Treaty,
Noting the great positive significance of the Treaty Banning
Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and
under Water, signed in Moscow on 5 August 1963, 55
Stressing the importance of strict compliance with the abovementioned Treaty up to the time of entry into force of this
Treaty,
Seeking to achieve the permanenit cessation of all test explosions of nuclear weapons by all States,
Have agreed on the following:
ARTICLE I
1. Each State Party to this Treaty undertakes to prohibit,
to prevent and to refrain from carrying out any test explosions
of nuclear weapons anywhere under its jurisdiction or control in
a!ll environments-in the atmosphere, in outer space, under
water and underground.
·
2. Each State Party to this Treaty undertakes to refrain
from encouraging, inciting, or in any way participating in the
carrying out of nuclear explosions prohibited by paragraph 1
of this article.
ARTICLE 11

1. Control over compliance. with this Treaty shall be con-

ducted by the States Parties, through their own national technical means of control, in accordance with the generally recognized rules of international law.
2. In order to promote the objectives of and ensure compliance with the provisions of· this Treaty, the Parties to the
Treaty shall co-operate in an id'ternational exchange of seismic
data.
3. In order to promote the objectives of and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Treaty, the Parties shall,
when necessary, consult one another, make inquiries and receive appropriate information in connexion with such inquiries.
4. Any State Party to this Treaty which ascertains that any
other State Party is acting in violation of obligations deriving
from the provisions of the Treaty may lodge a complaint with
the Security Council of the United Nations. Such a complaint
must contain all possible evidence confirming its validity and
a request for its consideration by the Security CollllCil. The
Council shall inform the States Parties to the Treaty of the
resuilts of its consideration.
ARTICLE

III

1. The provisions of article ,I shall not apply to any underground nuclear explosions conducted by nuclear-weapon States
for peaceful purposes on the territory under their jurisdiction
and in compliance with the agreements under which, -in accordance with article V of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
154 Resolution 2373 (XXII), annex.
1111 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 480, No. 6964, p. 43.
