S/PV.9384

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9384th meeting

Tuesday, 25 July 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kariuki. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Moretti
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Wood

Agenda
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (S/2023/490)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-21823 (E)
*2321823*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9384

Peace consolidation in West Africa

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peace consolidation in West Africa
Report of the Secretary-General on the activities
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the Sahel (S/2023/490)
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Leonardo Santos Simão, Special Representative
and Head of the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel; and His Excellency Mr. Omar Alieu
Touray, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/490, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the activities of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel.
I now give the floor to Mr. Simão.
Mr. Simão: I am honoured to present today the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2023/490) on the situation
in West Africa and the Sahel and the activities of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) for the first time since assuming office.
I would also like to congratulate the United Kingdom
presidency of the Security Council for this month for
its leadership.
Allow me to start by welcoming the holding of
elections in several countries in West Africa and the
Sahel, namely in Benin, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau,
Mauritania, Nigeria and Sierra Leone. These elections
have marked important steps towards democratic
consolidation, offering opportunities for citizens to
choose their leaders and representatives at the national
and subnational levels. In Nigeria, voters, especially
young voters, injected a new vibrancy into the electoral
competition. In Guinea-Bissau, the opposition secured
an absolute majority after peaceful parliamentary
elections, whose results were accepted by all.
That notwithstanding, the often keenly contested
polls also exposed real challenges. In a number of
countries, there were concerns over a shrinking civic
2/18

25/07/2023

and political space and the lack of transparency in vote
tabulation and transmission, which undermined citizens’
trust in the electoral processes. Those challenges should
be addressed way ahead of future elections. In that
context, I welcome the national dialogue convened by
President Macky Sall of Senegal. The ongoing proactive
implementation of the recommendations of the dialogue
is noteworthy as Senegal moves to hold its presidential
election in February next year.
For its part, UNOWAS supported the various
electoral processes — not only through high-level
good offices, but also through support for pre-electoral
interparty
dialogues
and
confidence-building
initiatives among stakeholders in Benin and Nigeria,
amid other initiatives.
I would also like to highlight how UNOWAS is
enhancing its partnerships with regional partners
to reinforce the rule of law, against the backdrop of
concerns over the impartiality of the judiciary in
parts of the region. Notably, in collaboration with
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), UNOWAS is partnering with the West
African Bar Association to strengthen justice systems
and will organize a regional conference in August
in Accra.
Despite the encouraging steps towards democratic
consolidation, the continued underrepresentation of
women across the region in political processes and
decision-making not only deprives half of the population
of essential rights, but is also a massive impediment to
development. Therefore, notwithstanding some notable
advances registered during the period, I call upon all
stakeholders, in particular Governments and political
parties, to promote legislation and ensure the effective
application of existing instruments on women’s
empowerment and gender equality.
Moreover, with more than 60 per cent of the
population being younger than 25, young people are an
important group whose voice is not yet being fully heard
in peacebuilding efforts. UNOWAS has continued to
advocate for greater inclusiveness of youth in electoral
and decision-making processes. In that regard, I was
pleased to engage students and young professionals
at the regional youth forum organized by UNOWAS
in Cabo Verde, which resulted in the Mindelo call
to action.
23-21823

25/07/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

(spoke in French)
As part of my introductory visits to the region since
taking office, I have been received by the authorities
of Senegal; Guinea-Bissau; Nigeria, through the
ECOWAS Commission; Côte d’Ivoire; Burkina Faso;
Sierra Leone; the Niger; Cabo Verde and Guinea. Those
visits enabled me to talk to the authorities about the
transitions under way and to understand the scale of the
crisis in the Sahel.
In Burkina Faso, I noted the determination of
the transitional authorities to re-establish security
throughout the country and their willingness to tackle
the many challenges facing their country and the
subregion. I also take note of the processes under way
in Guinea and Mali to return to constitutional order
within the allotted time, and I believe that our efforts
must converge towards that major objective.
In Mali, we are facing the major challenges of a
difficult transition, given the imminent departure
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I intend
to visit Bamako as soon as possible to discuss the
situation with the authorities, partners and United
Nations colleagues.
The crisis in the Sahel crisis is the sum of complex
circumstances, and its resolution requires concrete,
realistic and long-term support from the region and
beyond, in order to achieve lasting peace. The people of
the region are constantly reminding us of our collective
obligation to support the efforts of their countries to
resolve these crises and put an end to the scourge of
terrorism that has marked their daily lives for too long.
In this respect, I would also like to bear witness to
the commitment of the States in the region, reiterated at
the sixty-third ordinary summit of ECOWAS Heads of
State and Government, which I attended. Accordingly,
I welcome the participation of the President of the
ECOWAS Commission, Mr. Omar Alieu Touray, in
today’s meeting of the Security Council. The summit’s
decisions demonstrate, if proof were still needed,
the concern of the Heads of State, as well as their
unequivocal determination to tackle the crises and
re-establish contact between ECOWAS mediators and
the authorities of the countries in transition.
The decision to hold an extraordinary ECOWAS
summit at the end of August, preceded by a meeting
of Ministers of Defence and Finance, will enable the

S/PV.9384

region to focus more closely on the burning issues of
insecurity, including in the countries in transition.
(spoke in English)
The security situation in the Central Sahel has
deteriorated further, with multiple attacks against
civilians and defence and security forces, especially
in the Liptako-Gourma area. Encouraged by the
recent decision by ECOWAS to fully operationalize
the 2020–2024 Action Plan for the eradication of
terrorism in the region, using mandatory contributions
from its members. I would like to appeal to partners to
lend robust and decisive support to this commendable
initiative. Leveraging our comparative advantages, we
need to join forces with the African Union, ECOWAS
and affected Member States to make a decisive move to
stem insecurity in the Sahel.
(spoke in French)
I would like to emphasize the humanitarian impact
of the crisis facing our region. The rate of food insecurity
is alarming, particularly in areas where instability has
interrupted agricultural production. The 6.3 million
people across the Sahel who have been displaced are
another gravely worrisome humanitarian consequence.
A growing number of these displaced populations are
seeking refuge in coastal countries, including Côte
d’Ivoire and Ghana. I appeal to all stakeholders to work
together to preserve the dignity of refugees and the
security of host and transit countries.
Insecurity also has a direct impact on future
generations. Before our very eyes, more than 11,000
schools are closed across Burkina Faso, Mali, the
Niger and Nigeria, depriving children of education and
prospects, thereby mortgaging their fundamental rights
and the future of their countries.
(spoke in English)
To conclude, I would like to share with
Council members the progress achieved by the
Cameroon-Nigeria Mixed Commission, which is
another example of peacebuilding beyond the limelight
of everyday news. Of note, final mapping and the
construction of pillars demarcating the border between
the two countries are proceeding steadily, with only
three areas of disagreement remaining. To assist in
these sensitive processes, financial support will be
required to stimulate confidence-building between the
affected communities.

23-218233/18

S/PV.9384

Peace consolidation in West Africa

I would like to thank the Council for its continued
support of UNOWAS. You may rest assured,
Mr. President, that, in line with our mandate, we
will continue to work together with our regional and
international partners to consolidate much-needed
peace, security and democracy in West Africa and
the Sahel.
The President: I thank Mr. Simaõ for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Touray.
Mr. Touray: The Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) welcomes this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the political and
security situation in West Africa. We are grateful to
the United Kingdom’s presidency of the Council this
month for the invitation to do so. I particularly welcome
the opportunity to take the floor just after the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), Mr. Simaõ, with whom I continue to work
very closely in the region.
Let us remind ourselves about a few features of
the subregion. The 400 million people of the region
comprise in large part young ambitious and dynamic
people. The youthful population, the fertile land and
natural resources of the region hold considerable
promise for the people of West Africa. That promise
hinges on governance and security. By governance,
I am referring not only to the assumption of power
through inclusive democratic processes, but also to
accountability in the management of public affairs.
The region’s performance on this score needs to
be recognized. Out of the 15 countries in the region,
12 have democratically elected Governments. Twelve
have term limits enshrined in their Constitutions, and
we are confident that this number will increase shortly.
Major elections that have taken place in the region this
year alone include the presidential, legislative and state
elections in Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau.
The good showing by the oppositions in the various
countries suggests that democracy is alive in the region.
But the region is worried about the resurgence of
the military in the political space. The fact that 3 out of
the 15 countries of the region are under military rule is
indicative of a reversal of the region’s democratic gains.
For ECOWAS, this is unacceptable, and all the countries
must return to constitutional order within the specified
4/18

25/07/2023

time frames. Not only is the Security Council’s support
for transition to constitutional order in all of these three
countries crucial, but it is also in our collective interest.
The reversal of democratic gains runs parallel to
the insecurity that West Africa and the Sahel have
been facing for some time now. We can spend the
whole day talking about the drivers of insecurity in
the region, but allow me to single out terrorism, armed
rebellion, organized crime, unconstitutional change of
government, illegal maritime activities, environmental
crises and fake news as being the key drivers of
insecurity in the subregion.
Victims of insecurity — those killed, maimed and
displaced and those who have lost livelihoods — are
the subject of conflicting figures. Yet all the figures
are indicative of the pain and suffering that insecurity
continues to inflict on the people. For example, from
1 January to 30 June 2023, 1,814 incidents of terrorist
attacks were recorded in the ECOWAS region. These
incidents resulted in 4,593 fatalities: 2,725 were
recorded in Burkina Faso; 844 in Mali; 211 in the Niger;
77 in Nigeria; and 70 in Benin. Terrorist attacks in the
Republic of Benin and the Togolese Republic are a
stark indication of the expansion of terrorist attacks to
littoral States, a situation that poses an additional threat
to the region. The insecurity continues to have dire
humanitarian consequences, with a significant number
of refugees and internally displaced populations in
Nigeria, Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso. By the end
of April 2023, a total of half a million refugees were
recorded in the region, with significant numbers in
Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and Nigeria. The total
number of internally displaced persons stands at
6,182,117, with 2 million in Burkina Faso, 3.3 million
in Nigeria and almost half a million in Mali.
The food security situation in the region suggests
that insecurity does not only affect our present, but also
threatens our future. Our assessments have indicated
that nearly 30 million people are in need of food
assistance. In the absence of an adequate response, the
number of people needing food assistance will increase
from 30 million to 42 million by the end of next month.
That is just a snippet of the horrendous impact of
insecurity in West Africa.
Responses to insecurity in the region have been
diverse. They include bilateral, plurilateral and
multilateral arrangements, such as Operation Barkhane,
the Takuba Task Force, the Group of Five for the Sahel,
23-21823

25/07/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

the Accra Initiative and the Multinational Joint Task
Force, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali and ECOWAS’ own
plan of action for the eradication of terrorism. Those
important initiatives and operations have had impact on
the ground.
However, while we acknowledge the role of those
initiatives, we cannot ignore some of the challenges
they present. The multiplicity of such initiatives present
problems of coordination, ownership and inclusion.
ECOWAS’ proposal is to integrate the various
initiatives into the regional plan of action and to use
them as specialized operational tools of the regional
mechanism. That will facilitate coordination, promote
ownership and enhance inclusion.
ECOWAS Heads of State and Government have
taken three decisions aimed at facilitating the transition
to such an inclusive arrangement. The first decision is
to undertake a review of the mandate of the regional
Standby Force, with a view to enabling it to address
the challenges of insecurity through various forms of
intervention, including kinetic operations. The second
decision relates to financing for the regional mechanism,
and the third relates to the review of the existing plan of
action with a view to updating and aligning it with the
new decisions taken.
The consultations that have taken place among
the Chiefs of Defence Staff of member States seek to
strengthen the mandate of the regional Standby Force
in a manner that will enable it to support member
States in their fight against terrorism and threats to
constitutional order. Two options have been proposed
by the military chiefs, namely a brigade of 5,000 troops
at an annual cost of $2.3 billion or a deployment of
troops on demand at an annual cost of $360 million.
Those recommendations predate the decision of the
Council to close MINUSMA in Mali (resolution 2690
(2023)).
Yet regional leaders have reflected on the possible
adverse impact of the withdrawal on the region and have
decided to convene an extraordinary session on peace
and security by the end of August 2023. In preparation
for the extraordinary summit, a troika of the Heads
of State of Nigeria, Benin and Guinea-Bissau, plus
the Niger, met on 18 July to reflect on the political
and security situation in the region. Their conclusions
constitute the main message I would like to bring to the
attention of the Council.

S/PV.9384

With respect to the political situation in the region,
the leaders of the region have decided to re-engage the
three member States in transition at the highest level. To
that end, His Excellency Mr. Patrice Talon, President of
the Republic of Benin, will undertake a consultative visit
in the three countries on behalf of the troika. The leaders
have underscored their resolve to see an expeditious
return to constitutional order in those member States,
in accordance with the relevant ECOWAS protocols and
the transition charters of each of the three countries.
The leaders have reaffirmed ECOWAS’ commitment to
supporting credible and inclusive democratic elections
in each of the three countries. The leaders have also
reaffirmed their support for the Algiers peace process,
which seeks to facilitate a peaceful settlement between
the Government of Mali and the armed groups. The
leaders call on the international community, especially
members of the Security Council, to support the Algiers
peace process in Mali, as well as the ECOWAS position
on the transitions in the region.
On the security situation in the region, the leaders
stressed the region’s resolve to provide a robust response
to threats to peace in the region. The regional response
shall include the expeditious operationalization of a
revised ECOWAS plan of action for the eradication of
terrorism in the region. It will also include collaboration
with other security initiatives and the provision of
direct support to member States, including countries
in transition, in their fight against terrorism. The
leaders reiterated their strong commitment to financing
the regional security mechanisms from the region’s
own resources.
The regional resolve does not take away the
Security Council’s responsibility for the maintenance
of world peace. In that regard, the leaders of the region
reiterate their support for the African Union’s request
for predictable funding for African-led missions
through assessed contributions. That position has been
adequately supported and defended by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations on several occasions,
most recently in his report of 1 May 2023 on the
implementation of resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378
(2017) and considerations related to the financing of
African Union peace support operations mandated by
the Security Council (S/2023/303).
Allow me to conclude this statement by quoting the
report of the Secretary-General:

23-218235/18

S/PV.9384

Peace consolidation in West Africa

“...[T]he time when requests related to peace support
operations could be considered as exceptional
circumstances is behind us; to more effectively meet
the challenges of today, support to such operations
must be considered in a more systematic manner.
[...] I urge the Security Council to signal its clear
support for providing African Union peace support
operations with access to United Nations assessed
contributions. This would represent a concrete
demonstration that the Council stands ready to
break new ground and address a critical gap in the
international peace and security architecture, as
well as a strong reaffirmation of the willingness of
the Council to stem the scourge of armed conflict
on the African continent.” (S/2023/303, para. 38
and 44)
The President: I thank Mr. Touray for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I deliver this statement on
behalf of the three African members of the Council (A3),
namely, Gabon, Mozambique and Ghana.
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
on the activities of the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) (S/2023/490) and avail
ourselves of this opportunity to warmly congratulate
Mr. Leonardo Santos Simão on his appointment as
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa and the Sahel and Head of UNOWAS. We
are pleased with the Special Representative’s active
engagement with the countries of the region since his
recent assumption of duty and encourage his further
efforts in the implementation of the UNOWAS mandate.
We thank him for his first briefing to the Council.
We also thank Mr. Omar Alieu Touray, President of
the Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) for his important remarks
and take good note of his views on developments in the
region and the determination of the region to respond
to the security challenges and the request for solidarity
with members of the Community.
Since the last briefing to the Council (see/S/PV.9238)
and the renewal of UNOWAS’s mandate, we have seen
democracy consolidated in Nigeria and Sierra Leone,
as well as in Benin, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania and the
Gambia. We note the need for continuing international
and regional support for the upcoming elections in the
region and encourage the ongoing efforts to restore
6/18

25/07/2023

constitutional order in the three transitional countries,
particularly Mali, where the referendum held in June
should lay out a pathway for further efforts based on an
inclusive process. We urge the Malian authorities and
the signatory groups to remain engaged in realizing
the objectives of the Algiers peace agreement, and we
affirm our support for Mali’s sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity.
The A3, however, remains concerned about the
security situation in the region, especially in the
countries of the Sahel, where a loss of territory to
terrorists and armed groups is creating new waves of
displacement and their humanitarian consequences.
We note the interlocking nature of the unfolding crises
and the need for a comprehensive approach to resolving
them. Against that backdrop, we would like to make a
few critical remarks.
First, on the political front, we encourage the
countries of the region to fulfil their obligations under
regional arrangements such as the ECOWAS Protocol
on Democracy and Good Governance. The fact is that
democratic, inclusive and participatory practices are
essential to maintaining the stability of any country,
and amid the adverse impact of the coronavirus disease
pandemic and various geopolitical disputes, the fragilities
of the countries of the region should be managed through
a participatory approach to governance, involving young
people, women and minority groups. We welcome
the commitment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team, in close collaboration
with regional stakeholders, to implementing ECOWAS’s
core principles, as reiterated in the communiqué of the
sixty-third ordinary meeting of the Authority of Heads
of State and Government of ECOWAS, held on 9 July.
Secondly, with respect to the security situation, the
growing incidence of terrorism and violent extremism
and their evolving methods of operation are of major
concern. We strongly condemn attacks by terrorist
groups on civilians and security personnel in the
region and pay tribute to all who have lost their lives.
As the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) carries on
with its withdrawal from Mali, we urge for coordinated
action with the neighbouring countries to minimize
any further adverse security consequences for Mali and
the region. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
report to the Council in August, clarifying the role that
UNOWAS and other United Nations agencies can play
following MINUSMA’s withdrawal.
23-21823

25/07/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Ensuring logistical, operational and funding support
for regional mechanisms, such as the Multinational Joint
Task Force, the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the
Sahel and the Accra Initiative, is now more critical than
ever. We welcome the decision to activate the ECOWAS
Standby Force and provide the requisite support for its
deployment and for the implementation of the ECOWAS
action plan for the eradication of terrorism. We note
the commitment to enhancing synergies among the
regional initiatives, led by the three-member-plus-one
presidential troika, and look forward to the outcomes
of the ECOWAS Extraordinary Summit, to be held in
August to deliberate on concrete measures for addressing
the security situation in the region, including transitions.
Still on the security front, we encourage the sustained
monitoring of the situation in Libya and the importance
of embracing a coordinated approach in order to avert
the threat that the return of foreign terrorist fighters
poses to the stability of the region, including through
the proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We
remain hopeful that the wide consultations conducted
by the Independent High-Level Panel on Security and
Development in the Sahel, led by former President
Issoufou, aimed at developing an assessment report on
the Sahel, will emerge with elements supporting the
regional security initiatives to address the challenges in
the region. We encourage the support of the international
community for the ongoing regional efforts.
Thirdly, regarding the humanitarian situation, which
is a result of the escalation of conflicts and other drivers
such as deteriorating socioeconomic circumstances and
the adverse effects of climate change, the A3 would like to
draw the attention of the international community to the
more than 6 million people who have been displaced and
the approximately 10,000 schools that have been closed.
We need to move beyond a business-as-usual approach
to addressing the issue. We call for donor partners to
prioritize the implementation of humanitarian response
plans for countries in West Africa and the Sahel by
helping to meet the $3.5 billion target required to tackle
the increasing humanitarian needs.
Lastly, we encourage a comprehensive approach
to addressing the challenges in West Africa and the
Sahel, including support for measures to tackle the root
causes of the crises. That should include support for
addressing the deficits in governance and development,
but also a commitment to forging national consensus
in the countries of the region to ensure that women and
young people play an equal and meaningful role in all

S/PV.9384

decision-making and governance processes. In that
regard, we welcome support for integrating the human
security concerns of women and young people into the
recently adopted 2022–2026 ECOWAS Early Warning
and Early Response Strategic Plan and encourage further
support for the implementation of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel.
Regarding climate change, Gabon, Mozambique and
Ghana believe that it is aggravating the prevailing crises
in the region, having led to displacement and uncontrolled
competition over shrinking natural resources, among
other problems. In that regard, we welcome support
for implementing regional initiatives such as the Dakar
Call to Action on Climate Change, Peace and Security
in West Africa and the Sahel. We also welcome the
advisory note of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
for today’s meeting and underscore the need for more
support for its work to enable the region to harness the
positive dividends from the PBC’s intervening role,
including in climate-related peace and development
issues, as well as in the promotion of community-based
dispute-resolution mechanisms.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our respect for the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of all countries of
the region. The A3 would like to emphasize that the
demonstration of strong political will at the national,
regional and international levels, including by the
Council, remains crucial to addressing the multifaceted
challenges facing the region. We call on all Council
members to commit to adopting the draft UNOWAS
presidential statement in support of the mandate of the
new Special Representative as soon as possible.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to welcome Mr. Leonardo Santos Simão, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. I wish
him every success in his new role and look forward to
continuing our productive cooperation with him. I also
thank the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States for his briefing, and
the Peacebuilding Commission for its written advice.
We welcome the positive developments since our
last meeting (see S/PV.9238) such as those related to
elections and to transitional justice and accountability
efforts. However, today’s briefing makes it clear that
the security situation in the region remains very fragile
and that humanitarian needs are increasing. I would
therefore like to make three points.

23-218237/18

S/PV.9384

Peace consolidation in West Africa

First, with regard to the elections, we are
pleased to note that the polls have so far been largely
peaceful. We welcome the ongoing commitment of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) to promoting democratic governance
and peaceful electoral processes. It is a long-term
effort based on trust and regular dialogue, and it
reflects the good reputation that UNOWAS enjoys.
However, while notable progress has been made at the
State level, in particular in Benin and Mauritania, as
the Special Representative mentioned, women have
remained largely underrepresented throughout the
region in political processes and decision-making. We
call for a more in-depth and contextual analysis of the
underlying reasons for that in order to ensure the full
and meaningful participation of women throughout the
electoral process cycle.
Secondly, with regard to the security situation,
investing in violence prevention and peacebuilding
requires a commitment to addressing the various
security, political, economic, cultural and social
causes underlying such violence. That was reiterated in
February at the conference entitled “Grand Rendez-vous
for the Prevention of Violent Extremism in West and
Central Africa”, organized by UNOWAS, Switzerland
and Senegal in Dakar. It is imperative that States and
regional organizations, in particular the African Union
and ECOWAS, translate the Secretary-General’s Plan
of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism into reality.
The conference showed us that dialogue, including with
violent extremists, is key to achieving lasting peace.
Lastly, we are facing a serious humanitarian crisis
as a result of instability, conflict, forced displacement,
food insecurity and climate change. The crisis is
affecting millions of people in the region. The situation
of young people and children in West Africa and the
Sahel remains particularly worrisome. Attacks on
schools are often committed in tandem with other
serious violations, such as sexual and gender-based
violence. In general, we are seeing a deterioration in
access to health and education services. We cannot
remain indifferent to those developments.
Switzerland welcomes the work of UNOWAS on
climate change, peace and security in the context of the
Dakar Call to Action. My country welcomes the ongoing
analysis of climate security risks. As Ms. Aïssatou
Diouf told the Council in May,
8/18

25/07/2023

“It is no longer relevant to address the crisis in
the Sahel on the basis of security issues. We need
multisectoral responses that take into account
current and future climate issues.” (S/PV.9322, p. 6)
That will allow for an easing of the pressure on
humanitarian aid in the long term and help communities
to recover. In that regard, and in order to strengthen
the resilience of more than 700,000 people in Burkina
Faso, Switzerland is supporting a programme aimed
at de-escalating disputes between farmers and herders
by adapting breeding methods and livelihood means to
climate challenges.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/490)
once again highlights the importance of the role of
UNOWAS in overcoming the many challenges in the
region. The extension of the mandate in January attests
to the Council’s continued support for the mission.
Switzerland stands ready to promote dialogue among
stakeholders to explore the possibility of delegating
certain tasks that have been carried out by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali to UNOWAS, if appropriate. In
addition, as co-penholder, and together with Ghana,
we will continue our efforts to adopt a presidential
statement as soon as possible, in order to underline
the Council’s strong interest in the region. After two
years, it is time to reiterate our collective support for
the valuable and important work of the regional Office
in all areas of its mandate.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Simão and Mr. Touray for their
very informative briefings.
The United States remains gravely concerned
about democratic backsliding across the region and
strongly supports the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and its instrumental
role in preventing and mitigating conflict, addressing
election-related crises and promoting inclusive
dialogue processes in the region. We recognize the
continued efforts of UNOWAS to help promote and
sustain democratic processes and advise transitional
Governments in West Africa and the Sahel,
particularly in Mali, Burkina Faso, Guinea and Sierra
Leone. Although we are concerned about the lack of
transparency in the tabulation process for the 24 June
general elections in Sierra Leone and irregularities
in the election results announced by the Electoral
Commission, we applaud the people of Sierra Leone for
23-21823

25/07/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

participating in the elections, which play a vital role in
any democracy. We reiterate our support to transition
processes in Mali, Burkina Faso and Guinea and continue
to call for a return to democratic governance. We
support the United Nations and Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) leadership in
holding transition Governments accountable to their
stated timelines to return to constitutional order and for
promoting stability in the region.
Turning from democratic transitions to humanitarian
needs, we want to underscore the urgency of the arrival
of the new United Nations Resident Coordinator in
Burkina Faso and share the concerns expressed by
the United Nations on the transitional Government of
Burkina Faso’s actions that led to the departure of the
previous United Nations Resident Coordinator. The
United Nations Resident Coordinator leads the United
Nations work to support development efforts and is vital
to leading the delivery of much-needed humanitarian
assistance for the people of Burkina Faso.
Given the situation in the region, accountability
is especially important. We reiterate our call on the
transition Government in Mali to pursue an independent,
impartial, efficient, comprehensive and transparent
investigation to hold accountable those responsible for
the civilian killings in Moura, Mali, consistent with the
recommendation in the relevant May 2023 report of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights.
The UNOWAS mandate is all the more important
in the light of the Mali transition Government’s
decision to end the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
It is critical that the transition Government of Mali
fully cooperate with the United Nations to ensure
the safe and orderly withdrawal of MINUSMA. That
includes fully respecting the status-of-forces agreement
until the final MINUSMA element departs, beyond
December 31. Once the MINUSMA transition plan is
finalized, we would welcome a serious discussion in
the appropriate forum on what additional resources for
UNOWAS might be needed to ensure continued support
for UNOWAS and its increased activities.
We remain deeply concerned about the spread of
instability in coastal West Africa, both from national
political dynamics and the proximity of violent
extremism in the Sahel. The growing threats have cost
thousands of lives and contributed to displacement

S/PV.9384

across the region. We cannot ignore the fact that the
Wagner Group is committing human rights abuses
and endangering the safety and security of civilians,
peacekeepers and United Nations personnel. They are
obstructing the work of United Nations peacekeepers
and not only failing to address the immediate violent
extremist threat, but contributing to the likelihood that
it will grow.
Finally, the United States calls on members of the
Security Council to reinvigorate our collective action
and engage with African partners in addressing the
problems that cross borders. We applaud the efforts of
the United Nations, UNOWAS, the African Union and
ECOWAS to support the region and hope to soon see a
presidential statement reaffirm that commitment.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): I want
to begin by extending our sincere congratulations to
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Simão
on his appointment and express our deep appreciation
to Deputy Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Biha for her engagement with the Security
Council. The United Arab Emirates remains steadfast
in its support to the important work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and that of
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS). I also thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Simão and the President
of the Commission of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), Mr. Touray, for their
insightful briefings today. Furthermore, we welcome
the advice from the Peacebuilding Commission, which
informs the Council’s understanding of the region. Its
continuous contributions are vital to our work.
Our briefers today elaborated on how the countries
for which UNOWAS has responsibility are facing the
dual challenge of insecurity and a changing climate.
According to the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/490), 6.3 million individuals remain displaced
across the Sahel and coastal countries, and more than
37 million people require humanitarian assistance.
Addressing those challenges necessitates a rethinking
of the long-held assumptions and approaches previously
deployed — not only focusing on the current challenges
of the present, but the longer-term efforts needed to
help shape and build a more stable, secure and peaceful
horizon for the region, and not only focusing on the
national level, but also considering the challenges on a
region-wide basis.

23-218239/18

S/PV.9384

Peace consolidation in West Africa

I would like to make four brief points today to
that effect.
First, maintaining security in the region demands a
multitrack approach. According to the Global Terrorism
Index, four countries across West Africa are among the
top 10 most affected by terrorism. Protecting civilians is
not simply an exercise in response to threats — it must
also be about proactively creating a secure environment
from the ground up. In that light, soft and hard security
solutions, including building community resilience
through basic services, all form part of a comprehensive
security strategy for the region. Beyond national efforts,
regional security cooperation has paid dividends in
tackling cross-border threats and transnational organized
crime. We have seen a decline in terrorist incidents in
the Lake Chad basin, as well as improved maritime
security in the Gulf of Guinea, owing to best practices
being shared from country to country. We welcome
the growing coordination between ECOWAS and the
Accra Initiative.
Secondly, all the parties to a conflict must adhere
to their obligations under international humanitarian
law. Humanitarian actors currently face significant
challenges in reaching those in need. We urge all the
relevant actors to facilitate humanitarian actors’ safe
access to civilians who need life-saving assistance.
Against a backdrop of great insecurity, women and girls
in the region are at greater risk of sexual violence and
abduction by armed groups. Humanitarian actors must
be allowed to provide the necessary services to people
affected by those violations, and the perpetrators must
be held accountable.
Thirdly, the Council must approach insecurity in
the region through a climate-sensitive lens. Increased
desertification and reduced rainfall are shrinking already
scarce food and water resources. Agriculture is hindered,
leaving citizens without food and employment and
rendering them increasingly vulnerable to recruitment
by armed groups. In West Africa we see those dynamics
writ large. Climate change has also further entrenched
the epidemic of gender-based violence and inequality, as
women and girls are exposed to more precarious situations
when food insecurity persists. We must therefore make
concerted efforts to better understand and address the
interplay between climate, peace and security.
Fourthly and finally, long-term regional stability
will be built on a foundation of resilient institutions. Part
and parcel of building those institutions in West Africa is
10/18

25/07/2023

the conduct of free and fair elections. The recent holding
of peaceful elections in Guinea-Bissau, Nigeria, Sierra
Leone and other countries is a positive step forward, as
are the ongoing dialogue initiatives and efforts to ensure
the participation of women in the upcoming elections
in the region. Regarding the transition processes under
way, it is important to continue making headway, as
agreed with ECOWAS, and we welcome the Special
Representative’s close coordination with ECOWAS to
engage the authorities of the countries concerned in
upholding their commitments on an agreed timeline. In
that respect, we also welcome the establishment of the
ECOWAS Presidential Task Force.
As the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) begins its
withdrawal, we encourage UNOWAS to sustain United
Nations engagement with the Malian authorities, both
regional and national, and to help ensure a smooth
transition. We look forward to the Secretary-General’s
presentation of the plan in August for the transfer
of MINUSMA’s tasks, bearing in mind the possible
contribution of UNOWAS and other stakeholders. The
United Arab Emirates believes that the implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali is
essential, not only for Mali but for the region as a whole.
We therefore encourage parties to remain engaged in
its implementation.
As this will be the United Arab Emirates’ final
statement at a scheduled meeting on UNOWAS during
its Security Council term, I would like to reflect one last
time on the Office’s legacy and significance. UNOWAS’s
ability to promote inclusive political processes and
regional cooperation has come a long way. Looking to
the future, its role in implementing the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel will help address the
root causes of violence and foster community resilience.
In the long run, the gains made by UNOWAS so far can
be sustained only if international efforts are harmonized
with national priorities through ECOWAS and the
African Union, among others. The importance of the
Council finding unity and speaking as one voice on
UNOWAS, especially in terms of adopting a presidential
statement on UNOWAS, cannot be overstated. If we
succeed in doing that, our efforts will help the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General deliver on his
mandate to support the region. Ultimately, the Council’s
continued commitment to UNOWAS remains crucial
for the well-being, prosperity and peace of present and
future generations in the region.
23-21823

25/07/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Special Representative Simão and President
Touray for their briefings. China also congratulates
Mr. Simão on his appointment and will continue to
support the work of the Special Representative.
As the Secretary-General pointed out in his report
(S/2023/490), over the past six months the countries of
West Africa and the Sahel have achieved positive results
in maintaining peace and stability and deepening
regional cooperation. At the same time, they are facing
multiple challenges, such as terrorism, food security
and climate change. The international community and
the Security Council should provide more constructive
and targeted support. I would like to stress the following
three points.
First, China is pleased to see the election results
achieved in the region earlier this year, including the
general elections in Nigeria and Sierra Leone, the
constitutional referendum in Mali and the legislative
elections in Benin, Guinea-Bissau and Mauritania. The
smooth progress of those important political processes
is of great significance to the consolidation of peace
and stability in the region and the countries concerned.
The international community and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) should
continue to support countries in the region in enhancing
governance and building capacity while taking the
local context into account, promoting solidarity and
cooperation through dialogue and consultation and
following a development path that accords with their
national conditions. Nigeria recently assumed the
presidency of ECOWAS, and China hopes that under
Nigeria’s leadership, ECOWAS will continue to play
an active role in promoting common development and
maintaining common security in the region.
Secondly, China commends Nigeria, Mali,
Burkina Faso and other countries for stepping up their
counter-terrorism efforts. We support the launch of
the ECOWAS Standby Force and the reorganization
of the Sahel Joint Force. We hope that the countries
of the region will uphold the concept of common
security and promote counter-terrorism cooperation,
and that ECOWAS’s Extraordinary Summit, to be held
in Nigeria next month, will inject new vitality into the
process. Once the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali has completed
its withdrawal, the international community should not
scale back its support for Mali and regional countries in
the fight against terrorism but should rather provide more
support in terms of equipment, logistics and funding.

S/PV.9384

Thirdly, against the backdrop of a changing
international landscape, West Africa and the Sahel are
receiving less external aid and facing more difficulties
in accessing foreign credit. The international
community, especially the international financial
institutions, should not allow other crises to lead them
to reduce their aid and investment in the region. During
its recent summit, ECOWAS called on the countries of
the region to prioritize economic development, food
security, interconnectivity and intraregional trade. The
international community should align its assistance in
both areas, identify development needs in the region and
help it improve its independent development capabilities.
China attaches great importance to the challenges
brought by climate change to countries in the Sahel. It
should be pointed out that funding shortfalls and a lack
of technology are the primary challenges that countries
in the region are facing in terms of climate response.
The international community, especially developed
countries, should translate political commitments into
concrete action and play a leading and exemplary role
in helping countries in the region.
China has always stood firmly with its friends,
partners, brothers and sisters in West Africa and the
Sahel. We have long-standing relations with the region
and provide an enormous amount of political, economic
and social support and assistance through bilateral and
multilateral channels. We stand ready to work with the
international community to make renewed contributions
to maintaining regional peace and stability and
promoting regional development and prosperity.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I welcome Mr. Leonardo
Simão in his capacity as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel and
thank him and Mr. Touray, President of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for
their insightful briefings. I also thank the Peacebuilding
Commission for its written advice.
Japan highly appreciates the work of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS), its active engagement at the regional,
subregional and national levels in support of democratic
processes and its continued coordination with the
United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
recognizing that the challenges facing West and Central
Africa are interconnected.
Today I want to touch on two pressing issues facing
the region. First, the restoration and maintenance of
legitimate and democratic governance is essential. We

23-2182311/18

S/PV.9384

Peace consolidation in West Africa

welcome the holding of a number of elections this year
in the region and look forward to seeing the forthcoming
elections held in a peaceful, inclusive and transparent
manner. While most of the elections this year have
been conducted peacefully, not all have been without
controversy. Any truly inclusive democratic process
cannot have opposition candidates jailed or barred
from running. Incendiary rhetoric and accusations
must be avoided by all participants, and appropriate
measures need to be taken against misinformation
and disinformation.
Furthermore, Japan reiterates the importance of
a return to constitutional order. Japan calls on Mali
to continue to make every effort towards holding
elections as agreed with the Economic Community of
West African States and encourages UNOWAS and
the United Nations country team to assist Mali. In that
context, Japan welcomes the contributions of regional
partners. We also hope to see positive developments in
the political transitions in Guinea and Burkina Faso.
Security cannot be achieved without accountable and
inclusive governance.
That leads me to my second point. The security
landscape across the Sahel has continued to deteriorate,
particularly in Mali and Burkina Faso. In that regard, it
is regrettable that the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali has to
withdraw after a decade of its dedicated work, despite
the many challenges Mali and the region continue to
face. We stress the need to respect human rights in
all security operations and urge the Mali transitional
authorities to coordinate with their neighbours and
with regional partners to avoid a security vacuum. A
collective, holistic, and transnational security approach
is necessary to combat violent extremists and terrorists,
who operate across borders. In addition, we should not
forget that the deterioration of the security situation in
the Sahel is having a negative impact on neighbouring
countries, including several coastal countries of the
Gulf of Guinea.
Continued insecurity has increased the alreadysevere humanitarian needs, with widespread food
insecurity, displacement and school closures, as we
just heard from the briefers. On top of that, the effects
of environmental degradation and climate change are
deeply worrisome. In tackling those challenges and
ensuring long-term peace and stability, people must be
placed at the centre and given a sense of ownership, and
Governments must build strong and robust institutions
12/18

25/07/2023

to provide for their well-being. Recognizing the
importance of human security, Japan has long provided
development and institution-building assistance to
the region.
I conclude by reiterating our commitment to
continuing to work with bilateral, regional and
international stakeholders for a stable and prosperous
West Africa and Sahel.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Mr. Leonardo Santos Simão for his
briefing this morning and congratulate him on his recent
appointment as Special Representative and Head of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS). We wish him every success in his work.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his detailed
report on developments in the region (S/2023/490) and
Mr. Omar Alieu Touray, President of the Commission
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), for his interesting briefing.
We would like to underscore three main points.
First, we reiterate our conviction that a sound and
stable institutional framework is the key to improving
the living conditions of populations and tackling the
root causes of violence. In that regard, we congratulate
the countries of the region that have taken important
steps to consolidate their democratic processes and
institutions by holding elections in recent months,
particularly Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Benin, GuineaBissau and Mauritania. We also hope that the elections
to be held in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Togo will be
conducted in a peaceful and transparent manner. We
appreciate the efforts of ECOWAS, with the support of
the United Nations, to restore constitutional order in
Burkina Faso, Guinea and Mali, and we reiterate our
call for compliance with the commitments agreed and
timetables established for that purpose.
Secondly, we express our concern about the
deterioration of the security situation in the central
Sahel, particularly in Burkina Faso and Mali, and the
persistent danger of the expansion of terrorist violence
to the south. Ecuador expresses its solidarity with
the victims of violence and reiterates its unequivocal
condemnation of all terrorist acts, while recalling that
the measures taken by States to combat that scourge
must be based on respect for their obligations under
international law, international humanitarian law,
refugee law and human rights. In addition, we reiterate
our call on the countries of the region to intensify
23-21823

25/07/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

S/PV.9384

their cooperation in the fight against terrorism, and
we appreciate the efforts being made in that regard,
including the Accra Initiative.

the right of opinion and expression, and we strongly
urge the authorities in the region to step up efforts in
that regard.

Thirdly and finally, I want to comment on the
humanitarian consequences of insecurity, which
disproportionately affect the most vulnerable segments
of society — women, young people, children and the
elderly. Of particular concern is food insecurity, which
would affect some 21.8 million people in the region.
The efforts by UNOWAS to alleviate the suffering of
those affected are a very important step in stopping the
vicious circle of discontent and violence. In that regard,
it is essential to continue the work of coordination
among Governments and the United Nations system,
while taking into account all the interrelated factors
affecting the region. I therefore welcome the inputs that
the Peacebuilding Commission has submitted to the
Security Council and encourage all members to take
them into consideration.

Malta calls for a holistic approach towards
deterring any extension of violence in the region
by tackling the root causes of violent extremism
and conflict. Education, human rights, sustainable
development, justice and the rule of law must run
parallel to counter-terrorism operations. We deplore
violations of international humanitarian law and human
rights law in any counter-terrorism efforts and strongly
urge thorough investigations into alleged violations to
ensure accountability.

Ms. Gatt (Malta): I take this opportunity to
welcome Mr. Simão, Special Representative and Head
of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the
Sahel (UNOWAS), to his new role and thank him for
his briefing. I thank the former Special Representative,
Mr. Mahamat Saleh Annadif, for his work and Deputy
Special Representative Biha for ensuring continuity
over the past months. I also thank Mr. Omar Alieu
Touray, President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for his
insightful briefing and the Peacebulding Commission
for its written advice.
The year 2023 is crucial for democracy in West
Africa and the Sahel. Malta welcomes the recent
elections in the region, which are a step in the right
direction towards democracy and sustainable peace. We
commend the good offices of UNOWAS, including its
engagement with leaders. The increased representation
of women as local councillors and mayors in the
Gambia, the highest-ever proportion of women in
Benin’s National Assembly, the increased number of
women parliamentarians in Mauritania and a quota
for women’s representation in Liberia are welcome
achievements. However, we also note with concern
the setbacks to women’s representation and political
participation in Nigeria, where the number of women
in the National Assembly decreased by 19 per cent.
Furthermore, any attacks on human rights defenders
and the civic and political space continue to limit

In particular, we wish to underline our concern
about the security situation in Mali. The withdrawal
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali carries potential risks
for both Mali and its neighbours. We reiterate our call
for the protection of civilians to be safeguarded in
accordance with international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
Relevant stakeholders must focus on the needs of
children and on the humanitarian response in the light
of the grave violations being committed against them.
We look forward to discussing how UNOWAS could
potentially bridge that gap, following this development.
We also take note of the establishment of the ECOWAS
Presidential Task Force to deepen reflections on the
withdrawal and any forthcoming security challenges.
Malta commends ECOWAS, members of the Accra
Initiative and other regional organizations for their work
in handling these challenges and strongly encourages
full cooperation from countries of the region. We also
commend UNOWAS for its collaboration with UNWomen and other organizations in advancing the women
and peace and security agenda in the region. Malta
remains deeply concerned by the dire humanitarian
situation across the region, particularly in the Sahel,
with millions more this year than in the previous
reporting period requiring humanitarian assistance and
with the majority expected to experience severe food
insecurity, with elevated food prices also impacted by
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine.
As the region is heavily impacted by climate change,
we continue to support UNOWAS in advocating for best
practices on climate-change resilience and adaptation
on the ground and in promoting an understanding of
these practices among local communities. On that note,

23-2182313/18

S/PV.9384

Peace consolidation in West Africa

we hope that the Council reaches an agreement on a
presidential statement that truly reflects the situation
on the ground.
In conclusion, we look forward to the
recommendations of the Independent High-Level
Panel on Security and Development in the Sahel, led
by Mr. Issoufou, while reaffirming our strong support
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
UNOWAS and regional organizations. Peace and
security in West Africa and the Sahel should remain at
the heart of our efforts.
Mr. Spasse (Albania): Albania joins others in
congratulating Mr. Simão for assuming the role of
Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel. I
assure him of my delegation’s full support and call on all
stakeholders to engage constructively with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in tackling
the complex regional challenges. We also welcome
the President of the Commission of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS),
Mr. Touray, and thank him for his valuable insight.
The situation in West Africa and the Sahel remains
a pressing concern, encompassing political, security
and humanitarian aspects. In that regard, allow me to
make three points.
First, on the political front, we welcome the
holding of elections in several countries, promoting
the consolidation of democratic processes. However,
the shrinking of the civic and political space remains
worrisome. Albania underscores the importance of
inclusive political dialogue and consensus-building
among all stakeholders in order to sustain the progress
achieved thus far.
We express concern about the continuous
underrepresentation of women in political processes and
call on Governments and political parties to prioritize
women’s empowerment through legislation and
effective implementation of established mechanisms.
In that respect, we commend the steps undertaken
by Benin and Liberia aiming at increasing women’s
representation in their respective parliaments.
Furthermore, the ECOWAS mediation of political
transitions remains crucial. We urge the transition
authorities to strengthen cooperation and advance
outstanding benchmarks in order to ensure a return to
constitutional order within the agreed timelines.
14/18

25/07/2023

Albania welcomes the Peacebuilding Commission’s
advice of 20 July emphasizing the urgent need to
address the region’s root causes of conflict by ensuring
democratic consolidation and good governance,
the rule of law, respect for human rights, gender
equality, sustainable development and the inclusion of
civil society.
Secondly, the security situation is increasingly
perilous, with expanding terrorism, transnational
organized crime, intercommunal violence and illicit
financial flows. Violent extremist groups in Mali and
Burkina Faso continue to target military and civilian
infrastructure, resulting in severe human rights
violations. As reported by the Secretary-General,
violations against civilian populations in the conduct
of counter-terrorism operations remain of serious
concern. It is frustrating that approximately 10,000
schools across Burkina Faso, Mali, the Niger and
Nigeria were closed or non-operational due to violence.
Women and girls are the most vulnerable to sexual
violence and abduction.
We call upon West African and Sahel States to
enhance cross-border cooperation, working with the
United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS and
the Group of Five for the Sahel to strengthen security
and peacebuilding efforts. Strict adherence to human
rights and international humanitarian law is crucial
in all military activities. We express concern over the
partnership with the Wagner Group, which poses a
significant threat to those principles.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation remains dire.
The Sahel is grappling with escalating food insecurity,
climate change implications and displaced persons, with
humanitarian assistance reaching unprecedented levels.
Albania calls for a holistic approach that addresses
the multifaceted challenges facing the region, spanning
the security, governance and development nexus. We
also stress the need to address the adverse impact
of climate change and its implications for regional
security. In that regard, we call on Council members
to engage constructively on the presidential statement
and demonstrate our united commitment to the region.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
dedication to achieving peace and stability in the
Sahel region. We commend ECOWAS for its tireless
efforts and engagement with States to strengthen good
23-21823

25/07/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

governance and the rule of law, and we anticipate the
recommendations of the Independent High-Level Panel
on Security and Development in the Sahel.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I congratulate Special Representative
Leonardo Santos Simão on his appointment and thank
him for his briefing. I wish him every success in the
discharge of his mandate. He can count on the full
support of France. I also welcome the participation
in this meeting of the President of the Commission
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Mr. Omar Alieu Touray.
At the outset, I would like to talk about strengthening
democracy in the region. France salutes the exemplary
decisions of the heads of State who have made the
courageous choice of a political changeover, following
the example of Mahamadou Issoufou and Muhammadu
Buhari. France also welcomes President Macky Sall’s
decision not to run in the next presidential election.
Senegal is thus once again demonstrating the solidity
of its long democratic tradition.
France also congratulates President Bola Tinubu,
who assumed the presidency of ECOWAS a few days
ago. We wish him every success in his efforts to
promote peace in the region, building on the remarkable
achievements of President Úmaro Sissoco Embaló.
France encourages the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel to continue its action
in support of ECOWAS to ensure that this positive
dynamic continues throughout the region. Elections
must be held in a climate conducive to dialogue and
allowing the participation and free expression of all,
in particular women, journalists and human rights
defenders. That is particularly important in countries
where constitutional order has broken down. I would
mention Burkina Faso, Guinea and Mali, which must
complete their transition process and hold credible
elections within the deadlines agreed with ECOWAS.

S/PV.9384

Stabilization Mission in Mali, particularly in terms of
security. We, too, attach great importance to an orderly
and safe withdrawal of the Blue Helmets, almost half
of whom come from ECOWAS countries, and to the
need for Mali to cooperate with the United Nations to
that end.
France welcomes the fact that the heads of
State have also requested a report on the presence
of private foreign armies in the region. We share
their conviction that the Wagner Group mercenaries
represent a highly destabilizing threat due to the
serious human rights violations they commit under the
guise of fighting terrorism, their well-known strategy
of plundering resources across the African continent
and the incompatibility of that model with democratic
institutions, guarantors of the rule of law.
On the contrary, as the Council knows, France,
alongside the European Union, has long supported
initiatives by countries of the region to ensure their
own security. In that context, I would point to the
Accra Initiative and the Group of Five for the Sahel
Joint Force. With its European partners, France is also
committed to doing more to support the coastal States
of the Gulf of Guinea in the face of the growing terrorist
threat from the Sahel.
France will be attentive to the conclusions of the
ECOWAS extraordinary summit scheduled for next
month in Nigeria, as well as to the recommendations
of the Independent High-Level Panel on Security and
Development in the Sahel, led by the former President
of the Niger, Mr. Mahamadou Issoufou. There is an
urgent need to support regional initiatives and enable
them to benefit from United Nations funding. This is
essential not only for the region, but for the security of
us all.

My second message concerns security. France
remains committed, alongside the countries of
the region, in the fight against terrorism and the
strengthening of maritime security.

Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS),
Mr. Leonardo Simão, as well as the President of the
Commission of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), Mr. Omar Touray, for
their briefings.

We closely followed the ECOWAS summit on 9 July,
at which the heads of State decided to set up a presidential
working group comprised of Benin, Guinea-Bissau and
Nigeria to look more closely at the consequences of the
end of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated

The Head of UNOWAS and his staff are faced
with truly difficult challenges, especially in view of
the current situation in the Sahara-Sahel region. I wish
to begin my statement by expressing our support for
Mr. Simão and the entity that he heads, and we wish

23-2182315/18

S/PV.9384

Peace consolidation in West Africa

him every success in his new post. We believe that
the main objectives of and challenges for UNOWAS
are preventive diplomacy and the provision of good
offices and mediation in the resolution of conflict both
in individual African countries and among them. We
welcome Mr. Simão’s cooperation with countries of
the region as well as the priority he has set, namely,
bringing together the efforts of countries of the region
to counter shared challenges.
The situation in the region of Sahara-Sahel and in
West Africa remains difficult, including at the security
level. This is a problem that is regarded as a priority by
the majority of countries in the region. The epicentre of
tensions remains the border regions of Mali, Burkina
Faso and the Niger, where there is increased activity by
fighters from the Islamic State in the Greater Sahara and
the Jama’at Nasr al-Islam wal Muslimin. The subversive
activities of Boko Haram and Islamic State West Africa
Province cells exacerbate the already difficult situation
in the countries of the Lake Chad Basin. The situation
remains alarming in Burkina Faso and in Chad, where,
as a result of the destabilization in the Sudan, the influx
of refugees has significantly grown, which has worsened
domestic problems. Manifestations of terrorist activity
have also been observed in the coastal West African
countries of Benin, Côte d’Ivoire and Togo.

25/07/2023

sounds completely unacceptable, especially in the light
of the French colonialist history in the region, as well
as in the light of the fact that the well-being of many
European countries, including France, was dependent
specifically on the plundering of such resources.
A difficult situation has unfolded around the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) after 10 years of its
work in Mali. We met with understanding the decision
by the transitional authorities of the Republic of Mali,
announced at the 16 June meeting of the Security
Council (see S/PV.9350), to independently deliver
safety and security to the people in their country, calling
for the withdrawal of MINUSMA, whose mandate
terminated at the end of June. We believe that the
decisions on which political tasks will be transferred
from the Mission to UNOWAS need to be made in
close cooperation with Bamako. The Malian authorities
continue spare no effort to restore the country to
constitutional order in accordance with the modalities
set by ECOWAS. In particular, on 18 June, a referendum
was held on a new constitution. Preparations are under
way for the implementation of further elements of the
agreed electoral cycle.

The humanitarian situation is exceedingly difficult.
The number of internally displaced persons in the
Sahel, as noted in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2023/490), is more than 6 million people. Some
37 million people in the region need humanitarian
assistance to one degree or another. It is clear that
States of the region need to step up cooperation in
order to surmount the humanitarian consequences of
the instability.

We also note the elections that were held in a
number of other countries in the region. Respect for
democratic standards in West African and the Sahel
largely hinges on the security situation in the region.
Stabilization in the situation there, in turn, depends on
the situation in Mali, whose authorities in early 2023
redoubled their efforts to counter illegal armed groups,
and they have already achieved certain successes in this
regard. Clearly, given the worsening terrorist threat, we
should meaningfully help the Malians and not to hinder
their efforts.

Evidently, the attempts by countries of the
European Union (EU) to facilitate stabilization in the
Sahel have not been crowned with success. On the
contrary, as a result of the unilateral termination of the
activities of the French Operation Barkhane and the
EU’s Takuba Task Force in Mali, and subsequently in
the Sahara-Sahel region as a whole, terrorist threats in
the region have only escalated. The repercussions of the
campaign in Libya, carried out by Western countries in
violation of Security Council decisions, continue to be
felt. Despite all of that, Western countries continue to
interfere in the domestic affairs of countries of the Sahel
on all fronts. The announcement by the representative
of France that someone is plundering African resources

We welcome the decisions of the leaders of ECOWAS
designed to establish cooperation with countries in
transitional periods. We also welcome the planned visits
of the President of Benin to Mali, Burkina Faso and
Guinea. We trust that equitable and respectful dialogue
through ECOWAS will help reconcile differences,
restore trust and promote cooperation in the region. We
call on countries outside the region to facilitate these
contacts and refrain from steps that may undermine
this process. I refer, first and foremost, to the spillover
effects into this already volatile region of geopolitical
frictions linked to the highly territorial posture of
Western countries with regard to the development
of cooperation between States of the region and the

16/18

23-21823

25/07/2023

Peace consolidation in West Africa

Russia Federation. In principle, we believe that the
main role in the maintenance of peace and security in
the region falls upon the States of the region, and the
international community should provide those States
with meaningful assistance to that end.
The Russian Federation will continue to participate
constructively, including as a permanent member of the
Security Council, and contribute to collective efforts
aimed at upholding security in the Sahara-Sahel region
and in West Africa, with a key focus on implementation
of the “African solutions for African problems” principle.
We will continue to deliver bilateral support to States
of that continent, including by enhancing the military
capabilities of the armed forces, training military and
law-enforcement personnel and delivering assistance of
a humanitarian nature. All of the foregoing is absolutely
in line with the applicable international legal norms and
is welcomed by the countries of the region.
Mr. Moretti (Brazil): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Leonardo
Simão, and the President of the Commission of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), Mr. Omar Touray, for their briefings and
work for West Africa and the Sahel. On behalf of Brazil,
I wish Mr. Simão every success in his new functions
and assure him of my Government’s support.
We have carefully examined the most recent report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in West
Africa and the Sahel (S/2023/490). As a nation deeply
committed to the prevention and peaceful resolution of
conflicts, we commend the efforts of the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS)
in fostering preventive diplomacy, the exercise of
good offices and advancing political mediation and
facilitation across the region. We also commend the
Office’s emphasis on partnerships with such regional
and subregional organizations as the African Union,
ECOWAS and the African Development Bank. Brazil
fully endorses and promotes this approach, as it holds
the potential for critical synergies and helps to enable
African solutions for African problems.
Delving a little bit into the report’s updates, we
draw attention to three key areas.
First, Brazil welcomes the resilience of democratic
governance in various countries in the region and the
successful conduct of elections. Political participation
under the rule of law is critical.

S/PV.9384

Secondly, however, we echo the concerns expressed
regarding the shrinking of the political space in some
countries in the region. The deterioration of the security
situation due to the persistence of terrorism is also
quite disturbing, and reminds us of the need for longterm, comprehensive and well-coordinated efforts to
fight and defeat that scourge in a sustained manner. The
Security Council must support such endeavours. At the
same time, it is encouraging to see improvements in
the Lake Chad basin region and in maritime security
in the Gulf of Guinea. As a founding member of the
Zone of Peace and Cooperation of the South Atlantic,
Brazil attaches great importance to security in the
Gulf of Guinea and seeks to contribute to it. We stand
ready to further assist efforts to combat piracy such as
bolstering cooperation among navies in the region and
reinforcing the Yaoundé Architecture.
Thirdly, we are concerned about the persistent
humanitarian crisis in several parts of the region,
marked by violence, displacement and food insecurity.
The figure of 6.3 million people displaced is staggering.
Addressing that critical situation requires the combined
efforts of all the countries concerned in the region,
supported by the international community and in
line with the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel.
In conclusion, Brazil reiterates its full support
to UNOWAS as it carries out essential work in its
extensive area of operations. We remain willing to
work alongside all the members of the Security Council
as we help the region strive for peace, stability and
sustainable development in all of its countries.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.
Let me start by congratulating Special Representative
Simão on his appointment and by thanking him and
the President of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Commission, Mr. Touray,
for their briefings. I will make three points, focusing
on democracy, security and humanitarian issues.
First, while welcoming the democratic progress
that has been made in parts of the region, the United
Kingdom is concerned about the democratic uncertainty
and the shrinking civic space in some countries. The
progress towards the restoration of constitutional
Governments in Mali, Burkina Faso and Guinea has
been too slow. We need to redouble our collective
efforts to hold transitional Administrations to account

23-2182317/18

S/PV.9384

Peace consolidation in West Africa

on election timetables. We urge the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) to
continue supporting countries in the conduct of free
and fair elections, and we note with concern the recent
election discrepancies in Sierra Leone.
Secondly, we remain concerned about the Sahel
region’s deteriorating security situation and instability,
including the risk of it spreading to the coastal States.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s forthcoming
transition plan for the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, including as
to how UNOWAS can support Mali’s transition and the
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
The United Kingdom remains committed to
protecting civilians’ rights. That is why we are concerned
about the damage being done by the Russian mercenary
Wagner Group across the region. Its track record proves
that it has not delivered long-term security and indeed
that it cannot. From Mali to Ukraine, and even in Russia
itself, all that the Wagner Group offers is chaos and
destruction, and it is civilians who suffer most. Now
that President Putin has acknowledged that the Wagner
Group is funded by the Russian State after years of
denial, we call on Russia to hold accountable those
responsible for human rights abuses, rapes and killings.
We welcome increased regional security
coordination, including through the Accra Initiative. We
encourage efforts that provide coordinated and targeted

18/18

25/07/2023

support, including those that are complementary to
wider regional initiatives. The United Kingdom is also
reinforcing African security through its contributions
to multilateral peacekeeping and conflict prevention,
our bilateral security partnerships, including with
Ghana and Nigeria, and bilateral humanitarian and
development funding.
Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in the Sahel
remains dire, including pockets of famine in Burkina
Faso. It is essential to ensure that humanitarian actors
are allowed safe and unimpeded access. As we have
heard today, the humanitarian and security challenges
are exacerbated by climate change.
In conclusion, we look forward to continuing to work
in partnership with UNOWAS and ECOWAS to help
address those complex regional challenges and build
regional peace and security. We join other members in
calling for the adoption of a presidential statement to
underpin our support for UNOWAS’s mission.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers. I invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

23-21823
