UNITED

NATIONS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR
th

MEETING: 19 SEPTEMBER 1978
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2086)

......,.. ,. ...,. .... .., .. .,. . .

1

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . , . . , . . , . . . . . . . 1. . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (S/ 12845) . . . . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . ~ . . . . , . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda

SlPV.2086

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcsolutiotls and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2086th
Held in New York
President: Mr. Ilja HULINSKq

on Tuesday,

MEETING
19 September

(Czechoslovakia).

Council, the invitation to participate in the debate will
confer on the Palestine Liberation Organization the same
rights of participation as those conferred on a Member
State when it is invited to participate under rule 37.

Present; The representatives of the following States:
Bolivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon,
Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius,
Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America, Venezuela.

3. Does any member wish to speak on this proposal?
4. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): The United
States delegation has consistently taken the position that
representatives of the Palestine Liberation Organization
could be granted a hearing under rule 39 of the provisional
rules of procedure, but not, as is proposed, with the same
rights of participation as Member States. We are, of course,
aware that this procedure has been used in the past.
However, we believe that the procedure used in the past
and proposed today is not appropriate.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2086)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (S/ 12845)
The meeting was called to order at 12.15 p.m.

5. Members of the Council are familiar with the reasons
for our taking that position in the past, and I do not want
to repeat them, but I request that you should put to the
vote the question of the invitation to the Palestine
Liberation Organization in accordance with the procedure
you have outlined.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (S/12845)

6. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): If no
other :nember wishes to speak, I shall take it that the
Council is ready to vote on the request for participation
now before it,

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
representatives of Lebanon, Israel and the Syrian Arab
Republic have addressed letters to the President of the
Council in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the question. I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion without the right to vote, in conformity
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Bolivia, China, Czechoslovakia,Gabon, India,
Kuwait, Mauritius, Nigeria, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics,Venezuela.

Against: United Statesof America.
Abstaining: Canada,France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

2. I have also received a letter from the representative of
Kuwait, dated 18 September [S/12851/, which reads as
follows:

The proposal was adopted by 10 votes to 1, with
4 abstentions.

“I have the honour to request that, in accordance with
past practice, the Security Council should extend an
invitation to the representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization to participate in the present deliberations of
the Council on the Secretary-General’s report on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.“]

At the invitation of the President,Mr. TuCni (Lebanon)
and Mr. Terzi (Palestine Liberation Organization) took
places at the Council table and Mr. Blum (Israel) and
Mr. El-Choufi (Syrian Arab Republic) took the places
reservedfor them at the side of the Council chamber.

The proposal is not made pursuant to rule 37 or 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure, but, if approved by the
1 Quoted

in Englishby the

1978, at 11.30 am.

7. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
first speakeris the representative of Israel. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make a statement.

speaker.

1

Southern Lebanonwas aimedody againstPLO terrorists
who, having usurped Lebanesesovereigntyin that region,
had turned it into a stagingground for barbaricattacks
againstIsraelicivilians. Our own desirewasidenticalto that
of the Government of Lebanonitself, that is, to seethe
establishmentof full Lebanese
authority andsovereigntyin
SouthernLebanon In witnessof thoseintentions,Israelhas
fulfilled its part in the implementationof resolutions
425 (1978) and426 (1978). Nonethe less,asthe SecretaryGeneralhimselfstatesin his report:

8. Mr. BLUM (Israel): At the outset, I should like tojoin
with previous speakers by paying my respects to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the duties of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I should also like to thank
you for according me the right to take part in the
deliberations of the Council for the first time since my
accreditation to the United Nations.
9. Israel did not intend originally to participate in this
discussion. However, certain statements made in this
chamberyesterday containedsuchdeliberatedistortionsof
the situation in Southern Lebanonthat they now call for a
responseso as to set the record straight. Israelviews with
great concern the present situation in Lebanon. That
concern, which goes well beyond the duration of the
mandate of the United NationsInterim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), sterns both from our own vital securit.yconsiderations and from the very real threat which a large
segment of the Lebanesepopulation faces to its very
existence.

‘I . . . very much remainsto be done before the task
entrusted to UNIFIL by the S:curity Council is fulfilled . . . . Above all, the task of bringing about the
restoration of Lebanesesovereignty and authority in
Southern Lebanonhasonly begun,and evenin the large
areaunder the full control of UNIFIL progress
hasbeen
slow.” [S/12845, para.57.j
13. The Government of Israelsharesthat assessment
and
earnestlyviews the fulfilment of that taskasvital, not only
to the peopleof Lebanonbut to our own citizensaswell.
For over 30 years, our northern bordershavebeenusedto
launch armed attacks againstIsrael and its population.
When the PLO waspermitted entry into SouthernLebanon
some10 years ago, a reign of terror beganfor Israeliand
Lebanesevillagersalike, In the last four yearsalone,there
have been 1,662 individual actsof aggression
arisingfrom
artillery, Katyusha, mortar and other terrorist attacks
mounted against Israel from Lebanon and resulting in
hundredsof Israeli casualties.That situationmust not be
allowedto return.

10. As the Secretary-Generalhasnoted in hisreport, “the
situation in Southern Lebanonis very closelylinked to the
formidable problems of Lebanonas a whole” /S/Z284S,
pun. 591. In recognition of that fact, the Security Council
six months ago entrusted UNIFIL with a broad three-part
mandate designed to restore “the territorial integrity,
sovereignty and political independenceof Lebanonwithin
its internationally recognized boundaries” [resolution
425(2978/j. That mandatewas not intended merely to
paperover the wounds that might open up againassoon as
UNIFIL withdrew. Rather, it wasto help heal the wounds
and to create conditions that would preserveboth peace
and Lebaneseindependencelong after the mandateexpired.
To that end, UNIFIL waschargedwith, first, “confirming
the withdrawal of Israeli forces”, secondly, “restoring
international peace and security“ and, thirdly, “assisting
the Government of Lebanonin ensuringthe return of its
effective authority in the area”[ibid.].

14. This meeting takes place immediatelyfollowing the
successfulconclusionof the truly historic summitmeeting
held at CampDavid on the personalinitiative andunderthe
aegisof the Presidentof the United States.Now that we are
well alongthe arduousroadtowardsajust andlastingpeace
in the Middle East, it is imperative to defusetensions
throughout the areaand to ensurethat the momentumto
peace which has just been given new impetuswill be
maintained.

11. In co-operation with the Israel Defence Forces,
UNIFIL has successfully carried out the first part of its
mandate. The completion of Israel’swithdrawal was confirmed by the UNIFIL Commanderon 13 June 1978 and
15. It is therefore with particular sorrowthat WCview the
recorded in the progressreport of the Secretary-General
of
current actions of certain armed elementsabusingthe
the samedate /S/I262O/AddS]. As the Secretary-General’s
territory of Lebanonasdeliberateattemptsto sabotagethe
spokesmanstated on that day:
peaceprocessin the Middle East.It almostappears
that, the
more successfulthe peaceefforts are, the moreimplacable
“The fourth and last phaseof the withdrawal of the
and disruptive and intransigentbecomethe elementswithin
Israeli forces from Southern Lebanontook placetoday,
the Arab world and beyond that aresoviolently opposedto
I3 June 1978. The withdrawal processwas,verified by
those efforts. The situation in Lebanon is only one
United Nations military observers.By 1700hoursGMT,
manifestation
of their subversiveactivities,and it is surely
all Israeli positions were evacuatedand the Commander
incumbent on the Security Council to avoid adoptingany
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,MajorGeneral G. A. Erskine, confirmed to the Secretary- position or expressingany opinion which might give
encouragement,however remote, to thoseelementsso at
General that the Israeli forceshadcompletely withdrawn
process.The precarioussituafrom Southern Lebanonascalledfor by Security Council odds with the peace-making
tion in Lebanon-which is by no meansconfined to
resolution 425 (1978) , . . . With the withdrawal of the
Israeli forces from all Lebanese
territory and its confjrma- Southern Lebanon-is all too amenableto exploitation with
the aim of diverting us all from the road to peace.The
tion by the Force Commander,the first part of the
mandate entrusted to UNIFIL by the Security Council Council, with its duty to advanceinternationalpeaceand
security, can have no part, either in word or deed,in the
hasbeenfulfilled.”
attemptswhich no doubt wilt be madeto take advantageof
12. As the representativeof Israelstated in this chamber the situation
in Lebanon with a view to disrupting the
last htarch /2071st arzd2074th nzeetiugs/,Israel’saction in
peace-making
processin the Middle East.
2

IG. But there is no need to refer to those intransigent
elements so indirectly, for they themselves make no
attempt to hide their sinister intentions. Indeed, the real
obstacle to full implementation of UNIFIL’s mandate was
outlined by Abu Iyad,- Arafat’s second-in-command and
architect of the murderous attack on the Israeli bus on the
Tel Aviv-Haifa highway in March of this year, in an
interview with the Swiss newspaper Tages Arzeiger published shortly after UNIFIL was established:

and tanks. As to the PL,O, it still constitutes a virtual state
within a State in Lebanon, and the continued presence of
its armed terrorists constitutes a serious threat both to the
authority of the Lebanese Government and to the prospects
for peace through the region. If UNIFIL becomes the thin
end of the wedge whereby the PLO may re-enter Southern
Lebanon, the United Nations Force will have failed in its
task.
22. Thirdly-and this is perhaps the most urgent consideration-the
villagers of Southern Lebanon have genuine
reason to fear for their lives. In view of their own previous
experiences, and in the light of what is at present taking
place in the north, these villagers know that their own
Government does not at present possess the means to
guarantee their security. It is their fear that foreign forces
will enter the South when the United Nations leaves that
has prompted the villagers there to depend on themselves.
For the present, the local Lebanese forces defending the
Christian and Shish areas in the South represent their only
protection and those areas constitute, incidentally, the only
ones in all of Lebanon where Lebanese authority has been
maintained, No credible alternative to those local forces has
yet been presented.

“We have fought against the Arabs and against the
Israelis. We will fight against the United Nations too if
they stand in our way. No one can prevent us from
returning to our bases in Southern Lebanon.”
Such declarations, confirmed by clashes with UNIFIL
troops, the killings by the PLO of soldiers of UNIFIL and
continued PLO infiltration behind UNIFIL lines, cast some
doubt on the somewhat angelic impression of the PLO
conveyed by certain quarters and also to the Council.
17.. Much has been said here about obstacles to the
deployment of the Lebanese Army in Southern Lebanon.
The salient fact in this connexion is that PLO armed
elements were able to infiltrate back or were allowed to
exercise control over certain areas in Southern Lebanon
which continue to bc barred to the Lebanese Army. It is a
well-known fact that units of the Lebanese Army would
r,ot even dare to advance through the coastal sector of Tyre
or through PLO-dominated areas in the central sector of
UNIFIL’s area of operation.

23. Given the dimensions of those problems and the
determined conspiracy by some parties to sabotage the
current peace efforts, the task of UNIFIL, with its
geographically limited mandate and its politically defined
scope, remains awesome indeed, Under the most trying
conditions it has made progress, as witnessed by the relative
calm in the South and by the return of refugees, many,
unfortunately, fleeing the renewed terror in the north. In
these circumstances, my Government wishes to pay tribute
to the courage and performance of the officers and men of
the United Nations Force, and to express our deepest
appreciation to the Members of the Organization which
have contributed contingents to it. Soldiers from Asia,
Africa, Europe, Canada and the Pacific have fulfilled and
are continuing to fulfil their duties with integrity under
conditions of great hardship. Indeed, several of their
number have made the supreme sacrifice. The people of
Israel honour their memory and pray for the speedy
recovery of the wounded. If UNJFlL succeeds in fulfilling
its mandate, their sacrifice will not have been in vain and
they will have made a lasting contribution to the search fol
peace in our troubled region.

18. I speak here not only of Southern Lebanon, which is
experiencing relative quiet compared to the bloodletting in
the north. The Secretary-General’s report correctly states
that “the situation in Southern Lebanon is very closely
linked to the formidable problems of Lebanon as a whole”
[ibid., para. 591. Thus any discussion of Lebanon must aim
at creating a permanent peace and restoring full Lebanese
sovereignty, not only in the South, but throughout the
country, including at Beirut itself.
19. Israel’s position on the resolution adopted last night
by the Council is based on three major considerations.
20. First, as confirmed by the UNIFIL Commander, Israel
has fulfilled its obligations under the first part of the
UNIFIL mandate by having completely withdrawn
its
forces from Lebanese territory. In the process, and I regret
that there was no space to mention this in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, Israel provided significant assistance and
tangible aid to UNIFIL, facilitating its entry into Southern
Lebanon, installing facilities and assisting with communications, supplies and logistics.

24. No one could be surprised at the remarks of the Soviet
representative last night, since his country’s role has been
overtly designed to torpedo the current peace efforts and to
destabilize the region as a whole. In consonance with its
policy of destabilizing the Middle East, the Soviet Union
refused to support the creation of UNIFIL in March,
preferring no doubt to see the agony of Lebanon continue
at the hands of its terrorist protCge’s. J use that phrase
advisedly, for it is no longer a secret that the PLO terrorists
are supplied and even trained by the Soviet Union, both
directly and by proxy. Ever since Soviet vessels were
discovered unloading weapons and missiles for the PLO at
Sidon in January, Soviet assistance to the PLO has reached
Lebanon via Syria. Elaborate terrorist “training institutes”
exist today in the Soviet Union.

21. Secondly, despite Israel’s complete withdrawal,
foreign forces still remain on Lebanese soil, thus impeding
the implementation of the second and third parts of the
UNIFIL mandate It is painfully clear to all observers that
the problems of the Lebanese Government in reasserting its
authority over its territory are not confined to certain
marginal areas of Southern Lebanon. Effective control by
the Lebanese Government is impeded as long as that
Government functions in the gunsights of foreign artiller)
3

25. The larger Soviet design is even more ominous, as
represented by the massive build-up of arms supplies to the
States of the “rejectionist front” since President Sadat’s
visit to Jerusalem last November. According to figures
released by the International Institute of Strategic Studies
in London and the Stockholm International Peace Research
Institute, Syria, Libya and Iraq are augmenting their
already vast arsenals with huge quantities of the most
sophisticated Soviet weapons, including thousands of T-62
and T-72 tanks and hundreds of MIG-23 fighter aircraft, as
well as Sukhoy fighters, Scud surface-to-surface missile
launchers and Komar and Osa missile boats. Indeed, the
artillery rockets and tanks at present pounding Christian
neighbourhoods in Beirut are of Soviet manufacture.

29. Mr. President, I too had not intended to speak in this
debate. The generosity with which you personally conducted yesterday’s superb hearings and, as I understand, the
consultations, and the very swift vote that took place
yesterday on the draft resolution had given total satisfaction to my country and my delegation. We also had felt
that the Secretary-General’s report had said everything that
there was to be said, However, I find myself compelled,
since the debate has been opened to non-members, to make
a few remarks, and I want to initiate them by thanking you
for this opportunity, which stems from your personal
generosity as well as from the very intimate ties that have
always existed between your country and mine and the
understanding that you can have of the problems we are
suffering.

26. In fact the Soviet Union has played a key role in every
outbreak of violence in the Middle East in the past 25
years. As Egyptian President Nasser indicated in his
resignation speech of 9 June 1967, it was Soviet intrigue
that had led Egypt into the 1967 war. The recent intensive
Soviet-Syrian diplomatic and military interchanges are
reminiscent of Soviet attempts to increase tensions on
Israel’s northern border after the 1975 Disengagement
Agreement between Israel and Egypt. Determined to
destroy the peace process, the Soviet Union has aimed at
destabilizing the Middle East, including Lebanon, as it has
attempted in recent years to destabilize other regions of the
world. Only in what it regards as its own sphere of
influence does the Soviet Union employ even more direct
means. In this respect also the Soviet Union appears to have
taught its Syrian allies a lesson in regional expansionism.
Following the Soviet pattern, the Syrians have used the
mask of regional peace-keeping to advance their sinister
aims. The sad record of the Soviet Union in the use or
threat of force in international relations disqualifies it from
making pronouncements 3n the subject of national sovereignty and territorial integrity in this forum.

30. My delegation, as I said, would have had little to add
to the report of the Secretary-General, which has been
implicitly endorsed in substance, particularly its conclusions, by the majority, if not the totality, of the members
of the Council. I wish, however, to be permitted the
following remarks.
31. First and foremost, we wish to be associated with the
Council in expressing our deep appreciation for the
tremendous performance of UNIFIL. The soldiers of peace,
under the very wise and courageous guidance of the
Secretary-General and the superb command of their officers, particularly Major-General Erskine, have given a new
historical dimension and a new meaning to the solidarity
between peace-loving nations and the rule of international
law and order. Never will the people of Lebanon forget the
message of hope, carried by men who have chosen to
imperil their lives, far from their homelands, for the cause
of peace.
32.. My second remark flows directly from this tribute to
the peace-keeping force. When resolutions 425 (1978) and
426 (1978) were adopted in this chamber, I said, in
concluding the debate (2075th nzeetingl, that my Government considered the response of the international community as a challenge-that we all considered it as a
challenge-a challenge to the United Nations and a challenge to the Government of Lebanon. I also expressed our
hope that our people would be able to prove that
independence was for Lebanon more than an empty word.

27. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The
next speaker on the list is the representative of Lebanon, on
whom I now call.
28. Mr.. TUI?NI (Lebanon): It is very fashionable nowadays to quote from the Bible, and I wish to start my brief
address this morning by a quotation from the prophet
Isaiah:

33. Since then, much has happened in Lebanon, and we
feel that we owe it to the Council to admit, with candour
and honesty, that the challenge has not been fully met. Yet,
we are anxious that the Council should be assured that we
do not look upon UNIFIL as a permanent engagement, nor
does Lebanon intend, in any way, to become forever a
“problem country”, a burden unto itself and the world.

“Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be
turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be
esteemed as a forest?
“And in that day shall the deaf hear the words of the
book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity,
and out of darkness.

34. My third remark is precisely about this: if Lebanon is
still today a “problem country”, it is through no fault of its
own. Our ancient land-where the scars left by so many
conquerors are still bleeding, generation after generation,
and year after year-has always been known for its
patience, its resistance, its heroism and a certain ability
always to resurrect and survive.

“.. .
“For the terrible one is brought to nought, and the
scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are
cut off:
“That make a man an offender for a word.“2

35. But let us not be blinded by rhetoric. Today what
Mr. Waldheim so rightly calls “the tragedy of Lebanon” is

2 Isniah, 29: 17-21.
4

far too complex for any one nation to overcome alone. If I
may borrow here the very words of paragraph 59 of the
Secretary-General’s report, I would submit that indeed “the
situation in Southern Lebanon is very closely linked to the
formidable problems of Lebancn as a whole”, which, in
turn, are “inextricably linked with the problem of the
Middle East”.

land, and we think that the time has probably come for us
all to seek a legal and pragmatic expression of international
security on and within our internationally recognized
boundaries comparable at least to, if not more secure than,
what had been found admissible on more belligerent
frontiers.
42. Such arrangements already have their legal framework
laid over the years, since the first Middle East war and in
the signature of the documents creating the Israel-Lebanon
Mixed Armistice Commission (ILMAC) in 1949. In this
connexion we wish to remind the Council that, in the
report of the Secretary-General to the Council /S/12611]
which the Council approved by its resolution 426 (1978), it
is stated very clearly that UNIFIL’s efforts should ultimately lead to the revival of the Armistice Agreement and
of ILMAC. Furthermore, in the Secretary-General’s latest
progress report (S/1262O/Add..S/, it was reiterated that
UNIFIL should ultimately lead to a reactivated II&AC.
Such an arrangement would avoid much rhetoric in the
Council-useless rhetoric, if I may say-about who has
withdrawn from Lebanon, what is withdrawal from Lebanon and how it is possible still to be in Lebanon while
having withdrawn.

36. I submit, however, that this should not be read as an
excuse for carelessness or an alibi for failure. Quite to
the contrary, this, in historical perspective, is in reality the
most factual statement in support of what was said here to
this very Council six months ago and later to the General
Assembly-that Lebanon had been made to pay, through no
fault of its own, for being so deeply cormnitted to the
ideals of peace.
37. Is it not strange indeed that the one and only country
in the Middle East which has refused to wage war should
have suffered, both in terms of casualties and destruction,
so much more than the sum total of the losses of all the
parties to three or four Middle East wars? Is it not also
strange, and paradoxical as well, that this haven of liberty
and democracy should have been transformed not into a
“no man’s land” of peace but into an “every man’s land” of
war, an arena of everyone’s war against everyone and
everyone’s revolution as well? A greater paradox is that
some have taken this tragic reality as a licence to perpetuate
what is now called “the Lebanon war” or, at best, “the
question of Lebanon”.

43. In concluding these remarks, I should also like to say
that this agreement should be made easier to reach by the
fact that Lebanon has never expressed the desire to become
what is called a “confrontation State”, nor has it ever
indicated an interest in so becoming. And I do earnestly
hope that those words will be taken in the spirit in which
they are being said.

38. Let it here be said, and clearly understood, that
Lebanon is not negotiable; nor do we consider it a
dispensable entity. So strong is our will to survive in
freedom and in peace, that we refuse to be constantly made
to choose only between two fatal options, both suicidal:
explosion or invasion.

44. That brings me to my fifth and final remark. We
appreciate the Secretary-General’s reasons for saying:
“It is difficult to envisage a full and satisfactory over-all
solution of the problems of Lebanon except in the
framework of a general settlement of the Middle East
problem or, at the very least, of a significant degree OF
movement towards such a settlement.” /S/12845,
para. S9.J

39. Yesterday many of us saw and Iistened to the
President of the United States address both Houses of
Congress. I have the honour here to quote what. the
President said as a testimony to this attitude:

Yet, we submit also that this should be read as complemented by further statements speaking-at random, inter
ah, and sometimes by signals and symbols-of the “disastrous” consequences of UNIFIL’s withdrawal, on the one
hand, and on the other hand of the “complexities” of the
problems in Lebanon, the “psychological climate”, the
need “to bring about a change” in the way people “view
not only each other but also the outside worId” and “the
degree of suspicion, fear, violence and even fatalism which
prevails”-let alone the importance of stressing the task of
protecting “the rights and security of all the inhabitants”.

‘We must also join in an effort to bring an end to the
conflict and terrible suffering in Lebanon . . [We must]
try to move toward a solution of the problem in Lebanon
which is so vital to us and to the poor people in Lebanon
who have suffered so much.”
40. This leads me to my fourth remark, which is an appeal
to the Security Council-a body which we have always
respected-that Lebanon should not be made the object of
debates and quarrels that go much further beyond the
Lebanese question. On the contrary, Lebanon should be
protected, and the problem of peace and the fate of peace
in Lebanon should be resolved in both a more practical and
stable and much wiser manner than some statements here
have indicated.

45 We feel sure that no injustice is being done here to
Mr,, Waldheim’s political wisdom and acumen by reading
into his remarks a more explicit warning-I repeat, a more
explicit warning-than he probably wanted to deliver. This
warning, we submit, should be addressed to each and every
one of us, individually as well as collectively. For if
conditions in Lebanon no longer appear, as they did six
months ago, to constitute a real “danger and threat to
international peace and security”, yet they still constitute a

41. I have no intention of going into rhetoric nor of
answering any of the speakers. But I want to assert here
before the Council, on behalf of my Government, that we
have no intention of maintaining the United Nations
Interim Force permanently on our borders or inside our
5

51. In my Government’s letter to the Presidentof the
Council dated 5 September[S/12&351 there wasaninvita.
tion to seekto redefine the mandate of UNIFIL so asto
ensurethe full implementationof the objectivessetforth itI
resolutions425 (1978) and 426 (1978). Our requestwasno
more than what the Secretary-Generalhashitnselfsaid.I do
not wish to enter into a futile debate on the factsstatedin
my letter aswell asin the report of the Secretary-General
or in explanations presented to the Council. However,I
should like to say the following. The Council was we11
inspired in setting a specific date, midway through the
period of the secondmandate6f UNlFlL, for anassessment
of the situation and to examine what further stepsshould
be taken

“‘major obstacle to a just settlemerlt of the Middle East
Lrisis”, which in turn keeps the world on the brink of war.
It is again probably paradoxical yet none the less true that,
while there cannot be peace in Lebanon without
a
settlement of the Middle East crisis, there also cannot and,
indeed, will not be peace in the Middle East without or
even before peace is attained in Lebanon. For peace in
Lebanon cannot, should not and, indeed, will not, I hope,
wait for a comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle
East, much as we all want that peace.
46. Six months ago, Lebanon cried in agony to the
Security Council and to the world: “let my people live”,
We then thought that the world had already responded, as
this Council had. But since then, some of my people have
been dying every day, more and more every day, every day
of every weekof every month.

52. Not much can be achievedin two months,or evenin
four, but a lot can certainly be undertakenthat might
encourage us all either to pursue UNIFIL or to deploy
further political efforts, or a combination of both, let alone
the possibility of seeking new avenues of thought and
action

47. Many, indeed, may have thought it convenient that
Lebanon should die, and some may even have thought it
possible.We are meeting here to prove that it shall not be
so. Indeed, the Council’s new resolution should be read as
such,asan act of faith and a new leaseof life.

53” While expressingmy Government’sappreciationto the
Council for its resolution, allow me to say that we find in
its positive presentationgreater encouragementthan in the
condemnationthat we would have beenjustified in seeking,
Israel’s responsibility in preventing the total implementation of the previous resolutionsis so clear,sopatent, that it
hardly needsfurther emphasis.

48. Lebanon has had more than its share of death and
desolation,of human suffering and bloodshed, and of the
destruction not only of life and of cities but also of the
very fabric of its society and polity. Let us therefore
recreate Lebanon, not by quarrelling over rights and
responsibilitiesand all the Pharisaic interpretations of life
and death, but by allowing the Lebaneseto unite again,to
rediscover their national identity, to regain their total
sovereignty and independence, and freely and fully to
implement themselveswhat the international Organization
hasbeencalling for.

54. Let us therefore hope that the coursechosenby the
Council will be an inducementto confidence: confidencein
international law and order, confidence in the United
Nations, confidence in the effectivenessof United Nations
forces in providing peace and security for all and their
ability to protect-and aloneto protect-the right of people
to live and to determinetheir own future.

49. We all here know the hazards and the glories of
peace-keeping-allforms of peace-keeping,past, presentand
future.

55. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russh): I
thank the representative of Lebanon for the kind words
which he addressedto my country in connexionwith the
traditional links of friendship and co-operationthat have
always existed between Lebanon and Czechoslovakia.
I
thank him alsofor the very kind words that he addressed
to
mepersonally.

50. Returning once more to the Secretary-General’sobscrvations and the facts brought to the Council’s attention, we
feel justified in saying that bringing peace to Lebanon, in
particular to Southern Lebanon, is more a “political”
matter than a military one, whence our earlier assertion
that the settlement of Lebanon’scrisis must be political as
well. The mission, so unique in character, of the “soldiers
for peace” should thus be conducive to a more comprehensive peace-keepingeffort. Such an effort is probably what
the Secretary-Generalhas hinted at in his report on the
work of the Organization for the year 1978, where he
clearly states:

56. The next speakeris the representativeof the Syrian
Arab Republic. I invite him to take a placeat the Council
tabie and to makehis statement.
57. Mr. EI ;HC ,‘FI (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President, alIp. me first of all to extend to you and to the
friendly people of Czechoslovakiaour warmestcongratulations on your assumption of the presidencyof the
Security Council. We are confident that in this capacityyou
will guide the deliberationsof this important international
body to meaningfulconclusionsin the causeof peaceand
security the world over.

“The strength of a peace-keepingforce lies not in its
armsbut in its peaceful and disciplined approach and in
the political consensuswhich lies behind it. To resort to
force is the last and least desirable course for a pcacekeeping force. Negotiation and persuasionmust be the
primary method for achieving its objective. llowever, if
such methods prove unavailing, the Security Council may
well have to consider what other approachesare open to
it under the Charter.“’

58. We all know, asdoesthe world at large,who it isthat
has created obstaclesthat have prevented UNIFIL from
carrying out its mandatein accordancewith the resolution
of the Security Council. Not even the Councilcanhide,by
carefully selected wording, the fact that Israel merely

5.

6

pretended to accept resolution 425 (197Q and did not
hesitate to sabotage its full implementation, for, while the
resolution called for complete and unconditional withdrawal of its for&s from Lebanon, Israel instead handed
over some of the positions under its control to irregular and
illegal militia that had already been denounced by the
Lebanese Government.

63. The PRESIDENT (interpretation porn Russian): The
next speaker is the representative of the PalestineLiberation Organization, upon whom I now call.
64. Mr. TERZI (PalestineLiberation Organization): Comrade President, I am really honoured to speakwhen you are
occupying the presidential chair of the Security Council
and it is consideringa vital matter that affects not only the
status and the lives of people in Lebanon but the entire
situation in the Middle East.

59. Israel thus exacerbated a situation already fraught
with tension and danger and, as a result of such intransigence, many lives, including the lives of UNIFIL personnel, were lost or seriously endangered. This behaviour on
the part of Israel is not exceptional in the posture it has
adopted ever since it came into existence as a Zionist entity
in the Middle East. Its aggressive conduct and consistent
record of trampling upon other people’s rights merely flow
from its Zionist character. We share with the international
community the hope that one day the Israelis will recognize
the danger of Zionism, an ideology that poisons not the
Arab area alone but the morality of the Israelis in Palestine
as well. Zionis1n has transformed part of world Jewry into
neo-Nazis. The promised land of the preachings of the Bible
and other holy books is a dream, a concept relevant to at1
human beings, especially the oppressed; but Nazi zionism
transformed that dream into an instrument of hatred; it
made of this dream a myth for the perpetuation of
chauvinism and Nazi supremacy, a concept relevant only to
oppressors.

65. We are not in Lebanon becausewe want to be in
Lebanon: we are in Lebanon becausewe have been driven
from our own homesat bayonet point. Our ambition is to
go back to our homes.We fully support the bannersthat
were carried around in some streets: “Palestinians, go
home”. This is exactly what we want, and this is exactly
what we are fighting for.
66 I shall confine my statement at the moment to the
report of the Secretary-General,and I wish to state at the
outset that the Secretary-General and his staff had the
courage and the guts, if I may say so, to dot the i’s and
cross the t’s. The Secretary-General and his staff have
clearly said:
“The fact that the Israel Defence Forces”-ironically
they call themselves defence forces when they are
invading Lebanon-“banded over control of the border
area to de #b&o armed groups”-and here I would much
rather have seenthe term “unautborized armed personnel” instead of “de facto armedgroups”-“rather than to
UNIFIL has continued to make impossible the full
deployment of UNIFIL and the restoration of the
authority of the LebaneseGovernment in the whole area
of operation.” [S/12845, para. Gl.]

60. Listening to the representative of Israel, we all
witnessed an excellent act of flagrant distortion, when that
expansionist himself, whose Government still occupies part
of my country, catted Syria expansionist. It is still more
ironic that the Israeli representative is complaining about
Syria’s acquiring enough armaments to defend itsell’ against
the permanent Israeli aggression. When the Israeli rcpresentative wants to cite the armaments of others he must
respect this international body and remember that his
Zionist State has become a true storehouse of lethal
armaments, probably including nuclear arnlamcnts.

67 Now, this in itself should have been sufficient for the
Council to think of taking more action than just renewing
for four months or three months or six months the
deployment of UNIFIL, action that is guaranteed in the
Charter. What should the Council do with so-calledStates
that owe their presence to the United Nations? The
remedy is there in the Ct1arter: there is something called
sanctions.We cannot permit those raciststo invade neighbouring countries and go scat free.

61. As regards the Syrian mission in Lobanun, WCarc there
at the requestol‘ the legal Lebmse
Government. We are
strivingto do all tl1at we can to carry out our nationaland
humanitarianmissionin the shortest possibletime. It is
indeedironic and blatant hypocrisy for the Zionist racist
entity of Israelto claim humanistic intentions in Lebanon.
Weare all awareof how the Palestinianpeople and other
Arabs have been treated--or, rather, mistreated-by the
Zionists in Palestine. We believe that the problem in
Southern Lebanon can be resolved, notwithstanding the
over-allconflict in the Middle East. It is a problemthat can
be solvedbecause,for the first time, the Security Council
hasintervenedand stated in clear terminology that Israel,
the aggressor,must withdraw from the territory of a
sovereign,
independentMember State.

68. Let me be frank. The United States drafted the first
resolution, but I wish to tell the representative of the
United States, through you, Sir, that its duty doesnot end
with the presentation of a paper, its duty is to seeto it that
the contents of that paperhave beenimplelnented.
69. But what have we seen? The United Statescontinues
to supply Israel with lethal weapons-cluster bombs, bil.
lions of dollars’worth of armaments-to kill more and more
people. In the interim, and during the presenceof UNIFIL
in the areaof operation, the racist forcesattacked Lebanon,
and we have sent a letter to the Secretary-Generalconcerning another raid by Israeli planes. They were American
planespiloted by Israelis;maybe there were Americans as
we]]; how do ] know? But those planes maintain arid
continue their missionof destruction and genocide.

62. We reiterate, therefore, that the Council must dischargeits responsibility for the maintenanceof peaceand
securityto ensurethat the LebaneseGovernment will be
enabledto exerciseits full legal authority over its own
sovereign
territory.
7

70. Of course, we are not surprised. Not only are the
Zionist racists
criminally-minded, but at the head of that
group is the most notorious criminal, Begin, someone who
took pride, and still takes pride, in his book, TIze Revolt,
about the massacre of Deir Yassin But, naturally, the world
seems to forget. At the White House the other night they
gave a wonderful show, the Menachem Begin Show,
producer Jimmy Carter, and there were other participants.
This will not erase that image of the criminal who
massacred our children and women 30 years ago.

think of renewing UNIFIL perpetually without achieving an
aim. The aim should be the confirmed and effective
withdrawal of Israel from Lebanese territory-and
not its
remaining there by proxy-so
that the Lebanese may
exercise their authority and sovereignty over their own
territory.

71. In the Secretary-General’s
report we do not see a
reference to a human aspect: the return of those who
inhabited Southern Lebanon before the invasion. We have
been told that they have not yet been enabled to return to
their homes. This is not surprising. The Security Council, in
June 1967, in its resolution 237 (1967) which was one of
the consequences of the June 1967 aggression against the
Arabs by the racist Zionists, called upon the Government of
Israel

76 Mr. IHARLAMOV
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretation fivm Russian): I had not intended to
speak, but since one of the previous speakers has gone
somewhat beyond the context of the question we are
discussing, I am obliged to make a few brief comments.

75, The PRESIDENT (interpretation jkom Russian): I call
on the representative of the Soviet Union, who has asked to
speak in exercise of his right of reply.

77. Unfortunately, the new representative’of Israel has
repeated the old worn-out gross distortions of the aims of
Soviet foreign policy in that part of the world. If Israel
were to pursue a policy such as or at least closely aIong.the
lines of the policy pursued by the Soviet Union, I am
profoundly convinced that there would have been peace in
the Middle East long ago. Furthermore, it would have been
a durable peace and a peace serving the interests of all
peoples in that part of the world.

“to ensure the safety, welfare and security of the
inhabitants of the areas where military operations have
taken place and to facilitate the return of those inhabitants who have fled the areas since the outbreak of
hostilities”.
As the Council knows very well, since 1967 those inhabitants have not been enabled to return.

78. The representative of Israel could be asked marry
questions, but I shall simply confine myself to the
following. Who occupied the Arab territories and who is
still in those territories even today--in the territory of Sinai,
the Golan Heights and in other places? Who expelled the
Palestinians from their homes and turned them into a
homeless people-these talented and hard-working people
who for many years have been suffering as a result of
Israel’s actions? Who invaded Lebanon and inflicted new
sufferings and privations on that country and its people?

72. What is more tragic is that we note in a document that
appeared yesterday, a document which is called “A
Framework for Peace in the Middle East Agreed at Camp
David”, how they view the return of those Palestinians and
others who were thrown out of their homes. They state
that a committee made up of Egypt, Israel, Jordan and the
so-called self-governing authority which is to be established
under the bayonets of the forces of occupation, will decide
on the modalities of the admission of persons displaced
from the West Bank and Gaza in 1967. But there is
something more dangerous there. That is subject to
measures which are to be taken to prevent disruption and
disorder. Now what does that mean? That is a violation
and a complete disregard of resolution 237 (1967). We do
sincerely hope that our brothers, both Palestinians and
Lebanese, who have lived in the area of operation will be
permitted immediately to return to their homes.

79.. Here the representative of Israel expressed regret and
spoke about humanitarian purposes. But that is something
like the tears which are shed by a crocodile when he is
devouring his victim.
80. We can think of other questions to ask as well, but we
could hardly expect the representative of Israel actually to
reply satisfactorily to such questions.

73. Another matter that has been brought up here is the
financial aspect, The Secretary-General is concerned about
this and he is justified. There are financial aspects. Now
why should the international community bear that brunt?
It is the criminal who has been convicted of his crime that
should pay for his crime. And if not only the criminal-if
the criminal is such a poor fellow-then
the accessory
before the fact, during the fact and after the fact should
also be responsible for bearing those expenses. Let me make
myself clear. It is the Government of the United States that
should bear the expense and not the international community.

81.. The Soviet Union, as everybody knows, including the
representative of Israel, is not seeking any spheres of
influence or any possessions. It is not seeking anything of
that sort either in the Middle East or in any of the other
parts of the world which were referred to by the representative of Israel. Members of the Council also know the
proposal that we made for a comprehensive settlement of
the problem of the Middle East, including ways and means
of ensuring the security of Israel itself, One cannot get
away from that. Israel is trying to complicate the comprehensive settlement. Its aim is quite clear. It is trying to
poison the atmosphere in the Middle East and prevent a
comprehensive settlement. However, I am deeply convinced
that such a policy will not succeed Sooner or later a
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East, responding to

74. I am content that my colleague, the representative of
Lebanon, is satisfied that the duration of UNIFIL has been
extended four months. I agree with him that we should not
8

the interests of a durable peace and the vital interests of the
87. There can be no onehere who hasnot beenappalled
peoples of that area, Will in fact be found. As regards the
and outraged by Syrian excessesin Beirut and northern
assistanceof the Soviet Union 10 the national liberation Lebanon,in whatever languagethey havereadof them and
movement, its purpose is also well known. It has one whateversourcesthey haveat their disposal.
purpose and One PurPose only, namely, to help those
peoplesto achieveindependence,freedom and peace.That
88. Recently, Newsweek magazinereported that a fullis a noble purposeand nobody will be able to distort the
in Beirut
real facts by false rhetoric, not even the new representative scaleSyrian assaulton Christianneighbourhoods
left hundredsdead, mostly civilians, and resulted in the
of Israel,
worst fighting sincethe civil war endedtwo yearsago:
82. The PRESIDENT (i?Uerpretationfrom Russian):The
representativeof Israel has askedto speakin exerciseof his
right of reply. I invite him to take a olace at the Council
table andto makehis statement.
83. Mr. BLUM (Israel): As might have beenexpected,the
opponentsof peacein the Middle East have done everything possiblein this chamber today to escalateverbal
tensionswith a view to bringing about the disruption of the
spirit of peace-making.Israelwill not assisttheseopponents
of peaceand we therefore refrain from being drawn into
futile exchanges
with them
84. The representative of the Soviet Union is understandablyunhappy with the exposure of the hypocritical
attitude of his country. He must surely know by now that
no amount of bullying and invective in this chambercan
succeedin intimidating the people of Israel.
85. As for Syria, its intentions are clear enough,andfrom
official statements they appear to be rather broader in
scopethan thoseof the PLO. Anyone who doesnot ignore
the facts knows that the challengeto the independenceand
sovereigntyof Lebanonis not somethingwhich beganjust a
few monthsago, and he knows that it doesnot comefrom
the Lebaneseof the South. The threat to the independence
and sovereigntyof Lebanonhas come time andagainfrom
the samedirection. In the words of the Syrian Minister for
Information, Ahmad Iskandar, “Lebanon will not escape
from the destined unity of Syria and Lebanon”. The
Presidentof Syria himself told the newspaperAI-Anwar
that “Syria and Lebanonare one singlecountry”.
86. Under the transparentguiseof an inter-Arab deterrent
force, the 30,000 Syrian troops who entered Lebanon
during the Lebanesecivil war are gradually implementing
the old Syrian design for Al Surriya Al-Kubra-Greater
Syria. In pursuit of that plan, which would ultimately also
embraceIsrael and Jordan, Syria is determined to destroy
the peaceprocessinitiated last November and hasopenly
vowed to do so. If in PresidentAssad’sown words “Syria
and Jordan are one nation, one homeland,one army”, and
“Palestine is southern Syria”, then Syria clearly has no
interest in a genuine peace settlement in the Middle East.
Until the present Syrian leadershipis disabusedof such
outdated expansionist notions, and until it agreesto
participatein negotiationstowards a just and lastingpeace
in the Middle East based upon
secure and recognized
boundariesfor all parties including Israel and Lebanon,we
have no choice but to view Syrian activities in Lebanon
with the greatestsuspicionand asa gravethreat to our own
security.
9

“On Wednesdaynight,” reportedNewsweekcorrespondent Raymond Carroll, “the Syrians pumped an
estimated1,200 shellsinto the Christianzone, and next
morning1risked a trip to oneof them-Ashrafiyya. It was
quite apparentthat the shellinghad beenindiscriminate.
Apartment buildings had huge holes pumped through
their sidesby direct rocket hits. Hospital corridorswere
lined with beds bearingwoundedpeople, most of them
old men, women and children. Few looked able-bodied
enoughto be militia men.”
The International Committee of the Red Cross,an organ
usually most reticent about issuingprotests,nevertheless
statedthat it had “vigorously protestedagainstthe usein a
denselypopulated town of weaponscausingconsiderable
loss of life among the civilian population”. And the
LebaneseAmerican League,representing2.5 million Lebanesein 75 organizations throughout the United States,
recently wrote to PresidentCarter in the following words:
“We protest vehemently the savagekilling of the
innocent and unarmed Lebanesecivilian population by
the Syrian Army. The massmurderof young men in the
Beka’sValley this past week, and now the unprovoked
and indiscriminate shelling of the densely populated
residentialareasof Beirut, areagainclearproof that the
Syrian Army can no longerbe considereda peace-keeping
force in Lebanon. Whatever may have been President
Assad’soriginal intention, he is now engagingin systematic destructionof the Lebanese
Christiancommunity in
the worst traditions of barbarism.We believe that the
integrity and sovereignty of Lebanonwill be restoredif
all Syrian so-called peace-keepingforces and armed
Palestiniansare put out of Lebanon. Meanwhile an
enlargedpeace-keepingrole shouldbe entrusted to the
United Nations forces until a new Lebanesearmy is
formed.”
89. Surely the Council cannot turn a blind eye to what it
knows, what it must know, are Syria’s actions and
intentionsin Lebanon.
90. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian):The
representativeof the Syrian Arab Republicwishesto speak
in exerciseof his right of reply. I invite him to take a place
at the Counciltable and to makea statement.
91.. Mr. EL-CHOUFI (Syrian Arab Republic):I really did
not want to take any more of your precious time,
Mr. President,or the time of this important international
body, but lhe remarks we have heard from the representative of Israelobligeme to makea few remarks.

92. It is strange that the representative of Israel should
show such interest in preventing more bloodshed in
Lebanon. He could have shown this same interest in other
instances, when his armed forces, following invasion,
occupied Lebanon, and when his armed forces occupied-as
they still do-other Arab territories in Syria, in Jordan and
in Egypt.
93. We are all looking for a comprehensive peaceful
settlement in the Middle East. We have not changed our
position. All the Israeli accusations and distortions cannot

make Syria change its position concerning its willingness for
there to be a peaceful settlement in the Middle East.
94. Lebanon has gone through a tragedy, a great tragedy,
and it is the responsibility of the world community to help
Lebanon to solve this problem. Syria is doing its part. We
do hope we are doing it in the best interests of the
Lebanese people and the cause of peace in general.
The meeting rose at 1.40 p.m.

/

10
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S.

1.00

(or equivalent

in other currencies)

7%70005-February

1980-2,2~~

I
