United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9016

th meeting
Wednesday, 13 April 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Eckersley/Ms. Jacobs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lamce
Mr. Burkhardt
Ms. Xue Ailong
Mr. Samson
Mr. Doumbeneny Ndzigna
Ms. Tenkorang
Mr. Setia
Ms. Trant
Ms. Nthoki
Mrs. Vásquez Muñoz
Ms. Tranoey
Mr. Kuzmin
Mr. Almazrouei
Ms. Kroeker-Maus

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Accountability as prevention
Ending cycles of sexual violence in conflict
Letter dated 5 April 2022 from the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General (S/2022/293)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-31822 (E)
*2231822*

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The meeting was resumed at 3.05 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collar of the
microphone will prompt speakers to bring their remarks
to a close after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to express my
appreciation to the United Kingdom for convening
today’s important open debate.
Despite all the prevention efforts, there continue to
be alarming reports of sexual violence in conflict. Most
recently, the Security Council heard worrying reports
of sexual violence in Ukraine during briefings on 5 and
11 April (see S/PV.9011 and S/PV.9014). While Japan
finds those reports particularly disappointing, we are
determined to redouble our efforts to assist national
endeavours to ensure that the perpetrators are held
accountable and in particular that survivors receive
support through the following measures.
First, we will bolster accountability efforts. Japan
has provided financial support since 2014 to the work
of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, which reports to the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict. The Team of Experts
has conducted work in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, the Central African Republic, Somalia and
Iraq in support of investigations and prosecutions,
legislative reform and capacity-building for judicial
and security authorities. Its efforts in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo led to the prosecution of the
leader of an armed group following a mobile court
hearing in January 2021.
Secondly, we will provide support to survivors
through a multilateral framework. Japan became a
member of the Board of Directors of the Global Fund
for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence in
2020. We will be contributing €2 million to the Global
Fund in addition to the €4 million we have contributed
to date, to ensure access to reparations and redress
for survivors. Japan has supported the International
Criminal Court Trust Fund for Victims since 2014 and
has earmarked most of its contributions for support to
survivors of sexual and gender-based violence.
2/53

13/04/2022

Lastly, we will advocate on a global level for
enhanced international cooperation to facilitate access
to justice, redress and assistance for all survivors of
sexual violence in conflict, post-conflict and other
fragile situations, including post-disaster and postpandemic situations. Japan is seriously concerned
about the growing number of alarming reports of sexual
violence and therefore calls on all Member States to take
effective action to protect and respond to survivors’
needs. We remain fully committed to working with the
United Nations and other partners to tackle the issue of
conflict-related sexual violence on a global scale.
Before I conclude, I would like to respond to the
inadequate statement that was made earlier today by one
of the members of the Council. I think that we should
be humble and honest in squarely facing what has been
done in the past as well as what is being done now. I will
not repeat our position on the issue that was raised, as it
has been explained on countless occasions. I would just
like to reiterate that Japan has been unwavering in its
significant contributions to the universal values of the
international community since the end of the Second
World War, upholding and improving human rights. I
hope that most Member States concur with that.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Fifield (Australia): I want to thank the United
Kingdom for convening today’s open debate and for its
continued leadership on the problem of sexual violence
in conflict. Australia also thanks today’s briefers and
welcomes the analysis and recommendations in the
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/272).
Women and girls continue to face appalling levels of
sexual violence in conflict-affected settings, including
Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Myanmar, Syria and Iraq. We
are also concerned about the increasing reports of acts
of sexual violence against women and girls in Ukraine.
Australia fully supports the work of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine,
which will investigate all the alleged violations and
human rights abuses.
We are gravely concerned about the ongoing use
of military interventions at the expense of political
processes, and about the devastating and disproportionate
consequences that such military action has for women
and girls. The ongoing targeting of women peacebuilders
and human rights defenders, including through sexual
violence and harassment, is unacceptable. We must
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

ensure that women, girls, men and boys affected by
sexual violence have access to comprehensive support,
including sexual and reproductive health services and
psychosocial, legal and other crisis support services.
Australia is proud to partner with the International
Planned Parenthood Federation, the United Kingdom,
the United Nations Population Fund, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the International Rescue Committee, as well as
international non-governmental organizations such as
the Danish Refugee Council, to provide those support
services. For our part, our second national action plan
on women and peace and security, for the period 20212031, uses a survivor-centred approach to reducing
sexual and gender-based violence and increasing access
to justice.
In almost all the settings covered in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, impunity for crimes of conflictrelated sexual violence remains the norm and the pace
of justice unacceptably low and slow. Gender advisers
are critical to embedding gender-responsive planning
and resourcing into peace operations and advancing
prevention, protection, compliance, accountability
and justice for survivors. Australia trains and deploys
military and civilian gender advisers on military, police
and humanitarian relief and recovery, as well as crisismanagement operations and missions. We also support
the Elsie Initiative and the UN-Women Female Military
Officers Course, both of which promote the meaningful
representation of uniformed women across all levels of
United Nations peace operations. Australia is also a
founding member of the Call to Action on Protection
from Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies. We are
proud to be working with diverse regional and global
partners in that endeavour.
Australia strongly condemns the use of sexual
violence and rape as weapons of war. Efforts to prevent
and resolve conflict cannot be separated from efforts to
address gender-based violence. We must do more. If we
are to fulfil the promise of the women and peace and
security agenda, we must put an end to sexual violence
against women and girls in conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): I would like to thank
the United Kingdom for organizing today’s important
debate. My special thanks go to today’s civil-society
briefers, Nadia Murad, Mariana Karkoutly and

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Hilina Berhanu, for sharing their stories and for the
indispensable work that they do.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself
with the statements to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union and the LGBTI Core Group, as well
as the statement delivered earlier today on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see
S/PV.9016).
We strongly support the mandate and the work
of Pramila Patten, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. As
the Special Representative said earlier this morning,
the world has seen protracted conflicts intensify and
new crises unfold despite the Secretary-General’s
call for a global ceasefire two years ago. The Russian
Federation’s unjustified invasion of Ukraine is another
example of grave violations of international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations. We are
appalled by the testimonies of the sexual violence
perpetrated by Russian armed forces against Ukrainian
women and girls. Those crimes cannot and will not go
unpunished. We must do more if we are to strengthen
accountability for sexual violence in conflict and help
to prevent such violence. Allow me to highlight three
key areas where action is needed.
First, the response to sexual violence should
prioritize the diverse voices and needs of survivors, and
I am in full agreement with my colleague from Australia
that those priorities should include their access to
essential services for sexual and reproductive health and
rights, as well as mental health services. As Ms. Murad
put it so clearly, survivors’ voices are key prerequisites
for enhancing access to justice and accountability.
Best practices from our own programmes under the
survivor-centred approach include setting up dialogues
with survivors and local leaders to address the root
causes of sexual violence.
Secondly, we need to keep investing in the role of
civil society as key enablers of democracy and the rule
of law. Across the globe, we are seeing cases where
civic space is being restricted and women human rights
defenders are being attacked or even murdered. As a
result, the lives of people in settings such as South Sudan,
Libya, Myanmar and Yemen are at risk, and therefore
so are their vital roles in monitoring and responding to
sexual violence in conflict. The Netherlands contributes
to the strengthening of civil society through dedicated
women and peace and security programmes and by

22-318223/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

providing financial support to the NGO Working Group
on Women, Peace and Security. However, we — all of
us — should do more.
Thirdly, let me join others in stressing the need
to strengthen the mechanisms for holding those who
perpetrate sexual violence accountable, both at the
national and international levels. Impunity perpetuates
conflict-related sexual violence. We therefore call on
national authorities to strengthen the rule of law for
prosecuting sexual and gender-based violence. I want
to assure everyone that the Kingdom of the Netherlands
will always be a strong supporter of efforts to prevent
and eliminate sexual violence in conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.
Ms. Jurečko (Slovenia): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for organizing this open debate and
the briefers for their briefings and testimonies.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
statement delivered on behalf of the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security (see S/PV.9016), and
would like to make some additional remarks in its
national capacity.
The international normative framework on
conflict-related sexual violence is clear. The Security
Council condemns sexual violence in conflict, which
presents a threat to international peace and security
when used as a tactic of war. The reports of persistent
sexual and gender-based violence in conflicts and the
low level of compliance with the international norms
by the parties to those conflicts are therefore deeply
alarming. We need to do more to bridge the divide
between the normative practices and the state of play on
the ground. There is a climate of impunity, associated
especially with State collapse, that sadly has persisted,
and accountability for crimes committed remains low.
Every State has a responsibility to prevent conflictrelated sexual violence and ensure accountability for
such acts. We need to strengthen knowledge about
conflict-related sexual violence, even before armed
conflicts emerge, in order to ensure a better rendering
of justice and assistance to survivors.
A survivor-centred approach to preventing and
responding to conflict-related sexual violence is
essential. Access to sexual and reproductive health
services and psychosocial and economic support
4/53

13/04/2022

must be part of the comprehensive assistance to
victims of sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict. Such an approach also calls for the full and
meaningful participation of women and survivors in
decision-making processes. Discriminatory practices
are always precursors to violence, and more should be
done to eliminate them entirely, including by eliminating
multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination and
violence in times of peace. Existing inequalities are only
further deepened in times of conflict and at such times
access to information is of the utmost importance. We
must create conditions for victims and survivors that
facilitate the reporting of sexual violence and enable
them to relay their experiences without judgment or
stigma. Deploying women’s protection advisers to
peace operations is therefore crucial.
Slovenia has reaffirmed its commitments to the
global initiative of the Call to Action on Protection
from Gender-Based Violence in Emergencies. We
are committed to advocating for gender equality, as
well as preventing and responding to gender-based
violence. We continue to finance projects on genderbased violence in emergencies. For the period from
2020 to 2022, we have allocated €400,000 to support a
humanitarian project focused on gender-based violence
and awareness-raising about child marriage. Slovenia
also supported the response of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to sexual violence in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We are appalled by the growing numbers of
atrocities and war crimes committed by the Russian
armed forces in a number of occupied territories of
Ukraine. We condemn the conflict-related sexual
violence that has been reported in Ukraine. It is barbaric
and uncivilized. It is a war crime and a crime against
humanity. It is our duty and responsibility to step up
efforts to ensure full compliance with international
human rights and humanitarian law and accountability
for violations of those laws. That will help to create a
more equal world and one that is closer to being free
from violence and impunity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): Lithuania aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered on behalf of the
European Union and would like to add the following
remarks in its national capacity.
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

I would first like to thank Ms. Murad, Ms. Karkoutly
and Ms. Berhanu for their very powerful messages.
I also want to thank the United Kingdom team for
organizing today’s timely and very important event.
Since the first day of Russia’s unprovoked and
unjustified war on independent Ukraine, it has been
evident that Russia is directly attacking the civilian
population and civilian objects, including hospitals,
medical facilities, schools and shelters, and that it
is committing atrocities and war crimes. As in any
other war, women and children are the ones who are
primarily affected and the most vulnerable. For many
reasons, including deeply rooted gender discrimination
and inequality predating the conflict, women and girls
continue to be targeted by weapons of war such as
sexual violence, including rape.
The mounting evidence shows that Russian soldiers
are using rape as a deliberate tactic of war. We are
horrified by the testimonies of gang rape, assaults
at gunpoint and rapes being committed in front of
children. There are also reports of minors being raped.
In areas occupied by Russian military forces, women
who have chosen not to evacuate or were unable to
do so because of disability, caregiving obligations or
their own preference are particularly at risk of sexual
violence. The overall risk of gender-based violence,
including sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as
human trafficking, is also increasing. Many survivors
experience negative long-term consequences and posttraumatic stress and are particularly vulnerable to
discrimination and social stigmatization. Moreover,
many women have little to no access to health-care
services or gender-based violence support services.
The sexual violence being perpetrated by the
Russian army is motivated by various reasons, including
the desire to punish the brave Ukrainian people, destroy
their morale and break down their resistance. But it is
a war crime, and Russia will be held accountable for it.
All who are directly responsible for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law on Ukrainian soil must
and will be held accountable. In that context, we fully
support the investigation launched by the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court into war crimes
and crimes against humanity and the work of the
Independent International Commission of Inquiry on
Ukraine. All of the investigations must fully encompass
and address the gender-specific aspects.

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Conflict-related sexual violence should not be
perceived as an inevitable consequence of war. It is a
preventable and punishable crime under international
human rights law, international humanitarian law and
international criminal law. We already have a solid
international framework for addressing those crimes, but
its implementation needs work. Sadly, as the SecretaryGeneral highlighted in his report (S/2022/272),
impunity for conflict-related sexual violence remains
widespread, signalling to survivors the world’s benign
indifference. Impunity, together with stigmatization
and deeply rooted stereotypes, is silencing victims and
keeping the levels of conflict-related sexual violence
underreported. We must ensure accountability for
such atrocious crimes, whether in Syria, Myanmar, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Afghanistan,
Ukraine or any other part of the world. Holding the
perpetrators to account — whether they are individuals,
State actors or non-State actors — is essential to
building inclusive democracy and fostering trust in
national institutions, and it is the best way to prevent
such crimes in the future.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of New Zealand.
Ms. Schwalger (New Zealand): New Zealand
associates itself with the statement delivered this
morning by the representative of Canada on behalf of
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security
(see S/PV.9016), and would like to add a few remarks in
its national capacity.
We want to thank the Security Council for convening
this open debate, entitled “Accountability as prevention:
ending cycles of sexual violence in conflict”, as an item
under the women and peace and security agenda. We
also want to acknowledge and thank this morning’s
briefers for their powerful testimonials and reports,
keeping conflict-related sexual violence at the forefront
of the Council’s agenda.
New Zealand was one of 13 signatories to a joint
statement in November 2021 condemning the use of
sexual violence and rape as weapons of war as a red line
akin to the use of chemical weapons. Conflict-related
sexual violence is no longer seen as an inevitable byproduct of war, crises or emergencies. Rather, it is a crime
that is punishable under international human rights
law, international humanitarian law and international
criminal law. Holding perpetrators to account, whether
they are States, non-State actors or individuals, must

22-318225/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

be a priority, along with supporting survivors and
ending such heinous crimes, which predominantly
target women and girls. Disturbingly, such crimes have
become a daily occurrence in places such as Ethiopia,
Afghanistan, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Iraq, Syria, Myanmar and elsewhere. The
list is simply too long.
New Zealand is determined to strengthen
international and national responses by supporting the
legal accountability architecture, including the United
Kingdom’s initiative for a new convention on conflictrelated sexual violence. The prevalence of sexual
violence in conflict will continue unabated unless
the culture of impunity is addressed. All Member
States must prioritize the implementation of laws and
policies that enable a meaningful response. Eliminating
impunity by prosecuting those who perpetrate such
horrific crimes remains the key to ending the cycle
of violence and providing justice for survivors. In
operationalizing the conflict-related sexual violence
agenda, it is important to recognize the nexus between
sexual-violence crimes and security-sector reform
processes. In that regard, New Zealand believes that
a comprehensive response to conflict-related sexual
violence should also include proactive and purposeful
engagement with the security sector.
Working to improve the protection and promotion
of women’s rights in all instances, including in conflict
settings, is one of New Zealand’s top priorities under
our international human rights action plan. Sexual
violence is already recognized as a war crime, including
by the International Criminal Court, and as a crime
against humanity. New Zealand will continue to make a
steadfast commitment to ending the scourge of genderbased violence in all instances, including conflict. We
call on the Security Council and all Member States to
hold perpetrators fully accountable for their actions and
deny them any exemption from prosecution, regardless
of their status.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Throughout history, rape and sexual violence have
been used as weapons of war, and often as a deliberate
tactic during hostilities. Although there are a number
of international instruments that call for protecting
civilians from sexual assault in armed conflict and
recognize that such acts can constitute international
6/53

13/04/2022

crimes, conflict-related sexual violence has continued
unabated amid a culture of near-total impunity.
Deep-seated gender inequality can exacerbate
conflict-related sexual violence and, in turn, further
normalize it. Gender inequality is both an underlying
cause of sexual crimes and an obstacle to preventing
them. The work of preventing systematic and widespread
sexual violence should begin in peacetime, with national
legislation that takes a sufficiently strong approach to
criminalizing those acts. States must ensure that their
legislative mechanisms and judicial institutions are
ready to address the issue comprehensively.
Sexual-violence crimes have a gendered impact and
the conversation around them therefore tends to focus
on violence perpetrated by men against women and
girls. However, we should be broadening the discussion
of these crimes to include their effects on men, boys and
LGBTIQ+ persons as victims. Such cases are grossly
underreported, occurring in a climate of reprisals,
discrimination and stigmatization that contributes to
widespread impunity for the perpetrators. Holding the
perpetrators of sexual violence to account is vital to
bringing justice to their victims and deterring future
crimes. International law provides that individuals
may be held criminally responsible for such crimes,
and States have a primary responsibility to prosecute
the perpetrators. When a State is unwilling or
unable to investigate and prosecute international
crimes, including conflict-related sexual crimes, the
international community should take the necessary
steps to refer the situation to the International Criminal
Court. The Rome Statute clearly recognizes rape and
any other form of sexual violence as war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
We are seeing an increased willingness on the part
of the international community to investigate sexual and
gender-based crime. However, there is a gap between
the capacities of international and national courts that
limits their ability to effectively utilize existing legal
frameworks to bring justice to victims. Owing to the
sensitive nature of sexual crimes and the vulnerability
of their victims, if investigations are to be conducted
successfully they should be guided by specialists with
expertise. Moreover, such experts need to be available
at very short notice, in a matter of weeks or even days,
to catalogue the evidence. In that regard, we would like
to highlight the work of the Justice Rapid Response
mechanism, of which Argentina is a member. It provides
help to those who are investigating serious crimes under
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

international law on behalf of States and international
organizations and who require expert assistance in
collecting evidence that can be used to investigate or
prosecute international crimes. We especially value the
cooperation and joint work between the mechanism and
UN-Women to ensure that gender experts play a role in
investigating sexual crimes. The partnership between
Justice Rapid Response and UN-Women has helped
build a roster of more than 200 experts on sexual and
gender-based violence from more than 70 countries who
are specifically trained to investigate and document
sexual and gender-based violence.
Sexual violence can also occur in schools or on
the way to and from them. Resolution 2601 (2021),
on the protection of education in armed conflict,
expresses concern about the consequences of attacks
on women and girls, including rape and other forms
of sexual violence, that may impede the continuation
of their education. In that regard, we would like to
draw attention to the Safe Schools Declaration, an
intergovernmental political commitment that seeks to
ensure safe education and prevent sexual violence in
conflict. The declaration has already been endorsed by
114 States, and we encourage all that have not yet done
so to follow suit.
In conclusion, we would like to recall that in 2015,
Argentina and the United Kingdom spearheaded the
General Assembly’s adoption of resolution 69/293,
proclaiming 19 June the International Day for the
Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict in order to
raise awareness about the need to end conflict-related
sexual violence, honour the victims and survivors and
pay tribute to all who have courageously dedicated
their lives to fighting to eradicate those crimes, as well
as those who have died in the pursuit of that endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Sithole (South Africa): We are grateful for this
opportunity to address the Security Council, and we
would like to thank the briefers for their insightful and
important interventions this morning. In the context of
today’s thematic discussion and consideration of the
Secretary-General’s report on conflict-related sexual
violence (S/2022/272), I would like to highlight the
following points.
South Africa is gravely concerned about the
increased incidence of sexual violence documented
in the reporting period. We are also concerned about

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

the use of sexual violence and exploitation as a tool
of reprisal to target those who work to combat sexual
violence abuses and provide life-saving, preventive and
responsive services in conflict situations, including
critical sexual-violence and reproductive health
services. Such incidents have grown even worse since
the start of the global coronavirus disease pandemic,
which has threatened the progress previously made
in addressing conflict-related sexual violence. An
equal cause for concern highlighted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report is the fact that sexual violence and
exploitation is increasingly being used as a tool to
silence and intimidate women pursuing political and
leadership positions, particularly during elections.
South Africa acknowledges the robust and welldeveloped normative framework for addressing the
scourge of conflict-related sexual violence. However,
it is urgent that we redirect our attention to the gaps
in the full and effective implementation of all Council
resolutions relating to women and peace and security
and aimed at addressing conflict-related sexual
violence. We must strengthen our collective political
will and create access to adequate, predictable and
sustainable financing to address the issue.
In order to focus our efforts on preventive measures
at the national, regional and international levels to
address conflict-related sexual violence, we need urgent
and concrete action at the political and operational
levels to strengthen risk mitigation mechanisms that
address the root causes of sexual violence and the
reasons it can recur. It is also important to ensure that in
implementing political and social reforms, we create safe
environments conducive to the reporting of incidents of
sexual violence. Additionally, it is important that we
address the drivers of conflict, including structural and
systemic barriers, discriminatory stereotypes, poverty
and inequality, in order to holistically address sexual
violence in conflict situations. In that regard, we have
to improve early-warning and early-response systems,
including in periods of political instability, rising
violent extremism, forced displacement and escalating
armed conflict, in order to inform responses that
counter acts of sexual violence in situations of conflict.
We must continue to empower the work of women
protection advisers in United Nations peace operations.
They play a critical role in supporting women in
conflict situations and also interact with civil-society
organizations, local actors and national authorities.
Women protection networks and women’s organizations,

22-318227/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

in collaboration with national authorities and the
international community, contribute to providing
necessary support to the survivors of sexual violence.
Those outreach capabilities continue to have a positive
impact, especially in local communities.
It is our view that States, together with local,
regional and international bodies, must focus on
structural prevention, including at the institutional and
policy levels. We trust that this will also ensure that
non-State actors are held accountable for perpetrating
sexual violence during times of conflict. It is important
to underscore that prosecution is a form of prevention
and deterrence that demonstrates that impunity for such
crimes will not be tolerated.
Accountability and justice for victims and survivors
can be bolstered through effective investigations,
timely prosecutions and by ensuring gender-sensitive
and -responsive security-sector reform. That can be
enhanced by increasing the representation of women
in this sector and by vetting and training troops and
police in peacekeeping missions on the identification of
conflict-related sexual violence before they deploy. We
believe that can be a positive step towards filling the
remaining gaps in addressing sexual violence in conflict
situations. It would also go a long way to ensuring
protection, relief and recovery for those affected by
sexual violence in conflict. In addressing impunity, it is
critical to ensure that victims and survivors have access
to justice and human rights mechanisms and medical
care, including mental and psychosocial support.
We commend the continued role and work of
the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict, as outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, in assisting national authorities in
strengthening such institutions, providing support to
victims and survivors and enhancing accountability for
conflict-related sexual violence. The work of the Team
of Experts provides best practices that can be replicated
in other situations where there is a lack of capacity,
resources or coverage. It can further support and build
on existing legal and institutional frameworks through
regular virtual and in-person visits and engagement,
where possible, with national and regional bodies. We
must also continue to ensure that victims and survivors
have access to and participate in decision-making and
policymaking platforms to combat sexual violence. We
must adopt a survivor-centred approach that prioritizes
the views and perspectives of survivors and enables
8/53

13/04/2022

us to better understand and address their needs with
respect to justice and recovery.
In conclusion, we reiterate our consistent request
that the annual report of the Secretary-General on
conflict-related sexual violence also include information
on sexual violence in situations of occupation, such as
in Western Sahara and Palestine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Maes (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
Luxembourg thanks the United Kingdom presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this open debate
on the prevention of sexual violence. I would like to
thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Ms. Nadia Murad and the
civil-society representatives from Syria and Ethiopia
for their testimonies and recommendations.
Luxembourg fully subscribes to the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union and those made
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security (see S/PV.9016) and the LGBTI Core
Group, and I would like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
Despite the resolutions that the Security Council
has adopted since 2008 that demand that all parties
to armed conflicts put an end to all acts of sexual
violence against civilians, sexual violence continues
to be used as a weapon of war in Ukraine, Myanmar,
Syria, northern Ethiopia, South Sudan and other
conflicts, in a climate of almost total impunity. Rape
and other forms of sexual violence are war crimes and
can constitute a crime against humanity or an element
in the crime of genocide. We are deeply shocked by
the growing number of testimonies and reports of rape
and sexual and gender-based violence perpetrated by
Russian armed forces in Ukraine, targeting women and
children in particular. We condemn those despicable
acts in the strongest terms, and their perpetrators must
be held accountable.
As part of its feminist foreign policy, Luxembourg
defends and promotes the rights of women and girls
in all their diversity, including those of survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence. We therefore support
the awareness-raising actions of the Stand Speak Rise
Up! initiative and have established partnerships with
the United Nations Population Fund, UN-Women and
Justice Rapid Response. We continue to support the
mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we have
contributed to the trust fund that supports her work.
In South Kivu, in the Democratic Republic of Congo,
my country is supporting efforts to strengthen the
model of care created by Dr. Denis Mukwege for
victims of sexual violence, in partnership with civilsociety organizations. In Iraq, Luxembourg supports
the non-governmental organization Yazda, which helps
the Yazidi community, especially Yazidi women and
girls who have survived sexual violence committed by
members of Da’esh.
Luxembourg would like to make six recommendations
aimed at ending cycles of sexual violence. First, we
must prevent all abuses and violations of human rights
by fully implementing existing legal frameworks and
addressing the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence by committing to gender equality.
Secondly, we should support the work of
documenting crimes through investigative mechanisms.
Thirdly, we must work together to end impunity for
the perpetrators of crimes and thereby bring justice to
survivors. In that context, we emphasize the key role
of the International Criminal Court in complementing
national jurisdictions.
Fourthly, unhindered access to justice, health
services and psychosocial care must be ensured for
victims without fear of reprisals.
Fifthly, we encourage Member States that have not
yet done so to endorse and implement the Safe Schools
Declaration in order to protect children, young people
and teachers from sexual violence in times of conflict
at school or on the way to school.
Sixthly, Luxembourg encourages the Security
Council to continue its efforts to incorporate sexual
violence as a designation criterion in United Nations
sanction regimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank the United
Kingdom for convening today’s debate and the briefers
for their interventions.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the European Union.
While today’s debate focuses on crimes that are
abhorrent, cruel and inhumane, it also highlights

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

the resilience, determination and humanity of the
efforts to combat those crimes. As we condemn the
prevalence of conflict-related sexual violence and
the impunity surrounding it, we support and stand
with those around the world who work day by day to
prevent and end it — women’s rights and community
activists, local organizations, medical workers,
judges and lawyers, journalists and media workers,
national, regional and international investigative and
accountability mechanisms — all determined to break
the cycle of conflict-related sexual violence. And here,
in the Security Council, we say that the Council and
the United Nations at large must continue to do their
part. When Estonia was on the Council, we focused on
addressing conflict-related sexual violence wherever it
occurred, including in Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Iraq, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
Yemen, and we are continuing that work now.
We have heard repeated accounts from the United
Nations and organizations on the ground of the pattern
of horrifying conflict-related sexual violence by the
armed forces of the Russian Federation in its unlawful
military aggression against Ukraine. Those reports
are a reflection of how Russia wages war — through
targeted, cruel retaliation against civilians, including
women and children. They are also a reflection of an
ideology that sees the people living in Ukraine as less
than human and therefore permitted to be subjected to
inhumane treatment. We have seen that before, with
results that we as Member States have vowed never to
let happen again.
There are people in my country who still have
living memories of systematic violence brought about
by aggression. Now as then, we need accountability
and action to end the crimes in Ukraine today.
Estonia is determined to ensure that there will be
accountability for the violations of international law
in Ukraine, including those that amount to war crimes
and crimes against humanity. That includes holding
the perpetrators of these atrocity crimes accountable.
We fully support the Independent International
Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine, the work under
the Moscow Mechanism of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe and the efforts
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC). We have rejoined the referral of the situation in
Ukraine to the ICC. Criminal proceedings have been
initiated in Estonia under universal jurisdiction, within
which evidence of the commission of war crimes and

22-318229/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

crimes against humanity is collected. We call for the
continued monitoring and reporting of conflict-related
sexual violence in Ukraine by established United
Nations mechanisms, and for comprehensive survivorcentred services, including sexual and reproductive
health services. Estonia continues to support the United
Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
We
continue
to
support
the
standing
recommendations for ending and preventing conflictrelated sexual violence, in particular through the
inclusion of responses to it in mandate renewals; the
deployment and resourcing of women’s protection
advisers; the designation of sexual violence as a standalone criterion for targeted sanctions and ensuring
relevant expertise in the Sanctions Committees;
referrals of situations to the ICC in accordance with its
Statute; and by addressing threats and reprisals against
women’s rights and civil-society representatives. We
note, however, that if those recommendations are to be
truly acted upon, the Council as a whole has to start to
see that confronting conflict-related sexual violence is
an essential part of its work of maintaining international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, my delegation would like to thank the United
Kingdom presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this open debate. The topic under discussion,
accountability as prevention and ending cycles of
sexual violence in conflict, is a vital one. Historically,
regardless of who the victims are, violence is and always
has always been worthy of condemnation, and sexual
violence in conflict even more so. Unfortunately, it has
persisted and taken on new forms, not only affecting the
victims themselves but also eating away at and blighting
entire communities and societies. Morocco strongly
condemns such unacceptable and intolerable practices.
Almost 14 years ago, on 19 June 2008, the Security
Council adopted resolution 1820 (2008), which
specifically calls for the prosecution of perpetrators
of sexual violence and for ensuring that all victims of
sexual violence in conflict, in particular women and
girls, are protected under law as well as given equal
access to justice. It also stresses the importance of
ending impunity for the perpetrators of such acts.
10/53

13/04/2022

Resolution 2008 (2011) builds on the Council’s
well-known resolution 1325 (2000), which embodies
the ideals of the United Nations, generating great hope
for the thousands of women and girls who have been
victims of conflict. According to the United Nations,
more than 70 per cent of the non-combatant victims of
conflicts were women and girls. Unfortunately, the fact
that these crimes continue to occur is a major concern
for the international community. Non-State armed
groups present a major challenge in this area, given
their role in a majority of recent armed conflicts and
their involvement in mass atrocities and massacres of
civilians. Terrorist groups and other non-State armed
groups promote and openly practice sexual slavery and
the trafficking of women and girls, and continue to use
sexual violence as a weapon of terror and a source of
income. In the face of such hateful acts, indignation is
no longer enough. There must be rigorous application
of the existing legal arsenal. Above all we must act
and propose real solutions. Effective measures aimed
at preventing and punishing acts of sexual violence
may contribute significantly to the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that regard, I would
like to stress the following points.
First, it is important to respond to the root causes
of conflict-related sexual violence by strengthening
peacebuilding and human and sustainable development,
and by encouraging national initiatives aimed at putting
an end to gender-based discrimination.
Secondly, victims must have access to justice, and
we must fight impunity by prosecuting those behind
acts of sexual violence and their perpetrators.
Thirdly, we must facilitate the participation of
women in efforts to prevent and resolve conflicts, in the
maintenance of peace and security and in peacebuilding
during the post-conflict phase. It is crucial to support
the empowerment of women and their full and equal
participation in decision-making.
Fourthly, religious leaders have an influential
role to play in preventing religion from being used in
attempts to justify violence. Cooperation with local
actors and community leaders is also crucial, since they
can identify the warning signs of sexual violence and
offer early-warning systems.
Fifthly, it is important to combat stigmatization
of the victims of sexual violence, as well as children
born out of such violence, and the victims must receive
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

medical and financial support and assistance with
social reinsertion.
In conclusion, I would like to take this opportunity
to pay tribute to Secretary-General António Guterres
for the United Nations sexual exploitation and violation
prevention strategy, which stresses the rights and
dignity of the victims and calls for the implementation
of a zero-tolerance policy. Morocco fully and firmly
supports that zero-tolerance policy and is working
relentlessly by taking every possible measure to
eradicate this appalling act. Last month we launched
our first national action plan on women and peace
and security, for the period 2021-2024, an initiative
that is part of the momentum created by His Majesty
Mohammed VI’s higher vision for developing a fair,
democratic and equal society. A specific section is
devoted to the protection of women and girls and
the fight against sexual abuse and exploitation, in
accordance with international standards and the zerotolerance concept.
In conclusion, I want to respond to the inappropriate,
unacceptable and politically motivated reference made
by the representative of South Africa to Moroccan
Sahara. I wish to reaffirm here that there is no connection
whatever between Moroccan Sahara — where human
rights, especially those of women, are fully respected
and promoted — and the issue of sexual violence.
South Africa, however, has one of the highest and most
disturbing rates of sexual violence committed against
women in the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): Greece is gravely
concerned about the growing numbers of allegations
of sexual violence perpetrated against women and girls
in the context of the war in Ukraine, and we must all
echo the Secretary-General in his calls for the war to
stop now.
As the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the
Executive Director of UN-Women have recently stated,
war and the displacement related to it heighten the risk
of all forms of sexual violence. In all conflict situations,
allegations of sexual violence must be investigated to
ensure justice and accountability. That is a core aspect
of the deterrence and prevention of such heinous crimes.
Those responsible for such acts must be held to account
by national and, where applicable, international justice.

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

In that regard, all States should also adopt specific
commitments to preventing and addressing conflictrelated sexual violence, protecting survivors and
bringing perpetrators to justice. In parallel, we should
protect the civil space and reinforce civil society and
especially women human rights defenders, including
women journalists, who are facing increasing challenges
and threats. In that respect, women’s empowerment
and leadership require efforts to ensure the protection,
relief and recovery of survivors. A survivor-centred
approach should guide international peace efforts by
focusing on providing fair reparations and ensuring
multisectoral assistance and access to psychological
and legal services, among other things.
Greece has recently joined the Group of Friends
of Women, Peace and Security (see S/PV.9016),
recognizing the need for concrete and results-oriented
international policies that are aligned, coherent and
mutually reinforcing. Moreover, we were fortunate
enough to be accepted in January into the Circle of
Leadership on the prevention of and response to sexual
exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations,
with the participation of the President of the Hellenic
Republic, Ms. Katerina Sakellaropoulou.
In conclusion, I would like to highlight that
Greece’s first national plan on women and peace and
security, which we are about to adopt, prioritizes the
main pillars of the Security Council agenda, including
the prevention of all forms of conflict-related, sexual
and gender-based violence against women and girls,
and the relief and recovery of women and girl survivors.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the United Kingdom for organizing
this debate and the briefers for their contributions.
We must combat sexual violence in times of armed
conflict through all possible means and prevent bodies
from being used as battlefields. That is the reminder of
Dr. Denis Mukwege, joint Nobel Peace Prize laureate
alongside Ms. Nadia Murad, who briefed us today. And
14 years ago the Security Council adopted resolution
1820 (2008), making sexual violence in armed conflict
a security issue in its own right. A strong normative
framework has been established since then. However,
as the Secretary-General notes in his annual report
(S/2022/272), impunity remains the norm and the pace
of justice remains painfully slow.

22-3182211/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Switzerland remains very concerned about the fact
that the report once again shows that sexual and genderbased violence continued to be used as a tactic of war
in many conflicts in 2021. In addition, data from the
monitoring and reporting mechanism indicate that rape
and other forms of sexual violence against children
increased in 2021. Women and children in Ukraine now
face an increased risk of gender-based violence, sexual
exploitation, abuse and trafficking. Just this week,
the Council was informed of an alarming increase in
allegations of sexual violence in Ukraine. We call on
every party to every conflict to immediately cease
committing such crimes. The facts and responsibilities
must be established, and we must put an end to
widespread impunity.
I would like to highlight three issues in that
regard. First, we should be clear that the root causes of
conflict-related sexual violence can be truly addressed
only if women’s participation, autonomy and rights
are guaranteed. When the Council drafts mandates
for United Nations missions, it must ensure that they
include provisions for promoting gender equality
and the full, equal and meaningful participation of
women at all levels of decision-making. In order for
the United Nations to fulfil its mandates, women’s
protection advisers must be deployed and receive
adequate resources.
Secondly, we must fight impunity at the local,
national and global levels. One way the Council can
support that is by including designation criteria that
focus on sexual violence in sanctions regimes. We
welcome the increasing use of such criteria. Switzerland
supports the efforts of the International Criminal Court
to investigate these crimes and to develop gendersensitive approaches. In addition, through our civilsociety partners, we are helping survivors to assert their
rights by collecting evidence. For example, Switzerland
has supported Rohingya women in filing applications to
the International Criminal Court on behalf of hundreds
of survivors of gender-based violence.
Thirdly, the rights and needs of survivors, especially
their sexual and reproductive health and related rights,
must be central to our action. In line with resolution
2467 (2019), we call for funding adequate to supporting
prevention and response efforts, including community
solidarity networks. Switzerland works closely with
civil society and women human rights defenders. In
countless conflicts, they are at the forefront of the fight
against sexual violence and provide essential services.
12/53

13/04/2022

States have an obligation to ensure a safe environment
for them.
Fourteen years after the adoption of resolution
1820 (2008), we must, as Dr. Mukwege puts it, end
the use of bodies as battlefields. We must put an end
to impunity. As a candidate for a seat on the Security
Council, Switzerland strives to continue to be a positive
contributor for peace and humanity and remains fully
committed to that goal.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Mr. Skoog: I thank the presidency of the United
Kingdom for organizing this important debate.
I am speaking on behalf of the European Union
and its member States. The candidate countries North
Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania, the country of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova, Georgia, Andorra and San
Marino, align themselves with this statement.
I would like to start by paying a special tribute
to this morning’s briefers. Their testimonies force us,
sadly, to agree with the Secretary-General that the
situation is truly alarming. We are facing the highest
number of violent conflicts since 1945, repeated
violations of the Charter of the United Nations and
international law, the return of invasions and military
coups, and rising impunity.
We are horrified by the testimonies and reports
of violence, including sexual violence and rape,
perpetrated by Russian soldiers in Ukraine, and by
Russia’s repeated attacks on civilians and civilian
infrastructure, including hospitals. Those crimes will
not be left unanswered. We are taking action to support
independent investigations to ensure justice and
accountability, in particular through the efforts of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
and by Ukraine’s Prosecutor General. The European
Union Advisory Mission in Ukraine has been tasked
with assisting as well, and we are working to provide
urgent support to survivors of sexual violence. We
reiterate the General Assembly’s demand that Russia
immediately stop its military aggression, enabled by
Belarus, immediately and unconditionally withdraw all
forces from the entire territory of Ukraine and fully
respect Ukraine’s territorial integrity, sovereignty
22-31822

Women and peace and security

13/04/2022

and
independence
recognized borders.

within

its

internationally

The reports coming from Bucha and other cities
recall the worst atrocities committed by war criminals
such as Da’esh, in Iraq and Syria, as well as by State
and non-State actors in Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Mali,
the Sudan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the Central African Republic and elsewhere. There
is a solid international framework in place to address
such abhorrent crimes. We do not need more debates,
documents or initiatives. As Nadia Murad said this
morning, more than moral outrage, we need action.
Let me outline four priorities. First, it is the
responsibility of all States to prevent and address
conflict-related sexual violence, protect and support
survivors and bring perpetrators to justice. All State
and non-State parties to a conflict must adopt specific
commitments to preventing and addressing such
violence and monitor their compliance.
Secondly, members of civil society play a key
role, often as first responders. It is our collective
responsibility to put an end to threats targeting civilsociety actors, women human rights defenders and
mediators, hold perpetrators accountable and defend
civic space.
Thirdly, prosecution and accountability are key to
ensuring long-lasting peace. We support initiatives to
strengthen legal procedures at the national, regional
and international levels, notably through the ICC.
We reiterate our support to encouraging the Security
Council to incorporate and apply sexual and genderbased violence as a designation criterion in United
Nations sanctions regimes in a much more systematic
manner, something that many have said today.
Fourthly, protection costs money. Sexual and
gender-based violence programmes must be considered
as life-saving by humanitarian appeals, and as part of
standard funding in the area of women and peace and
security. A survivor-centred approach must guide our
actions, with a focus on ensuring access to psychological
and legal services, as well as supporting sexual
and reproductive health and rights, in line with the
Programme of Action of the International Conference
on Population and Development, the Beijing Platform
for Action and the outcomes of their reviews.
We will actively continue to use all our tools for
holding perpetrators accountable and ensuring that

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

women have the opportunity to contribute to the efforts
and dialogues promoted by the European Union, the
United Nations and the wider international community.
The President: The representative of the Russian
Federation has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to respond to the statement made
by the Head of Delegation of the European Union.
Mr. Skoog represents a major organization, the
European Union. I did not respond to the statements
by individual members of the European Union that, to
varying degrees — depending on their respective levels
of Russophobia historically — accused Russia and its
armed forces of things they have never done and that
Mr. Skoog knows they have never done. I expected a
more sober and balanced assessment from him of what
is going on in Ukraine, particularly regarding the crimes
being considered. I can expect the representatives of
countries like Lithuania and Estonia to say that Russian
soldiers raped women and then ate them, or anything
else they can think of, but I did not expect that from
him, and I really am very disappointed about that.
The President: I take note of the statement made
by the representative of the Russian Federation. I note
that Mr. Skoog would like to take the floor again.
I give the floor to the representative of the European
Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. Skoog (European Union): I will be very brief.
I just have two comments for my colleague from the
Russian Federation. There is absolutely no Russophobia
here or any strong feelings of antipathy to the Russian
people. However, there is a very strong rejection in this
Chamber and in the international community of the
aggression that Russia is committing against Ukraine.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Ms. Grba (Turkey): We would like to thank the
United Kingdom for convening this important and
timely debate. We also thank Ms. Pramila Patten,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the civil-society
briefers for their invaluable and insightful remarks.
Sexual violence is one of the gravest abuses of
human rights committed against women and girls. In
situations of conflict, it is often used as a weapon of war,

22-3182213/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

a strategy to deprive human beings of their most basic
rights — their safety, security and dignity. Moreover, it
can exacerbate and prolong armed conflicts and hinder
the restoration of international peace and security.
We acknowledge the progress that has been achieved
within the United Nations system to generate action
to combat this scourge. The Security Council has
successfully linked the concepts of sexual violence and
impunity to international peace and security, adopting
numerous resolutions and addressing the issue in many
meetings. We welcome the inclusion of sexual violence
as a designation criterion for the Council’s Sanctions
Committees and support its application in practice.
However, we see a gap between the commitments and
action. As the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/272) reveals, sexual violence continues to be
widely used as a tactic of war and terror. The report
also confirms the nexus among sexual violence, human
trafficking and forced displacement.
Sexual violence in conflict is one of the leading factors
triggering internal and cross-border displacement.
Furthermore, victims of sexual violence are likely to
face further abuses during their displacement, which
can lead to multiple victimizations, including human
trafficking. Strengthening penal codes and immigration
laws with a view to combating human trafficking is
essential. The protection framework should also cover
additional support in the aftermath of abuse, such as
ensuring the safety of victims, providing psychological
support and extending the victims’ stay in their country
of refuge, in order to mitigate the effects of the trauma.
Sexual violence has consequences for all who
are affected — women and girls, men and boys. In
addition to its devastating impact on survivors, it has
broad and long-lasting effects on communities and
States as a whole for generations. Our responsibility
must be to bring justice, recognition and reparations
to the survivors of these horrendous crimes. Punishing
the crimes is often the most important deterrent
and is a key element in prevention. However, as the
Secretary-General says in his report, impunity for
crimes of conflict-related sexual violence remains the
norm and the pace of justice remains painfully slow.
In order to address sexual violence during conflicts
and to ensure that these crimes can be prosecuted in
the post-conflict phase, the necessary documentation
and evidence must be gathered while the conflict
is ongoing. The United Nations, other international
organizations, humanitarian agencies and civil society
14/53

13/04/2022

have an important task in this respect. We commend
the efforts of women’s protection advisers in the field
and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict. We call for mobilizing human
and financial resources so that they can be deployed in
mandated missions in a timely fashion.
Today’s meeting is about standing up for the
delivery of accountability and justice for the survivors
of these despicable crimes. It is about protecting the
lives, rights and dignity of women and girls suffering
from the effects of conflicts around the world. In that
context, I want to express our solidarity with women
and girls in Ukraine, who are facing the terrible
consequences of the act of aggression by Russia.
Likewise, we reiterate our commitment to seeking
accountability for the horrific acts of sexual violence
perpetrated by the Syrian regime, which have long been
documented in various United Nations reports.
More than ever, it is time to collectively step up
our efforts for the women and girls who bear the brunt
of conflicts all around the world. Turkey is firmly
committed to gender equality and the empowerment of
all women and girls, and will continue to work closely
with the international community to advance the
women and peace and security agenda and eliminate
sexual violence in conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself with
the statements delivered on behalf of the European
Union, the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security (see S/PV.9016) and the LGBTI Core
Group, and I would like to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
I would like to thank the United Kingdom
presidency and the distinguished briefers.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/272)
demonstrates, despite all the advances made in
international law, conflict-related sexual and genderbased violence remains as pervasive as ever, and we
are appalled that yet another country, Ukraine, will
now have to be added to that unfortunate tally. The
evidence of widespread rape and sexual violence in
areas under Russian control has been growing since the
start of the invasion. We strongly support the calls by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict and others for a rigorous
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

investigation of allegations of sexual violence. The
Murad Code will be very helpful for this and other
similar purposes.
If we want to improve prevention, we should keep
in mind that conflict-related rapes and sexual violence
do not exist in a vacuum or come out of the blue. The
Secretary-General’s report points to structural genderbased inequality, gender-based violence and harmful
social norms as some of the root causes of conflictrelated sexual violence. In her report (A/76/132) on rape
as a grave and systematic human rights violation and a
manifestation of gender-based violence against women,
the former Special Rapporteur on violence against
women, its causes and consequences, highlights that
the lack of a human rights-based approach, and legal
shortcomings in the criminalization and prosecution of
rape before a conflict, contribute to normalizing sexual
violence during that conflict. We strongly encourage
all States that have not yet done so to align their laws
with international human rights, humanitarian and
criminal law standards on rape and sexual violence.
In order to avoid post-conflict legal shortcomings in
the prosecution of rape, we call on all States to ratify
the Statute of the International Criminal Court or to
align their laws on sexual violence and rape with
general recommendation No. 35 of the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women on gender-based violence against
women and with the model law on rape proposed by the
Special Rapporteur.
The definition of rape as based on lack of consent,
and the abolition of statutes of limitations in that
regard, are crucial to preventing it in war and in
peace. Furthermore, for victims who are unable to
seek compensation through the judicial process, it is
important to provide other victim-centred solutions.
For example, in Croatia, survivors of sexual violence
perpetrated during our homeland war are entitled to
financial reparations and special care packages even
if the perpetrators have never been found or brought
to justice. We are ready to share our practices and
experience with this victim-centred approach.
In conclusion, the Secretary-General’s report warns
that when it comes to conflict-related sexual violence,
impunity remains the norm. We therefore support the
Security Council in systematically incorporating and
applying sexual violence as a designation criterion in
United Nations sanctions regimes in situations where
such crimes are persistently perpetrated. The prevention

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

of sexual violence in conflict should start at home and
in peacetime, and we therefore support the SecretaryGeneral’s call for an emergency global action plan on
violence against women, as reflected in Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982).
Mr. Szczerski (Poland): I should like at the
outset to extend my sincere gratitude and appreciation
to the United Kingdom for having organized this
important debate and for highlighting the question of
accountability as the main focus of our discussion.
I should also like to thank all the briefers for their
inspiring contributions and the Secretary-General for
his informative and comprehensive report (S/2022/272),
which provides an in-depth analysis and a set of
practical recommendations for a wide spectrum of
international actors.
Poland aligns itself with the statement and additional
remarks delivered by the Head of the Delegation of the
European Union as well as with the statement made on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women and Peace
and Security (see S/PV.9016), both of which reaffirmed
their strong support for zero tolerance for any form of
sexual violence.
We share the view that the scale of conflict-related
sexual violence against civilians is of paramount
concern. Humanitarian, security and political crises,
compounded by the economic aftermath of the
pandemic and displacement, all have contributed to
increasing levels of conflict-related sexual violence.
The use of rape and other forms of sexual violence
as a weapon or tactic of war is widespread. The most
affected are women and girls, yet we must also account
for the presence of male victims.
Women’s full, equal and meaningful participation
in all aspects of public life and in political, social and
economic as well as peace and security processes is
a basic prerequisite for ending conflict-related sexual
violence. Such participation requires adequate and
effective protection mechanisms that will focus on a
strong commitment to addressing the issue of impunity
for perpetrators as well as on efforts to support the
victims of such crimes.
Women’s inclusion can best guarantee a survivorcentred approach, including the rehabilitation of women
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence, ensuring
post-conflict reparations and accountability as well
as the establishment of vetting mechanisms excluding
perpetrators of sexual violence from the security forces.

22-3182215/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The Secretary-General’s report covers the period
2021, but at this point we cannot fail to mention
the horrific reports and testimonies of victims in
connection with the killings in Bucha, Irpin and other
localities in Ukraine, visited today by the Presidents
of Poland, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia. We are
shocked by the growing accounts of sexual violence
used deliberately by Russian soldiers as a tactic of war
and a tool of terror and intimidation. In addition, the
massive displacement caused by the Russian aggression
has heightened the risks of all forms of sexual violence
and has disproportionately affected women and girls.
We hardly need to mention that the consequences of
conflict-related sexual violence, especially for women
and children, go far beyond the physical dimension.
Very often they have an irreversible impact on their
whole lives. What is more, that horrible trauma hits not
only individuals but also whole communities.
Poland has consistently advocated for respect
for and compliance with international norms and the
body of existing Security Council resolutions by State
and non-State actors. States have a legal and moral
responsibility to protect their citizens and ensure that
perpetrators are held to account. Accountability is also
a means to ensure prevention. Failure to act decisively
now will only encourage abusers to use those barbaric
tactics. The international community must ensure that
all perpetrators, including the leadership, are brought
to justice. Accountability cannot be achieved without
knowledge of the crimes committed. Regrettably,
because of discrimination and the stigma affecting the
survivors of sexual violence, a vast majority of them
do not report rape and other forms of sexual violence,
which not only contributes to the culture of impunity
but also prevents survivors of sexual violence from
accessing medical care and legal support.
Poland translates its words into action. In the case
of Ukraine, we were one of the first States to refer the
situation in that country to the Office of the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC). We will
assist the ICC in its efforts to collect evidence of the
war crimes committed by Russia in Ukraine. Moreover,
on 28 February the Polish National Public Prosecutor’s
Office initiated an investigation concerning the war of
aggression against the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence of Ukraine.
Furthermore, the Pilecki Institute — an institution
for research into crimes committed by totalitarian
16/53

13/04/2022

regimes that operates in Poland — has established
the Raphael Lemkin Center for Documenting Russian
Crimes in Ukraine. Its task is to collect and preserve
evidence of the war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed in Ukraine, and to collect and record witness
testimonies. Accountability for conflict-related sexual
violence, prevention measures and the fight against
impunity remain the priority issues of the Polish
national action plan on women and peace and security.
Reports of the indiscriminate killing of civilians,
including women and children, as well as of cases of
sexual violence, represent the most horrific atrocities;
they have no place in twenty-first-century Europe, yet
they are still happening. If we want to prevent a vicious
circle of powerlessness towards the deteriorating
situation of women, girls and men affected by conflictrelated sexual violence, we need to act urgently. It is our
common obligation to make sure that those responsible
for such barbaric atrocities are held accountable in
accordance with international law.
To conclude, let me reiterate that Poland stands
in solidarity with all survivors of sexual violence in
conflict and urges greater support and empowerment
for those affected by such crimes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Amaral Alves De Carvalho (Portugal):
Portugal aligns itself with the statements delivered
on behalf of the European Union and of the Group
of Friends of Women and Peace and Security (see
S/PV.9016).
Portugal welcomes the holding of this debate, which
is particularly relevant given the disturbing reports of
sexual and gender violence perpetrated by Russian
forces and non-State actors in Ukraine. Our thoughts
once again are with all persons victims of sexual
violence in armed conflict, which affects women and
girls in particular.
The Security Council has already adopted a
comprehensive framework to address conflict-related
sexual violence. The legal frameworks are in place;
now we must call on all States to use all instruments
at their disposal to ensure its implementation,
including by making conflict-related sexual violence
a designation criterion in all relevant United Nations
sanctions regimes.
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

The Security Council must ensure that all actors
are held accountable for the crimes that they commit, at
both the national and international levels.
The international criminal justice system, both
judicial and quasi-judicial institutions, must act,
through an integrated and coordinated approach, to
collect evidence and to set up and monitor criminal
proceedings until their conclusion.
The United Nations is most effective when it
works in support of national efforts and towards
reinforcing them. We can also bolster accountability
efforts and increase compliance with international
legal frameworks by assisting States in harmonizing
domestic laws with international standards.
Providing support to justice systems, both military
and civilian, has been key to success and is the best
means of ensuring that the gains made so far can be
sustained over the long term. Investing in justice for
victims is also an investment in sustainable peace.
Service delivery and material assistance cannot
be dismissed as a secondary issue for security
stakeholders. Meeting the basic needs of survivors and
fragile communities is a form of protection against
exploitation and abuse.
Even more important than ensuring accountability
for perpetrators is to prevent sexual violence from
occurring in the first place. An investment in human
rights and in human rights education and training, in
the empowerment of all persons and in women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation and leadership at
all levels of decision-making is a key investment in the
prevention of sexual violence.

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Sir, for organizing this open debate. I also thank
the briefers for their briefings.
Sexual violence is a heinous crime that is frequently
used as a tactic of war and terrorism. In armed conflicts,
sexual violence disproportionately affects women and
girls, as well as people in vulnerable situations. Women
and girls, unfortunately, are the main victims. Armed
conflict also increases the risk of trafficking in persons,
which unfairly targets women and children fleeing war
while being forcibly moved.
During armed conflicts, international humanitarian
law prohibits all forms of sexual abuse against women
and establishes protections for civilians, including
women and girls. In that regard, the four Geneva
Conventions and their two Additional Protocols
explicitly and implicitly condemn different forms of
sexual violence as serious violations of humanitarian
law in international and internal conflicts alike.
Furthermore, numerous United Nations resolutions
have condemned sexual violence against women in
conflicts and highlighted perpetrators’ accountability.
Therefore, it is necessary for all States and non-State
parties to conflict to fully comply with their obligations
under applicable international law, including the
prohibition of all forms of sexual violence.

Partnerships with national security actors, for
example, must be further strengthened. Training on
sexual violence prevention should be included in
security-sector reform programmes to build capacity
for local security actors. We call on all States to
redouble efforts to prevent and combat sexual violence
in conflict and ensure that all perpetrators are brought
to account.

Preventing and combating this inhumane practice
requires a collective effort. That, however, will not
be successful until its root causes — namely, the
circumstances surrounding the occurrence of an armed
conflict — are addressed. We believe that putting an
end to all armed conflicts is the most effective way
to prevent such crimes. Unfortunately, as long as
terrorism, violent extremism, foreign occupation and
foreign interference persist, such a solution will remain
elusive. The main threats to female security in our
volatile region, the Middle East, are foreign occupation,
foreign invasion and terrorism, which have no respect
for women’s rights or lives. The situation of Palestinian
women and girls is a clear case in point.

The President: For the speakers to come, I would
like to share a quick reminder to keep to four minutes,
if possible. We have a lot of speakers to get through
this afternoon. The flashing light on the collar of the
microphone will remind speakers of when their four
minutes are up.

While every effort should be made to prevent
conflicts, other measures to prevent and respond to
sexual violence must also be taken. In addition, sexual
violence perpetrated in the midst of a conflict should
not be treated with impunity. It is critical that we
concentrate our efforts on bringing such perpetrators

22-3182217/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

to justice. Survivors’ access to justice must also
be ensured.
The current situation in Afghanistan has had a
severe impact on Afghan women’s rights. According to
the recent report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2022/272), women and girls
have been targeted as part of systematic and widespread
violence, amid a concerted campaign to limit their
participation in public and political life. Afghan women
must be given their political and social rights, such as
the right to education, work and political participation.
We emphasize the importance of women’s
empowerment and the promotion of their involvement
in conflict prevention and resolution. The achievement
of this noble goal is a shared responsibility, and we
stand ready to support any genuine international effort
in that direction.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our principled
position that issues concerning women and girls should
be dealt with by the General Assembly and other United
Nations bodies and that the Security Council should
address only these issues if they are directly relevant to
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Zoghbi (Lebanon): At the outset, we
congratulate the United Kingdom on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month
and commend it for organizing this timely debate. We
take this opportunity to congratulate the United Arab
Emirates on its successful presidency of the Council last
month. We are very proud to see women Ambassadors
presiding over the Council for three consecutive months.
We also thank the briefers for their insightful remarks.
We were delighted to listen to Nobel Peace Prize
laureate Ms. Nadia Murad once again here in the
Security Council. We salute her bravery and courage to
continue advocating for survivors of human trafficking
and sexual violence so as to ensure that she is the last
girl in the world with a story like hers, as she puts it in
her book, The Last Girl.
Women continue to suffer sexual violence in
conflicts all over the world, as we heard this morning
from Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Pramila Patten. Women cannot and should no longer
bear the brunt of conflicts. We still remember all too
well the unimaginable suffering of Yazidi women and
18/53

13/04/2022

girls who were subjected to all kinds of barbaric and
inhumane treatment by the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham, including rape, sexual violence, sexual slavery
and torture, to name a few.
Unfortunately, such atrocities persist unabated.
The latest report of the Secretary General on the theme
(S/2022/272) confirms that sexual violence continues
to be employed as a tactic of war, torture and terrorism.
However, those heinous crimes remain underreported,
as, in most cases, survivors are afraid to come
forward and share their stories. We need to ensure that
survivors of sexual violence in conflicts are protected
and that the perpetrators of such crimes are brought to
justice. Conflict-related sexual violence can no longer
go unpunished.
We welcome in this regard the General Assembly
initiative, led by Sierra Leone and Japan, to adopt
a resolution on international cooperation for access
to justice, remedies and assistance for survivors of
sexual violence, and we look forward to engaging
constructively in that process.
We recognize that women and girls are
disproportionately the victims of sexual violence in
conflict. However, when addressing the issue, we
should not exclude sexual violence perpetrated against
men and boys. In their case, the stigma and shame are
much more intense, and many victims and survivors
choose to remain silent. Particular attention should also
be given to women activists, women peacebuilders,
women human rights defenders and women journalists,
who are often specifically targeted, including through
sexual violence and harassment.
In his remarks to the Peacebuilding Commission
last month, Secretary-General António Guterres
reaffirmed that the world is experiencing the highest
number of violent conflicts since 1945, with 2 billion
people, or a quarter of the world’s population, now
living in conflict-affected areas. The more conflicts
persist and multiply, the more sexual violence in
those settings will thrive. We need to address this
phenomenon and work for justice and accountability.
But the most important step to take is to silence the
guns, end conflicts and, above all, deploy all efforts to
prevent them before they erupt.
Women’s bodies can no longer be allowed to be
collateral damage. Women’s bodies can no longer be
allowed to be used as weapons of war. Women’s bodies
can no longer be allowed to be turned into battlefields.
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Lagatie (Belgium) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Sir, very much for convening this important debate.
Belgium aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the observer of the European Union.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/272)
paints a dark picture. We note an increase in war crimes,
such as conflict-related sexual violence. Civilian
populations are suffering unspeakably from such
crimes, and Belgium condemns them in the strongest
possible terms. We are concerned about reports of acts
of sexual violence perpetrated by Russian troops in
Ukraine and urgently call on Russia to cease hostilities.
We also urge a full investigation into the alleged war
crimes, including sexual crimes, and call on all parties
to fully participate and cooperate to that end.
Although the situation around the world is tragic,
there are some positive signs. Allow me to offer two
examples.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, while
the prevalence of sexual violence regrettably remains
extremely worrisome, we see some positive signs
as a result of the readiness of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to promote and
facilitate the fight against impunity, for example the
ruling on the Kavumu case.
In Mali, we commend the Team of Experts on
the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali for their support to
the national judicial authorities and civil society
stakeholders. We call on the Government of Mali to
provide swift support to ensure progress in the legal
proceedings.
Allow me to outline five priorities to speed up the
implementation of the robust legal framework at our
disposal for taking preventive action.
First, Member States bear the primary responsibility
for prosecuting the perpetrators of sexual violence. The
United Nations must continue to invest in building the
capacity of national institutions, which can be achieved
by developing legal frameworks and prosecution
strategies and by training police units and judges.
Secondly, international criminal justice mechanisms
play a key role in establishing responsibility. Belgium

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

fully supports the work of the International Criminal
Court in prosecuting the perpetrators of sexual and
gender-based crimes. The United Nations has also
supported hybrid courts. Belgium supports the fact
that sexual violence should be a standalone designation
criterion in sanctions regimes and encourages the
members of the Security Council to add to the lists,
based on that criterion.
Thirdly, other forms of justice and compensation
should be viewed as complementary, such as truth and
reconciliation processes and traditional forms of justice.
Those processes should be carried out by putting the
rights and needs of survivors at the heart of concerns,
while respecting international law.
Fourthly,
implementing
a
survivor-centred
approach involves several issues: guaranteeing access
to medical and obstetric care after a rape, including the
right to abortion; ensuring that survivors can report
crimes safely, without being stigmatized or harassed;
guaranteeing legal, psychosocial and economic support,
including compensation for reintegrating victims;
ensuring that services are available in rural areas; and
adopting an intersectional approach.
Lastly, we would like to underscore the key role
played by civil society, in particular organizations that
promote the rights of women and girls and survivors
in all these initiatives. Belgium contributes to the
Conflict-Related Sexual Violence Multi-Partner Trust
Fund with some €500,000, including to the United
Nations Action against Sexual Violence in Conflict
network and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict, to strengthen the
response to sexual and gender-based violence and
support civil society.
We can end sexual and gender-based violence
only by protecting and promoting all the basic rights
of women and girls, fostering gender equality and
guaranteeing the full, effective and equal participation
of women. The Council can count on my country to
continue to fight for those rights, both nationally
and internationally.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bulgaria.
Ms. Stoeva (Bulgaria): Bulgaria aligns itself with
the statement delivered on behalf of the European
Union and the statement delivered by the representative

22-3182219/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

13/04/2022

of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security (see S/PV.9016).

politicians and humanitarian workers, as they provide
critical assistance to survivors.

I would like to express our appreciation to the
United Kingdom for the timely organization of today’s
open debate, as well as to the briefers for their very
sobering remarks.

It is imperative to enhance accountability for
what is perceived to be the cheapest weapon of war.
In that regard, Bulgaria supports national justice and
referrals of situations to the International Criminal
Court when crimes of sexual violence, as defined
in its Statute, appear to have been committed. We
reiterate the importance of the recommendation in the
report of the Secretary-General to ensure that sexual
violence is incorporated as a standalone designation
criterion for targeted sanctions, as well as to giving due
consideration to early warning systems.

The focus on accountability as a form of preventing
sexual violence in conflict could not be more
appropriate. We are meeting against the backdrop of the
unprovoked, illegal and unjustified Russian aggression
against Ukraine. Amid all the other horrors of that
war, the reports of acts of sexual violence, including
rape perpetrated by Russian soldiers, are shocking and
deeply disturbing. Due to the timing of the issuance
of the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/272), it does
not take the situation in Ukraine into account. The next
one will most certainly address it, however, as horrific
testimonies of sexual violence are now being heard on
an almost daily basis.
Bulgaria joined in the statement presented by the
United States at the close of the sixty-sixth session of
the Commission on the Status of Women regarding the
critical situation of women and girls in Ukraine as a
result of the Russian aggression. Moreover, as co-Chair
of the Group of Friends of Children and the Sustainable
Development Goals, Bulgaria, together with other
countries, presented a joint statement on the situation
of children in Ukraine. It is appalling that there are
reports of children being subjected to sexual violence.
Judging by the number of reports, we should not
exclude the possibility that sexual violence is being
used as a tactic of war. That is why we need to ensure
independent investigations on the ground. Ukraine
is not an isolated case; it is just the most recent one.
Therefore, we need urgent action to break the vicious
cycle of sexual violence globally. That should start
by the cessation of hostilities and compliance with all
relevant Security Council resolutions on conflict-related
sexual violence, while providing unimpeded access for
humanitarian aid and human rights observers.
As a firm proponent of the survivor-centred
approach, Bulgaria considers that survivors, with their
specific needs, should be at the core of our response,
including by ensuring their sexual and reproductive
health and rights and access to legal and psychological
support. Furthermore, firm action should be taken
against reprisals towards civil society organizations,
as well as mediators, peacebuilders, journalists,
20/53

In conclusion, Bulgaria recognizes that gender
inequalities exacerbate conflict-related sexual violence
and acknowledges that prevention starts by addressing
the root causes. Member States need to achieve gender
equality and realize women’s full enjoyment of human
rights, while also ensuring women’s full and equal
participation. Bulgaria remains committed to the
women and peace and security agenda, also through
the implementation of its national action plan for the
period 2020-2025.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Italy.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statements submitted on behalf of the European Union,
the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security
(see S/PV.9016), and the United Nations LGBTI Core
Group. I would like to add a few remarks in a national
capacity.
The protection and promotion of the rights of
women and girls in the fight against all forms of sexual
and gender-based violence, in times both of peace and
of armed conflict, are a long-standing commitment
of Italy. We staunchly support the mandate of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten and
the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law
and Sexual Violence in Conflict through our pledge in
favour of the related Conflict-Related Sexual Violence
Multi-Partner Trust Fund.
The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/272) paints a bleak picture of the current
situation. In various parts of the world, State and
non-State actors still use sexual violence as a tactic
of war, torture and terrorism. We are also particularly
concerned about the increase in the incidence of rape
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

and other forms of sexual violence against children in
2021, based on data collected by the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, with growing instances of girls
affected by violations.
I take this opportunity to reiterate Italy’s firm
condemnation of the unjustified aggression of the
Russian Federation against Ukraine and our full support
to Ukraine and its people. We are deeply concerned
about the repeated attacks on civilians, including
women and children, and about the testimonies and
reports of conflict-related sexual violence against
women and girls, including rape, perpetrated by the
Russian armed forces. Conflict-related sexual and
gender-based violence, including rape, is a heinous
violation of human rights and war crimes. We must
spare no effort to prevent and combat such brutal forms
of violence, support survivors and bring perpetrators
to justice.
Let me outline Italy’s five priorities.
First, the prevention of widespread and systematic
sexual violence begins in times of peace through the
adoption of national laws that should be robust enough
to prevent abuses and violations in war time. There
exists a solid international framework that needs to
be implemented.
Secondly, we need a strong paradigm shift to
uphold a culture of gender equality and fully promote
women’s empowerment and their equal, full and
meaningful participation in decision-making processes.
Female leadership opportunities are essential to both
prevention and reconciliation at the national and
international levels, involving women and grass-roots
civil society organizations.
Thirdly, In line with resolution 2467 (2019), we need
survivor-centred approaches to prioritize the rights and
needs of victims of sexual and gender-based violence.
Fourthly, United Nations peacekeeping missions
play a crucial role in preventing and combating conflictrelated sexual violence within their mandate to protect
civilians. To that end, over the past years, Italy has
been providing troops with training on gender issues,
and has been promoting a stronger presence of women
among the ranks of peacekeepers.
Fifthly, the international community should fight
against impunity and hold the perpetrators of conflictrelated sexual violence accountable. To that end, we
need to assist conflict-torn countries and guide them in

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

reforming their judicial systems by strengthening the
rule of law and their accountability mechanisms.
Let me conclude by affirming Italy’s strong
commitment to preventing and tackling sexual violence
in conflicts. We will continue to support the work of the
Secretary-General and that of his Special Representative
in order to pursue better and increasingly tangible
results in this field.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Ms. Oehri (Liechtenstein): Despite a robust legal
framework, including the respective Security Council
resolutions, sexual violence continues to occur in
many conflicts, often in a systematic manner. The
latest shocking examples are the mounting reports of
sexual violence in apparent use as a weapon of war
in Ukraine, one of numerous aspects of systematic
violations of international humanitarian law resulting
from the Russian aggression. The ongoing reports of
rape and abduction in Ethiopia and Myanmar continue
to be very alarming. All three situations require the
urgent attention of the respective commissions of
inquiry and accountability mechanisms established
by Human Rights Council. In the case of Ukraine, we
will be looking for expeditious investigations by the
International Criminal Court.
We remain concerned about sexual and genderbased violence against women, girls, men and boys, as
well as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex
persons, which is used as a weapon of war to attack
civilian populations and break societies, communities
and families, as also documented by All Survivors
project in Afghanistan and Syria, among other
places. Such acts are not only morally repugnant, but
they are categorically prohibited under international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
They constitute war crimes and may amount to crimes
against humanity and genocide.
Concrete, time-bound preventive measures, as
explicitly outlined in resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2467
(2019), are necessary to bring an end to conflict-related
sexual violence. We reiterate our call on the Security
Council to include conflict-related sexual violence as
a designation criterion in targeted sanctions regimes.
Accountability is key to addressing conflictrelated sexual violence. International criminal justice
mechanisms have significantly advanced our efforts

22-3182221/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

to fight impunity. In 1998, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda broke new ground when it found in
the Akayesu case that rape and sexual assault constitute
an act of genocide. The Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) has played a pioneering role
in establishing a comprehensive and victim-centred
framework to expansively and efficiently respond to
crimes of conflict-related sexual violence. For the first
time in history, it firmly established conflict-related
sexual and gender-based violence as a crime against
humanity and a war crime. We commend the Office of
the Prosecutor for including charges related to sexual
and gender-based crimes in many of its cases and for
prioritizing such crimes as a matter of policy. The
ICC judgment against Dominic Ongwen succeeded in
painting a comprehensive picture of sexual and genderbased crimes suffered by victims and constitutes an
important precedent for future cases.
Where the ICC does not have jurisdiction, we
must look for other options. In the case of Syria, the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
(IIIM) supports prosecutions for the most serious crimes
under international law, offering a path towards justice
for the crimes committed, including sexual violence. Its
terms of reference notes the need for dedicated expertise
on sexual violence. We look forward to the publication
of the IIIM’s gender strategy and implementation plan
in the coming months.
Armed conflicts and the related displacement
result in increased vulnerability and a heightened risk
of human trafficking, including for the purpose of
sexual exploitation. Our collective fight against human
trafficking must include leveraging the crucial role
played by the financial sector in ending those crimes,
as also called for resolution 2331 (2016).
The Liechtenstein Finance against Slavery and
Trafficking initiative engages the financial sector
so as to tackle such crimes. It emphasizes the role of
financial inclusion and economic empowerment as a
major means to prevent vulnerability in the first place.
Among many other actions, it has undertaken activities
with respect to the risk of human trafficking as a result
of the massive refugee flows in Ukraine, both in the
area of prevention and the financial inclusion of the
Ukrainian people who have come to our country as
refugees due to the Russian aggression.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
22/53

13/04/2022

Ms. Leendertse (Germany): At the outset, I
would like to thank the United Kingdom for hosting
this open debate. I also thank Ms. Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Nadia Murad and
Ms. Mariana Karkoutly, as well as Ms. Hilina Berhanu,
for their important contributions.
The increase in conflict-related sexual violence
illustrated by the Secretary-General’s most recent
report (S/2022/272) is alarming. We are appalled by
the reports of sexual and gender-based violence against
women and children in Ukraine committed by the
Russian armed forces and mercenaries. The pictures
and accounts from Bucha are shocking; egregious
crimes were committed. Germany stands in solidarity
with all Ukrainians, including women and girls, in all
their diversity, affected by Russia’s unprovoked war of
aggression in Ukraine.
In Afghanistan, women and young girls are
subjected to forced marriages and sexual and genderbased violence on a daily basis, while impunity prevents
survivors from access to justice and to support services,
since specialized courts on violence against women
were closed. In Myanmar, widespread and systematic
violence has emerged since the military takeover, with
excessive force, including sexual and gender-based
violence, against protesters, journalists, activists,
women peacebuilders and women in leadership. The
numerous displaced women and girls from Syria face
heightened risks of sexual and gender-based violence,
as well as forced and early marriage. The Group of
Eminent Experts on Yemen in Geneva has documented
in its reports atrocious accounts of cases of sexual
violence against Yemeni women, children and men.
That important documentation is no longer being
carried out, because the Group’s mandate was not
renewed last year. We must hold all the perpetrators of
such crimes and others accountable.
Committed to advancing accountability in general,
Germany assumed the co-Chair of the States and Donors
Working Group of the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-based Violence in Emergencies. At the national
level, a higher regional court in Koblenz convicted
a former official of the Syrian General Intelligence
Service for crimes against humanity, including acts of
sexual violence, committed in 2011 and 2012.
Last week, the German Foreign Minister announced
the dedication of an additional €1 million in funding to
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

the International Criminal Court for the investigation
of Russian war crimes in Ukraine. We must protect
and enable organizations defending international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
and ensuring accountability for violations thereof.
A survivor-centred approach is essential to
preventing and responding to conflict-related
sexual violence. Three years after the adoption of
resolution 2467 (2019), put forward by Germany, we
are concerned about its slow implementation. The
international community must strengthen survivors’
rights and improve their access to justice, sexual and
reproductive health services, rehabilitation, reparations
and reintegration.
In 2021, German humanitarian assistance funded
projects with vital gender-based violence components,
totalling an amount of more than $80 million. That
made Germany the largest donor of the Oslo pledging
conference. Germany is also the largest donor to the
special appeal on sexual and gender-based violence
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
This year, German humanitarian assistance launched
a new project with UN-Women to strengthen sexual
and gender-based violence measures in humanitarian
response plans.
There can be no effective measures against conflictrelated sexual violence without real gender equality, the
protection and promotion of human rights, and women’s
and girls’ full, equal and meaningful participation and
leadership at all levels of decision-making. Germany
will pursue its strong commitment to all of these
aspects, including in the framework of its feminist
foreign policy, and hopes to be able to count on the
support of many other partners in this Chamber in this
important endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Denmark.
Mr. Hermann (Denmark): I am pleased to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, and of
course my own country, Denmark.
Let me begin by thanking the briefers — Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Pramila
Patten, Ms. Nadia Murad, Ms. Hilina Berhanu and
Ms. Mariana Karkoutly, for their sobering updates
this morning, and more importantly for their crucially

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

important work in addressing conflict-related sexual
violence.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a horrifying
reality. It is widely used to deliberately target civilian
populations in order to inflict long-term trauma,
dehumanize and humiliate victims, fracture families
and destroy the social fabric of communities. As
documented by the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/272), conflict-related sexual violence is a
violation that cuts across many geographies. To name
just a few contexts of concern, reports show that women
and girls have been targeted in Afghanistan through
systematic and widespread sexual and gender-based
violence. In northern Ethiopia, it is well documented
that sexual and gender-based violence, rape and sexual
torture have been used by both sides of the conflict
as systematic weapons of war on a horrific scale. In
Ukraine, initial accounts of sexual and gender-based
violence perpetrated by Russian soldiers are extremely
alarming, and the current large-scale displacement in
Ukraine is heightening the risk of human trafficking,
sexual exploitation and abuse for women, children
and persons belonging to LGBTQI+ communities in
particular.
The Nordic countries finds impunity for these
horrific acts unacceptable, and to ensure accountability
for conflict-related sexual violence, we need to do the
following. First, sexual and gender-based violence must
be incorporated as a stand-alone designation criterion
for targeted sanctions by the Security Council.
Secondly, as also pointed out by the SecretaryGeneral, we need to enhance coherence between the
practice of listing and the designation of parties for the
imposition of targeted and graduated measures. The low
levels of compliance with the framework on conflictrelated sexual violence put in place by the Security
Council starting in 2008 is simply not acceptable. An
alarming 70 per cent of the parties listed in the report of
the Secretary-General are persistent perpetrators and
have appeared on the Secretary-General’s list for five
or more years now.
Thirdly, to ensure better accountability for conflictrelated sexual violence, we must focus on both State and
non-State actors. State parties are often not scrutinized
enough, and, similarly, among non-State actors, we
see a lack of focus on the role of private military and
security actors, including the Wagner Group. We would
like to encourage the United Nations to contribute

22-3182223/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

to shedding the light on the role of State parties and
private military and security actors with regard to
conflict-related sexual violence and the possibility of
adding them to the Secretary-General’s list.
Fourthly, we call on the United Nations and
its States Members to support investigations and
prosecutions of conflict-related sexual violence and to
ensure the safe participation of survivors and witnesses
in judicial processes. Accountability, compliance and
reparations can only be ensured through the adoption of
strong national, legal and policy frameworks on sexual
and gender-based violence and remedies for survivors.
Fifthly, the Security Council must reflect prevention
and response to conflict-related sexual violence in
mandates for the renewal of peace operations. We
also call for further deployment of women protection
advisers and child protection advisers to both United
Nations peace operations and the offices of United
Nations resident and humanitarian coordinators in
relevant contexts. We note that they play a key role in
reporting on and addressing conflict-related sexual
violence in the field.
We already have the required normative and legal
framework to address conflict-related sexual violence
and other forms of violence committed against civilians
in armed conflicts, including women and children. What
is urgently needed now is accelerated implementation
of the existing legal and normative framework, which
requires substantial political will as well as funding.
An increased focus on protection cannot come at
the expense of the promotion of women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation. We need to promote
participation, protection and prevention simultaneously.
Intervention must take a survivor-centred approach
and include survivors’ access to basic health services
and rights, including sexual and reproductive-health
and reproductive-rights services, mental-health
and psychosocial support, efforts to prevent child
marriages and access to justice. Intervention must build
on and further strengthen partnerships with womenled and women-focused organizations, as well as
LGBTQI+ organizations, including through capacitystrengthening and sufficient rapid and flexible funding
and core funding.
The Nordic countries will continue to work to
end impunity and ensure accountability for all acts of
conflict-related sexual violence in collaboration with
24/53

13/04/2022

all partners, including civil society and women-led
organizations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Czech Republic.
Mr. Kulhánek (Czech Republic): The Czech
Republic aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of the European Union, in its
capacity as observer, and by the representative of
Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security (see S/PV.9016). I would like to add
a few remarks in my national capacity.
First and foremost, I would like to join others
in thanking the United Kingdom for bringing this
important debate to the Security Council. Accountability
for conflict-related sexual violence and its prevention
call for continuous attention from the Council. Every
year, there are thousands upon thousands of victims
of conflict-related sexual violence, most of them
women and girls. These sexual violence crimes, in a
sickening way, only add to the anguish and suffering
inflicted by armed conflicts and humanitarian crises
in Afghanistan, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ethiopia, Iraq, South Sudan, Syria, and, most recently,
Ukraine.
We are deeply concerned about all cases of sexual
and gender-based violence, human trafficking, sexual
exploitation and abuse. Discrimination against women
and girls in all their diversity are only worsened in
armed conflicts. Moreover, all forms of violence further
undermine the full, equal and meaningful participation
of all women and girls in political, social, economic and
peacebuilding processes.
Perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence
often remain unidentified. Justice for the victims is
therefore rarely achieved. Victims only seldom have
access to the necessary social and health services,
including sexual and reproductive-health services.
This needs to change. Efforts to strengthen prevention
and accountability must be accelerated. We must end
the culture of impunity. We have the international
framework for that, and the time for its implementation
is long overdue.
Following the outbreak of war in Ukraine, the
situation in the country raises particular concerns with
respect to what we are discussing in this Chamber
today. We once again call on Russia to end its military
aggression, withdraw all its forces from the entire
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

territory of Ukraine and stop violating international
humanitarian and human rights law.
We have been witnessing brutal sexual and genderbased attacks on women and girls systematically
perpetrated by the Russian armed forces in Ukraine.
Rape and other forms of sexual violence are used as
part of Russian tactics to intimidate civilian populations
and protesters, and punish and deter non-governmental
organizations, journalists and media workers.
Moreover, there are reports of cases of rape and
sexual violence in which they have become some
perverse form of entertainment for members of
the Russian armed forces in Ukraine. The Russian
Federation must be held accountable for those and other
unacceptable breaches of the Charter of the United
Nations and international law. All crimes by Russia
in Ukraine, including the widespread use of sexual
violence, must be properly investigated and brought
to justice.
Let me stress that all perpetrators of conflictrelated sexual violence, everywhere in the world, must
be held accountable. Ensuring prevention and justice
for victims and a zero-tolerance policy is the only way
to end conflict-related sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Maldives.
Ms. Hussain (Maldives): Thank you, Madam, for
convening the annual debate on conflict-related sexual
violence under the agenda item “Women and peace and
security”. I would also like to extend my appreciation to
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2022/272) and
to the briefers for their invaluable insights.
We are currently living in a world marred by multiple
conflicts and humanitarian crises. We continue to be
alarmed by reports of conflict-related sexual violence
and its prevalence in conflict areas around the world.
It is essential that the perpetrators of those heinous
crimes are brought to justice. To use sexual violence
as a weapon to terrorize vulnerable populations and
violate their dignity and most basic rights is grotesque
and outrageous.
In that regard, Maldives recalls resolution 1325
(2000), which compels all parties to the conflict,
including non-State parties, to take special measures to
protect women and girls from gender-based violence,
particularly rape and other forms of sexual violence.
The perpetrators of those crimes — regardless of the

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

conflict, the side of the conflict on which they fought
and whether it is still an active or a post-conflict
situation — must be held accountable for their actions
and brought to justice. We encourage all investigations
and prosecutions to be full, fair and centred on justice
for the victims.
As a peace-loving nation, Maldives welcomes the
Secretary-General’s recommendation that women’s
inclusion and participation in leadership roles in
political, peacekeeping, security and rule-of-law
institutions are fundamental to our efforts to build a
durable and peaceful society.
In that regard, we have implemented various
policies, including a zero-tolerance policy towards
all forms of gender-based violence, and have enacted
acts on the prohibition of sexual harassment and
abuse, on sexual offences and on the prevention of
domestic violence prevention. We have also enacted a
social protection act to raise awareness and create the
fundamental necessary conditions for the protection of
all women and girls.
The Secretary-General’s report is a stark reminder
of the tremendous amount of work that remains to be
completed to eliminate the abhorrent crimes of sexual
violence. We must commit to implementing a survivorcentred approach to preventing and responding to
sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict situations
and address sexual violence and work to eliminate it at
its root cause.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I congratulate the United Kingdom for organizing this
timely open debate and for the way in which has led
the work of the Council since the beginning of April.
I am grateful for the comprehensive and courageous
information provided by the briefers this morning,
which constitutes evidence of an unacceptable situation.
While the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/272) focuses on recent history, it reflects
patterns of violence and of cruelty that have been
on the rise since the 1990s. Conflicts share common
denominators and, unfortunately, the reports show
that sexual violence is one of them. For that reason, we
condemn all acts of armed aggression and occupation
because they open the door to torture and brutality.

22-3182225/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Ecuador therefore condemns sexual violence in any
context, whether in a conflict or post-conflict situation
and wherever it may occur — whether in Afghanistan,
Iraq, Syria, Ukraine or anywhere else in the world.
Ecuador does not see how we can call ourselves a
civilization while at the same time we contemplate acts
of barbarity, such as sexual violence, as a tactic of war.
The Council must promote effective mechanisms
to prevent sexual violence. As reflected in the
topic of today’s debate, an effective way to do so is
through responsibility, accountability, zero-tolerance
approaches and non-impunity for those who commit
such acts, as well as those who encourage or conceal
them, as many delegations have already mentioned.
Ecuador agrees with the content of the report of
the Secretary-General contained in S/2022/77 and
wishes to draw particular attention to paragraph 27,
which highlights the need for an interconnected and
interdependent application of judicial and non-judicial
measures in line with international standards and in
coordination with peace and political processes.
Yesterday, my delegation attended the Security
Council briefing on Colombia in this very Chamber (see
S/PV.9015). I take this opportunity to acknowledge the
efforts of our neighbouring country in implementing
the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, which leads me
to recall, as reflected in the report of the SecretaryGeneral I mentioned, certain practices of sexual
violence by armed groups such as the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo,
including against its own members.
While justice at local, regional and international
levels is key to preventing sexual violence, it is not
limited to sentencing those responsible but must also
be supported by improved legal and health services
with a gender perspective and a focus on the interests
of survivors, as underscored in resolution 2467 (2019).
My delegation noted with deep concern the
Security Council briefing of 11 April (see S/PV.9014),
in particular with regard to the increasing reports of
sexual violence and trafficking of women and girls in
the context of the mass displacement resulting from the
military aggression against and invasion of Ukraine,
which Ecuador once again condemns.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
26/53

13/04/2022

Mr. Aidid (Malaysia): I thank you, Madam, for
convening this open debate. I would also like to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and the other briefers for their valuable remarks on
the subject.
Malaysia remains deeply concerned by the
heightened risk of sexual violence against civilians,
particularly women and children in conflict. The report
of the Secretary-General last year (S/2021/312) revealed
the disturbing fact that a number of parties to armed
conflict continue to use sexual violence as a cruel
tactic of war, terror and political repression in order to
advance their strategic objectives. That heinous crime
must stop.
Malaysia continues to support — and underscores
the importance of — addressing sexual violence in
conflict and post-conflict situations in an integrated
and holistic manner by all stakeholders, including
States, the United Nations system and civil society.
In that connection, Malaysia is pleased that the recent
conclusions of the Commission on the Status of Women
contained vital language emphasizing the need to
address sexual and gender-based violence, both during
and in the aftermath of conflict, including by adopting
preventive approaches and taking into account the
needs and perspectives of victims and survivors.
Moving forward, we need to ensure accountability,
including through effective prevention and protection
mechanisms. In addition, measures to prevent and
address sexual violence should be strategically aligned
with efforts to prevent violent extremism. In that
connection, I wish to highlight the following points.
First, it is incumbent on States to introduce
or strengthen legislation and judicial processes to
document, investigate and prosecute sexual violence
in conflict and post-conflict situations. Malaysia
views accountability as a duty under both domestic
and international law. In that regard, national systems
should be pushed to meet international standards for
ensuring accountability and justice so that perpetrators
of such crimes will never go unpunished. Assistance
to survivors, such as psychological support and access
to justice, must also be prioritized. We also call for
provisions on sexual violence in conflict to be integrated
into all peace processes, negotiations and agreements.
Secondly, we see merits in broadening networking
and coordination between the Security Council and the
Human Rights Council towards ensuring accountability
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

for human rights violations, including sexual assault
and violence against women and children.
Thirdly, prevention efforts will not succeed without
women’s inclusive participation. Participation also
matters for protection and is key to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. Women’s participation in the security
framework can advance citizens’ trust in institutions and
contribute towards improving intelligence-gathering,
reporting of gender-based violence and treatment of
victims, witnesses and suspects. At the same time,
we need to end the harassment and reprisals targeting
women in peace and security processes.
Malaysia remains committed to the women and
peace and security agenda and the collective efforts to
combat sexual violence in conflict, including through
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Since 2014,
the Malaysian Peacekeeping Centre has continued
to teach courses on gender and the role of women
in peacekeeping missions, such as “Maintaining
a gender adviser, the comprehensive protection of
civilians, combating sexual exploitation and abuse,
women and peace and security, gender mainstreaming
and preventing sexual violence in conflict. Those
programmes have benefited more than 900 military and
civilian personnel, including 190 foreign participants
and nine Malaysian battalion contingents to the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.
Malaysia is also a signatory to the voluntary
compact, which reaffirms its strong commitment to
address sexual exploitation and abuse comprehensively
and effectively.
It is more crucial than ever to address the persistent
impunity and vacuum of justice and accountability
for sexual violence in conflict. Let me conclude by
stressing the importance of the Security Council
urgently working with relevant stakeholders and
partners in our collective efforts to strengthen the
protection of civilians, including women and children,
in conflict situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.
Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statements delivered earlier
today on behalf of the European Union and the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see S/PV.9016),
as well as with the statement to be delivered on behalf
of the United Nations LGBTI Core Group.

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

We take note of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2022/272) and endorses its content. Spain will also
continue to support the mandate of Ms. Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We are observing how — in contexts affected by
armed conflict, such as Afghanistan, Ethiopia, Libya,
Mali, Myanmar, the Central African Republic, Syria,
Yemen or Ukraine — the blatant use of rape as a weapon
of war has once again become evident.
Today more than ever, it is still necessary to shine
a light on conflict-related sexual violence. Almost 15
years ago, resolution 1820 (2008) declared conflictrelated sexual violence a peace and security problem in
its own right. The three subsequent resolutions focusing
on that human rights violation and today’s open debate
are a testament to how much remains to be done and
to the urgency of finding answers for the prevention
and condemnation of an expanding tactic of warfare
shielded by impunity. Accountability as a preventive
and reactive instrument must become an effective tool
to combat the impunity with which State and non-State
actors commit these crimes against humanity.
Spain believes that we must prioritize the inclusion
of sexual violence as an independent criterion for the
imposition of targeted United Nations sanctions and the
deployment of protection advisers for the prevention
and early warning of sexual violence in all conflict
situations. Gender equality, the promotion of human
rights and the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in their societies are the pillars of any
prevention strategy, as the fight against sexual violence
is also linked to the dismantling of patterns of gender
inequality and discrimination prior to the outbreak of
any armed conflict.
We also want to shine a light on the stigmas
associated with sexual violence and their consequences
for the victims. The lack of solid institutions in
countries in conflict leads to significant weaknesses in
the mechanisms and public networks for the protection
of victims of sexual violence, the inability to address
complaints and protect victims and significant
impediments to the effective investigation and
prosecution of such crimes.
For that reason, Spain understands the critical
importance of supporting civil society organizations,
in particular women’s organizations, which play
a critical role in disseminating information on

22-3182227/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

13/04/2022

prevention, protection and access to services so as to
assist women and girl survivors of sexual violence
and gathering evidence to combat impunity and
demand accountability.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
delivered on behalf of the European Union and the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see
S/PV.9016).

With regard to Ukraine, we demand that Russia
immediately cease its military aggression, withdraw all
troops from the entire Ukrainian territory and respect
its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity,
as pursuant to General Assembly resolution A/ES11/1 of 2 March. We condemn in the strongest terms
the crimes committed in Bucha and all cases of sexual
violence that are coming to light in the war imposed on
Ukraine by the Russian Federation, regardless of who
the perpetrators are.

This debate will focus on accountability, as
prevention is crucial. We consider it important to
increase our joint efforts to end the heinous practice of
sexual violence in conflict also through empowerment,
gender equality and access to justice. It is crucial that
the Security Council continue to address various aspects
of conflict within the framework of thematic debates
such as this one. Today’s debate also contributes to the
systematic advancement of the women and peace and
security agenda in the work and decision-making of the
Council.

We would like to emphasize the urgency of sending
experts with gender training to investigate incidents
of sexual violence in the country, as well as the need
to create safe environments in transit and destination
countries in order to prevent the trafficking of women
and children fleeing the war and to protect the victims.
In that regard, it is essential for Spain to support
the implementation of the Safe Schools Declaration.
My country therefore calls on all parties to the conflict
to prevent sexual and gender-based violence on the way
to and from schools and educational institutions.
Finally, although Afghanistan is no longer at war,
we would like to take this opportunity to denounce the
gender apartheid that Afghan women and girls still
suffer in this country and to continue to express our
support and solidarity.
Combating sexual violence is a priority in Spain’s
feminist foreign policy, which makes gender equality
and the rights of all women and girls a central objective
of all its actions. We hope that our actions will contribute
to this important work.
The President: As we still have a large number of
speakers inscribed on the list, I would like once again
to remind all speakers to keep their statements to no
more than four minutes.
I give the floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): First of all, let me express
our special thanks to you, Madam President, for
organizing this important meeting. We wish the United
Kingdom presidency of the Security Council for this
month every success. We are proud of your conduct of
the presidency thus far, and we wish you the very best.
28/53

Let me thank the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, Nobel Peace
Prize laureate Ms. Nadia Murad and the other briefers
for their insightful presentations.
Slovakia considers prevention to be the cornerstone
of United Nations efforts aimed at peacebuilding and
sustaining peace. The women and peace and security
agenda, together with the goals of inclusivity and gender
equality, definitely fits into the broader prevention
agenda of the Secretary-General. The women and
peace and security agenda is also instrumental in the
achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), in particular SDG 5 and SDG 16, which
recognize gender equality as well as peace, justice and
strong institutions as global development priorities.
As co-Chair of the Group of Friends of Security
Sector Reform, Slovakia wishes to recall resolution 2151
(2014), on security-sector reform, which underscores
the importance of women’s equal, meaningful and
effective participation and full involvement in the
security sector in order to build inclusive, accountable
and legitimate institutions that more effectively protect
populations and promote lasting peace and sustainable
development. Gender-sensitive security-sector reform
is key to developing security-sector institutions that are
non-discriminatory, representative of the population
and capable of effectively responding to the specific
security needs of diverse groups, thereby playing a
crucial role in prevention.
Reforming the security sector, as we have seen in
many conflict contexts, must also include the reform
of recruitment processes and an improvement in the
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

delivery of security services to address and prevent
sexual and gender-based violence.
I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his recent report on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2022/272) and commend his commitment and
leadership in connection not only with the women and
peace and security agenda but also with his efforts in
implementing a zero-tolerance policy with regard to
sexual exploitation and abuse.
On the other hand, we are deeply concerned by
the observation made in the report that the year 2021
was marked by continuing recourse to military rather
than diplomatic and political means, which led to
displacement on a significant scale, exposing civilians
to heightened levels of sexual violence. The report
likewise clearly states that rising inequality, increased
militarization, reduced civic space and the illicit flow of
small arms and light weapons also contributed, among
other factors, to fuelling widespread and systematic
conflict-related sexual violence, even in the midst of a
global pandemic, which is particularly disturbing.
Slovakia fully supports the approach of the
Secretary-General, which is based on prioritizing the
rights and dignity of survivors. An intrinsic part of
such dignity lies in holding perpetrators accountable.
That is absolutely crucial. Various Security Council
resolutions recognize that sexual violence can itself
constitute a war crime or a crime against humanity;
unfortunately, most of the perpetrators of those acts
continue to escape justice. Member States have to
continue working closely with the United Nations in
order to combat impunity for any and all such crimes.
The Security Council should closely consider referrals
to the International Criminal Court when gender-based
violence and gender-based crimes are committed. The
primary responsibility, though, for prosecuting such
crimes lies with States, which should adopt sufficiently
robust national criminal legislations as the best means
of prevention.
Last but not least, we deplore in the strongest
terms the ongoing unjustified and unprovoked Russian
aggression against Ukraine, in a blatant violation of
international law and the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. The images that the world has
recently seen have plumbed the depths of a living hell
following the Russian decision to start that senseless
war. The acts of sexual violence perpetrated by the
Russian forces, including gang rapes, rapes in front

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

of children and other similar practices, are among the
most hideous violations of international humanitarian
law and laws of armed conflict. We call on the Russian
authorities to take immediate and effective measures to
stop such inhuman and brutal practices and bring the
perpetrators to justice rather than continuously coming
up with lies, cover-up stories and excuses.
Let me say my last sentence in Russian, a language
that I studied for many years and that I used to teach, so
I speak it quite well.
(spoke in Russian)
Let me be very clear: such behaviour is unforgivable
under any circumstances, and there should be no
impunity for such crimes for anyone. That should be
crystal-clear to everyone, in all situations in which we
find ourselves.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, my country’s delegation congratulates the
United Kingdom on its assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month and on convening today’s
meeting successfully.
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome
Ms. Nadia Murad, who was here with us this morning,
and I commend her courage. She is a voice for many
survivors, not just in Iraq but throughout the world. I
would like also to thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and all
those civil-society representatives who briefed us
this morning.
During the period 2014-2017, the entire world
witnessed the perpetration of the most horrific crimes
by the Da’esh terrorist organization against the Iraqi
people, including decapitations, the sexual slavery
of women and girls, forced marriage, the destruction
of religious heritage and blatant disdain for the very
principles of human rights and human dignity. Those
crimes constitute genocide and crimes against humanity.
Today, in the wake of that terrible legacy, Iraq is sparing
no effort to promote peace, bring justice to the victims
and provide reparations to the survivors pursuant to our
national legislation and our international commitments.
In March 2021, the Iraqi Parliament adopted a
law on Yazidi female survivors, the first law to offer
compensation and support to survivors, including

22-3182229/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

women and girls who were sexually enslaved and
sold in slave markets. They were forced to change
their religion and get married. They were forced to
become pregnant and to have abortions. That law also
stipulates that a search will be undertaken for abducted
persons. Pursuant to that law, a General Directorate
for Female Survivors’ Affairs has been set up, which
is the main body charged with implementing the law.
This law explicitly states that the crimes perpetrated
by the Da’esh terrorist organization constitute crimes
of genocide and crimes against humanity. No general
amnesty or specific amnesty can be granted to the
perpetrators of crimes of abduction and captivity.
The Council of Ministers, furthermore, has adopted
legislation aimed at implementing the law of female
survivors, taking into account their needs and hearing
their views. It promotes peaceful coexistence and
rejects violence. The Council of Ministers is planning
to open medical centres to provide psychosocial and
societal services to the survivors. Paragraph 6 of the law
stipulates that applications presented by the survivors
to the centres need to be confidential. In order to
facilitate the process of submitting the applications, the
Directorate is developing a mechanism for receiving
and reviewing them and is establishing a database. The
Directorate also plans to set up an online platform to
receive applications in electronic format.
With regard to the idea of appointing a special
envoy, we believe that the United Nations is already
broadly represented in Iraq by the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq, which provides political
advice and humanitarian and development assistance.
In addition, the Federal Government in Baghdad and
the Kurdistan Regional Government hold high-level
meetings to deal with all issues, including coordination
between Iraqi security forces and Peshmerga forces to
combat the remaining Da’esh cells.
Members of Da’esh are still appearing before our
national courts to answer for the crimes and atrocities
committed against the Iraqi people, pursuant to Iraq’s
commitment to achieving accountability and justice for
all victims, including those of sexual violence, which
cannot be tolerated.
The Government is also strengthening the powers
of judges in the areas of combating terrorism and
promoting our judicial system in line with the Iraqi
Constitution and Iraq’s international obligations. Iraq is
prepared to receive the evidence that has been gathered
30/53

13/04/2022

by the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) in order
to use it in a competent national court.
The Council of Representatives of Iraq has finished
its first reading of a draft law concerning the criminal
court, which will address the crimes committed by
elements of Da’esh. That is the first step towards
ensuring accountability and fairness for all survivors
and using the evidence collected by UNITAD before
an Iraqi court.
In conclusion, with the support of civil society
organizations, the Directorate continues to play a
vital role in supporting the female survivors of sexual
violence and addressing the stigmatization inflicted
upon them through awareness-raising and encouraging
them to submit applications so that they may benefit
from reparations measures pursuant to the law
concerning female Yezidi survivors.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Mr. Khandamishvili (Georgia): I wish to extend
our appreciation to the United Kingdom presidency for
convening today’s debate. We thank the briefers for their
comprehensive, insightful and powerful presentations.
Georgia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the observer of the European Union and I would
like to make some additional comments in my
national capacity.
Today we are speaking about a cruel tactic of war and
horrific crime — sexual violence in conflict — which
is alarmingly widespread in conflicts and military
confrontations worldwide. Impunity for those crimes
continues to prevail and justice has yet to be served for
the victims and survivors. The international community
can and must do more to investigate, prosecute and hold
perpetrators accountable. That is vital for the future
prevention of such heinous crimes.
In that regard, let me reiterate our full support and
solidarity for Ukraine. Georgia strongly condemns
Russia’s unjustified and unprovoked full-scale military
aggression against its sovereign neighbour, which has
brought devastating humanitarian consequences and
immense suffering to Ukrainians.
Women and children are particularly vulnerable.
They have fallen victim to attacks on civilians and
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

civilian infrastructure, including on maternity hospitals
and other health-care facilities, schools and shelters.
Equally disturbing are reports about Russian forces
perpetrating sexual violence and rape as a weapon of
war against women and girls.
In that regard, we once again stress the urgency of
a prompt and impartial investigation into all alleged
violations of international humanitarian law and
related crimes. As I mentioned, ensuring accountability
for perpetrators and justice for survivors is key to
the prevention and deterrence of future violence of
this nature.
The adoption of Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security paves the way for States
to establish a firm normative framework to address
conflict-related sexual violence as an issue of peace
and security. Georgia pays particular attention to those
resolutions and has been carrying out its national action
plans for their implementation since 2012.
The promotion of women’s rights and gender
equality, including in the military, is a high priority
for Georgia. The Ministry of Defence has developed
its gender equality strategy, which establishes the
conditions to promote equal rights and opportunities
for men and women, prevent and eradicate all forms of
discrimination, counter gender violence and eliminate
misconduct, sexual harassment and physical and
psychological mistreatment.
Georgia makes every effort to build the capacity
of peacekeeping personnel to prevent and respond to
sexual and gender-based violence in both conflict and
post-conflict situations. Peacekeeping personnel are
trained according to Security Council resolutions on
women and peace and security within the framework
of mandatory predeployment training. Georgia spares
no effort to maintain issues related to women victims
of conflict, including refugees, on the agenda of the
Geneva international discussions, which is the only
format for negotiations between Georgia and Russia on
security and humanitarian issues.
Georgian participants in the Geneva discussions
hold regular meetings with civil society, internally
displaced persons and women affected by the conflict,
as well as women’s rights groups, to exchange
information on peace talks and set the needs and
priorities of conflict-affected women and vulnerable
groups. Our commitment to address sexual violence
in conflict has been further strengthened by endorsing

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

important multilateral initiatives, such as the Safe
Schools Declaration.
Regrettably, the illegal occupation of the Georgian
regions of Abkhazia and of Tskhinvali in South Ossetia
by the Russian Federation remains the main obstacle for
the Government of Georgia to implementing the human
rights protection framework for the women and girls
residing in the Russian-occupied territories of Georgia.
They remain particularly vulnerable, as their
fundamental rights and freedoms are frequently
neglected and violated, including but not limited to
freedom of movement and illegal detentions by Russian
occupying forces. International engagement and the
establishment of monitoring mechanisms inside the
conflict-affected regions is of paramount importance
to protect the rights of women and girls, including with
respect to the prevention of sexual violence.
The President: I give the floor to the observer of
the Observer State of the Holy See.
Monsignor Murphy: (Holy See): The Holy See
is grateful to the United Kingdom presidency for
having convoked this open debate on accountability
as prevention and ending cycles of sexual violence
in conflict and for being given the floor to offer a
few considerations.
Sexual violence in conflict is now widely
recognized by the international community as a war
crime. Year after year, the reports of the SecretaryGeneral confirm that it has taken its place among the
horrors of all violent conflicts. Sexual violence is often
used as a cruel tactic of war in order to advance strategic
objectives to subjugate and humiliate victims, causing
them physical, emotional and psychological harm, and
has profoundly negative impacts on the communities
to which victims belong, as a result of which they
sometimes find themselves ostracized.
Despite increasing attention to this war crime,
sexual violence in conflict often remains hidden,
underreported and given little attention compared
to its scope both during conflict and after the end of
hostilities — a period that often remains chaotic,
lawless and dangerous.
In that regard, ensuring as accurate reporting
as possible should contribute both to present a more
precise picture of how widespread such inhumane
crimes are and to take the necessary steps so that
victims may receive adequate assistance and support.

22-3182231/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

In this field, grass-roots and civil society organizations
also play an important role while striving — often in
situations of great danger — to help victims of sexual
violence in conflict.
In addition to being a hidden crime, sexual
violence in conflict is sadly also a crime ignored that
is perceived to be less attention-worthy or, alarmingly,
is viewed as intrinsic to conflict and therefore a fixed
feature of it. What is more, impunity is often the norm
and consequently victims are often afraid to speak
out. The silence must be broken. Impunity must give
way to accountability so that there can be justice and
reparation. The lack of concerted efforts to ensure
justice compounds the suffering of victims, who are
often marginalized and left on their own to deal with
trauma and pain. Holding perpetrators accountable is
also a key factor in deterring and preventing such acts.
The Holy See welcomes the work done at
the international level through legal action and
investigation, as well as advocacy in the pursuit of justice
to end impunity. In particular, we commend Ms. Nadia
Murad’s courage and her dedication in bringing her
weighty voice to those efforts. Survivors should not
only be heard; their pain should be acknowledged, their
strength recognized and their wisdom harnessed to
promote and protect the human dignity and rights of all.
In situations of conflict and tension around the
world, we must never forget that women are not only
victims but also have an essential and irreplaceable
role as protagonists in the promotion of peace and
reconciliation at the local, national and international
levels. To exclude the full participation of women at
every stage and aspect of peace processes would be
to fail the commitments made since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Common multilateral action is absolutely needed
to effectively address the scourge of sexual violence
in conflict. The Holy See encourages, in a particular
way, the members of the Security Council to seek
concrete and unifying action, in collaboration with
the Secretariat, as well as to promote initiatives to
prevent and combat sexual abuse in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including through the
specialized training of personnel, with the specific aim
of reducing risks in host countries.
The Holy See hopes that today’s open debate and
the attention it brings to the subject will give more
space to survivors and victims to encourage them to
32/53

13/04/2022

come forward to find healing and hope, through the
recognition of their personal dignity, and will see the
establishment of more robust mechanisms to bring
those who have committed violations against them
to justice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Ms. Chan Valverde (Costa Rica): Costa Rica
thanks the United Kingdom for convening today’s open
debate and its leadership on this issue. Sexual violence
is not an inevitable consequence of conflicts and States
are called upon to prevent, investigate and punish it. In
that regard, allow me to make the following remarks.
First, Costa Rica deplores the fact that impunity
for sexual violence in armed conflict remains the
norm; that justice continues to elude victims; and that
accountability is the exception, not the rule — from
Ethiopia to Myanmar to Ukraine. To put an end to
impunity, all State and non-State actors involved in
atrocities must be held accountable. That work begins
at home, with the adoption of robust legislation and by
strengthening judicial institutions and guaranteeing
victims and survivors access to justice and the right to
full reparation.
The International Criminal Court plays a
fundamental role in that regard. Costa Rica urges
the Court to continue to promote the implementation
of the Rome Statute by adopting an intersectional
approach in all proceedings involving sexual violence
in armed conflict.
Secondly, Costa Rica firmly believes in changing
the reductionist binary lens through which sexual
violence in armed conflict has been addressed for far
too long. For a long time, boys and men and lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex people have
been excluded from discussions on this topic. Costa
Rica calls upon the Council to broaden the conversation
so that all victims are considered. A victim-centred
approach and gender mainstreaming are key to ensuring
more inclusive and effective accountability. Invisibility
perpetuates injustice and underpins impunity.
Thirdly, Costa Rica believes that the international
response to conflict-related sexual violence must be
more forceful and should match the achievements made
other areas, such as the protection of civilians. Sexual
violence in conflict is not a second-rate issue. It is an
indisputable priority of the international community,
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

which Costa Rica believes should be systematically
reflected in the Council’s reports and actions.
While Costa Rica acknowledges the delay in
adopting a feminist approach to international criminal
law, we highlight the crucial contribution of Costa
Rican Judge Elizabeth Odio Benito. In 1998, as a judge
at the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, Elizabeth Odio Benito worked tirelessly to
ensure that rape and sexual assault of other kinds were
viewed as forms of torture.
Her interpretation is now an accepted principle
of international law and represents a milestone in the
struggle to condemn the use of sexual violence as a
weapon of war. It is time to honour that historic debt to
women and to all victims and survivors — all of them,
without exception and without distinction — because
we all deserve to live with greater dignity under the sun.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of NATO.
Mr. Miarka (NATO): Let me thank the United
Kingdom for convening this important debate. It is
particularly timely, considering the reports of the
horrific acts of sexual violence perpetrated against
women and children in the context of the Russian
aggression against Ukraine. Using sexual violence as a
tactic of war is a gross violation of human rights.
For a decade, starting with the Chicago Summit
in 2012, NATO has continued to demonstrate its
commitment to preventing and responding to conflictrelated sexual violence. In 2015, we developed specific
military guidelines on the prevention of and response
to conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence,
which provide strategic direction with the aim of
reducing risk and improving responsive measures for
the protection of vulnerable populations.
NATO personnel are obliged to prevent, act and
stop sexual violence in areas where it operates; develop
the analytical tools necessary to understand the level
of risk of sexual violence for information collection
and reporting; and cooperate with relevant local and
international actors, including the United Nations.
Last year, allies approved the NATO policy on
conflict-related violence, which outlines the actions
that NATO will take to prevent and respond to sexual
violence in all operations, missions and Councilmandated activities.

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

NATO’s dedication to prevent and combat any
form of sexual violence is far-reaching. We have been
working with the United Nations to integrate it into our
education and training to ensure that our staff are fully
prepared. We work with partners, such as the Nordic
Centre for Gender in Military Operations, to ensure
that gender advisers and gender focal points are well
equipped before deployment.
NATO also participates in the International Day for
the Elimination of Sexual Violence in Conflict to join
the United Nations and our other partners in raising
awareness. We continue to amplify that through other
activities, both on the military and civilian sides.
In particular, NATO Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Women, Peace and Security, Irene
Fellin, works closely with the Civil Society Advisory
Panel, an independent coalition of women’s rights
experts aimed at assisting NATO in the effective
implementation of the women and peace and security
mandate across the alliance. That helps ensure that the
actions we take are built upon the insight gained from
the perspectives of women civil society members from
allies, partners and conflict-affected areas. That has
assisted us both in our policymaking and in identifying
early warning indicators to support our efforts for the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence.
Integrity is one of the guiding principles in NATO’s
approach to women and peace and security. With
integrity comes accountability. When conflict-related
sexual violence cannot be prevented, those who engage
in it must be brought to justice. NATO is working to
make conflict-related sexual violence is a part of its
work on battlefield evidence collection to ensure that
war criminals are held accountable.
Such efforts are not only a part of what we do,
but of who we are. NATO will continue to work
towards preventing and responding to conflict-related
sexual violence, as well as holding those responsible
accountable. We will continue to work with the United
Nations and other partners in this important area, which
has a devastating effect on not only women, girls and
boys, but also entire communities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cyprus.
Mr. Hadjichrysanthou (Cyprus): I thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this important
debate. My statement complements that of the

22-3182233/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

European Union, to which we fully subscribe. I thank
the Special Representative for her report (S/2022/272),
and applaud the briefers for their courageous and
compelling interventions.
Sexual violence as a weapon of war cannot be
considered as an inevitable consequence of armed
conflicts, even though the history of that disturbing
phenomenon is as long as that of war itself. Despite
the increased attention to the women and peace and
security agenda, we observe that significant gaps
remain in effectively addressing the phenomenon.
Strategies to address sexual violence in conflict
have mainly focused on perpetrator accountability and
survivor support after violence has already occurred.
While those are vital, we also need to establish solid
prevention measures to stop sexual violence from
occurring in the first place. Conflict-related sexual
violence is preventable by systematic action.
Placing prevention at the core of our
approach requires a multifaceted, multi-level and
multidimensional strategy that includes addressing the
root causes of conflict itself. Investing in strengthening
the rule of law and State institutions and in economic
stability, infrastructure and social development, as well
as addressing deep-rooted inequalities and ensuring
women’s participation in all spheres, are central to that
approach. At the same time, foundational to a preventive
approach would be the recognition of the importance of
two particular aspects.
The first aspect is the continuum of sexual violence.
While conflict-related sexual violence takes place
in conflict settings, it still occurs within the broader
context of gender-based violence and exists within a
global climate of impunity, where gender inequality
and women’s disempowerment play a highly significant
role in its perpetuation.
The second aspect is the primacy of survivors.
Survivors should not be a voice alone. They must
become the architects of strategies aimed at addressing
conflict-related sexual violence. A survivor-centred
approach cannot focus solely on providing support or
promoting women’s empowerment. It must also address
the economic, social and political structures that
underpin their disempowerment.
Post-conflict situations provide an opportunity for
the transformation of societal structures in ways that
ensure greater enjoyment of women’s human rights. Yet
34/53

13/04/2022

women continue to be excluded from conflict prevention
efforts, post-conflict transitions and reconstruction
processes. Post-conflict societies recover and
rebuild more effectively when women participate in
reconstruction efforts and their experiences in conflict
are addressed. Responding to conflict-related sexual
violence should include women in developing solutions
to the factors that place them at risk.
History, including in the case of Cyprus, has shown
that the role of women in conflict resolution, postconflict rehabilitation, reconciliation and sustainable
peace is key. At the same time, the violence and
degradation suffered by women in conflict situations
remain largely unaddressed. As a country that has
experienced the atrocity of conflict-related sexual
violence first hand, Cyprus attaches great importance
to the elimination of all forms of gender-based
violence and joins calls to accelerate efforts towards
their elimination.
The crucial role of women in the prevention and
resolution of conflicts and the need for their full,
equal and meaningful participation and involvement in
all efforts for the maintenance of peace and security
have been widely recognized, particularly by the
Organization. What remains is for that to be translated
into practice. Sexual violence in conflict is a grave
human rights violation, which constitutes a threat
to international peace and security. Curbing the root
causes of conflict-related sexual violence is therefore
not only a moral but also a strategic imperative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): The delegation of
Sierra Leone is pleased to join the global discourse
on accountability as prevention: ending cycles of
sexual violence in conflict. I congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April, and I thank
you for convening this timely debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his recent insightful report on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2022/272).
Having experienced one of the bloodiest and fiercest
civil wars, during which sexual violence, including
rape, gang rape, sexual slavery, forced marriage,
et cetera were used as tactics of war by the warring
factions, Sierra Leone is fully aware of the horrifying
impact of such crimes on the lives and livelihoods of its
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

women and girls and is sparing no efforts in combating
that scourge.
On the domestic front, in recent times we have
taken many bold steps to address the incidence of sexual
violence. From amending our national law on sexual
violence to setting up a special court on rape, as well
as establishing a one-stop centre to provide services for
survivors of sexual abuse, we continue to demonstrate
an exemplary commitment to combating the incidence
of sexual violence within our borders.
Building on our domestic efforts, in his address at
the General Assembly in September 2021 (see A/76/
PV.6), His Excellency the President of Sierra Leone
called for global solidarity with regard to access to
justice and remedies for survivors of sexual violence
in the form of a stand-alone resolution, to be adopted
by the Assembly hopefully during this seventy-sixth
session. The resolution will not only highlight the
gravity of sexual violence, but will specifically call
out the crime as abhorrent to international peace and
security and will uplift survivors as deserving dignity
and justice. I therefore avail myself of this opportunity
to encourage all Member States to support that noble
initiative when the times comes, as most of its elements
speak to the issue of accountability as prevention. In
our view, peace is not the absence of visible conflict
and, in order to have true peace, survivors must have
access to justice.
It is no gainsaying that many commendable actions
have been taken by both the General Assembly and the
Security Council in the form of treaties, conventions
and resolutions, including resolution 1820 (2008).
Yet women and children around the world remain
vulnerable to sexual violence, be it in times of war or
peace. There is still much to be done at the national,
subregional, regional and global levels if we are to fully
implement landmark resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820
(2008) and other related human rights instruments in
our grand effort to turn the tide against sexual violence
in all its forms and manifestations.
Let me close by encouraging delegations present
in this Chamber to deeply reflect upon the fact that,
notwithstanding the many strong measures adopted
individually and collectively, the despicable crime of
sexual violence has continued unabated around the
globe, and often with total impunity. The time is now
to accelerate efforts aimed at taking concerted and
concrete steps to address incidents of sexual violence

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

crimes, restoring the dignity of survivors by promoting
forward-looking
strategies,
and
strengthening
accountability as prevention through enforcing
compliance with the relevant normative positions that
we have all adopted.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Koba (Indonesia): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom delegation for convening today’s
meeting. We also thank all the briefers for their
briefings.
Sexual violence should never be used as a weapon
in conflict. Based on the reports we have heard, it is
important to make sure the use of sexual violence must
stop. This is the first step to fulfilling our commitment
to saving lives. Indonesia supports the United Nations
in its multifaceted efforts aimed at ending the cycles of
sexual violence in conflict.
We must support nationally developed, home-grown
and reliable justice and accountability capacities. We
believe that there is no immediate way to fight and end
impunity to sexual violence in conflict. Every effort to
end sexual violence, especially in conflict settings, must
be built based on strong national and local willingness
and ownership.
Just yesterday, the Government of Indonesia
enacted its law on the protection of women and girls
against sexual violence. However, for Indonesia,
this understanding has guided us for a long time. In
2014, reflecting the highest political commitment of
the country, a presidential regulation was signed to
provide instruction on the protection of women and
children in conflict situations. This regulation came
at a moment when the global community had been
struck by the increasing reports of sexual violence
in conflicts, especially since the emergence of the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. In less than a year,
ministerial guidance was also published to ensure the
implementation of the presidential regulation at the
national and subnational levels.
Focus on women’s participation is crucial. As
we progress in discussions on the women and peace
and security agenda, we are also faced with many
challenges to women’s equal participation, including in
the peacekeeping missions. Today, four United Nations
peacekeeping missions have specific mandates to help
address sexual violence in countries with conflicts.

22-3182235/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

However, the representation of female peacekeepers
in those missions remains low. From the reports of the
Secretary-General, we can see that the number of female
peacekeepers and the numbers of sexual-violence cases
in the missions are inversely proportional. We call on
the Security Council to pay attention to this trend,
taking into consideration the linkage and connectivity
between the presence of female peacekeepers and the
number of sexual-violence offences.
Lastly, international cooperation plays an
important role in strengthening States’ capacities in
ensuring accountability and justice for sexual violence
in conflict situations. In this regard, Indonesia stands
ready to support efforts aimed at building the capacities
of States, especially through triangular or South-South
cooperation. Innovative financing, including through
the Bretton Woods system, and regional cooperation
are also important avenues to be explored.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I thank the United
Kingdom presidency of the Security Council for
organizing today’s important open debate. I also express
my sincere appreciation to Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Pramila Patten, Nobel Laureate
Ms. Nadia Murad and the other briefers for their
comprehensive remarks.
We take note of the Secretary-General’s annual
report (S/2022/272) pointing out that intersecting
humanitarian, security and political crises further
exacerbated the root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence in 2021. We are also concerned by the report’s
findings that compliance by conflict parties with
relevant international norms and resolutions remains
appallingly low. Against this backdrop, today’s debate
on accountability as a preventive measure to end the
cycles of sexual violence in conflict is very timely.
We stress that the international community should
make further efforts to implement the SecretaryGeneral’s earlier calls for translating commitments and
resolutions into tangible results.
Bangladesh had its own horrific experience of
sexual violence in conflict during its war of liberation in
1971, when over 200,000 women were violated. Despite
numerous challenges in rebuilding a war-ravaged
country, we took measures for their rehabilitation
immediately after our independence. The perpetrators
36/53

13/04/2022

were brought to justice through a trial process, and the
contribution of victims was officially recognized.
Our own experience has also inspired us to host
over a million forcibly displaced Myanmar nationals,
the Rohingyas, a large majority of whom are women
and girls, and to provide them with critical support,
including reproductive-health support. Unfortunately,
there has been no progress yet in ensuring accountability
of the perpetrators in Myanmar of the crimes committed
against the Rohingya women. Without the perpetrators
being held accountable, the desired environment
conducive to return cannot be created in Myanmar’s
Rakhine state.
Our commitments to eliminating sexual violence
in conflict have been duly reflected through our
contribution to peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities. We have increased the number of female
peacekeepers in various peacekeeping missions,
and we have also sent female judges to conflictprone zones to strengthen the judicial sector of host
countries. Our national action plan on women, peace
and security recommends specific activities for
updating and localizing modules and training materials
for peacekeepers in the implementation of related
mandates.
Allow me to highlight a few points on preventive
measures against sexual violence in conflict. First,
creating a culture of accountability should be the utmost
priority in preventing future incidents. Leaving the
perpetrators unaccountable would encourage repetition
of the same crimes. In this regard, the security and
justice sectors of conflict-affected countries need to
be strengthened. We call for increased international
support for capacity-building in this regard.
Secondly, early warning of possible violence can
play a significant role in preventing violence. However,
credible data in this regard are often missing. The
collection, analysis and preservation of real-time data
on sexual violence in armed conflicts are important to
ensuring the efficacy of specific preventive measures,
such as early-warning mechanisms.
Thirdly, the participation of women in all stages
of peace processes must be ensured. In this regard,
we welcome the proposals of the Secretary-General
articulated in his report Our Common Agenda, inter
alia, to put women and girls at the centre of security
policy and to bolster their economic inclusion, .
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

Fourthly, adoption and implementation of national
action plans on women, peace and security can play
an instrumental role in preventing sexual violence in
conflict. While we have seen the adoption of national
action plans on women, peace and security in many
countries in recent years, 95 States Members of the
United Nations have yet to adopt one. We stress the
importance of universalizing national action plans to
advance gender equality so as to address the deeper
causes of conflict-related sexual violence.
Fifthly, the Peacebuilding Commission has a
critical role to play in supporting national efforts aimed
at promoting gender equality, women’s empowerment
and elimination of all forms of violence against women
and discrimination on the basis of sex in conflictaffected countries. These will add value to the overall
preventive measures.
Finally, we stress the importance of adopting a
survivor-centred approach in the response to conflictrelated sexual violence. In this regard, we appreciate
the role and activities of the United Nations Action
against Sexual Violence in Conflict network in meeting
the needs of survivors. Coherence and cooperation
among the stakeholders should be strengthened to
ensure that services are delivered in accordance with
the fundamental principle of the United Nations Action
network — delivering as one.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): Sri Lanka appreciates the
United Kingdom’s role in supporting the discussion on
the women and peace and the security agenda, which
has featured prominently in the recent debates. The
importance of highlighting the risks that women and
girls face during conflict is particularly important in
today’s environment, in which women and girls are
surely marginalized.
The Security Council’s recognition of sexual
violence as a tactic of war in resolution 1820 (2008)
was a milestone in recognizing how conflict impacts
women. The bounds within which sexual violence in
a conflict occurs are not constrained to the battlefield.
It occurs in refugee camps, at the hands of non-State
actors, military personnel, spouses or those designated
to protect womenkind. It includes the sexual exploitation
of children, pornography and sexual assault, and so on.
Victims of abuse are often abandoned, leaving children

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

with no one to care for them, and receive little to no
societal support.
When the avenues for abuse in conflict are so rife
and the threat so ever-present, it is pertinent to ask
how the international community can make tangible
decisions with regard to the issue of accountability. In
order to address the issue, we need to make a global
and concerted effort to shift conflict-associated sexual
violence from a secondary concern to a primary one.
All Member States need adequate training and better
research and policy programme-sharing, in which
intervention techniques addressing sexual violence
in peacebuilding efforts are better understood and
more accessible.
We recall the bold step taken by former United
Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan in 2004, when
he appointed Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
of Jordan to help form a comprehensive strategy to
eliminate future sexual exploitation and abuse within
our peacekeeping forces.
Another discernible feature of note is the
hypermasculine culture that exists and that seems to
encourage exploitation and abuse, as the majority of
personnel engaged in armed conflict are men. Such
behaviour has been dismissed in the past thanks to
a “men will be men” attitude. That forms a bond of
misplaced camaraderie that helps protect the reputation
of the offender but also results in the stigmatization of
the complainant — the final result being that instances
of sexual abuse are swept under the carpet.
We must train our personnel investigating crimes
of sexual violence to develop keen investigation
skills. Investigators must maintain the highest level of
integrity and probity, without fear or favour. In addition
to intensive training, we must focus on community
outreach and engage in the education of women,
children and vulnerable groups on gender-based
violence and remedies.
We must bridge the gap in addressing the canvas
of sexual offences: we cannot hold only rape and sex
trafficking to a higher degree of accountability while
allowing the offenders of domestic abuse and mental
harassment to enjoy impunity. That creates a hierarchy
whereby certain violations can be considered the order
of the day or acceptable.
It has also been observed that in these uncertain
times, parties involved in armed conflict have adopted

22-3182237/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

a new modus operandi. It appears that engaging in the
traditional contours of the battlefield is no longer the
style of aggression. Instead, attacks on the cradle of
our civilization — our educational institutions — have
been the launching pads for aggression. Parties to
armed conflict have begun to use educational facilities
as bases, barracks, detention centres and weapon
storage units.
That modus operandi lends itself to the use of
educational facilities, which increases the risk of
child soldiers being recruited. In Sri Lanka, non-State
actors recruited 594 child soldiers, who were exploited
in multifarious forms, but were mercifully taken
into welfare camps, rehabilitated and returned to
their parents.
To combat that atrocity and stop it, Member States
must ensure that the foundational elements of school
safety are prevalent; ensure that schools are possessed
of characteristics that are safe and responsive to all
contingencies in conflict; and ensure that infrastructure,
crisis communication, geography and procedures — the
four security factors — are established in schools in
conflict areas. We also call upon Member States to help
prevent the use of school premises for the launching of
military operations.
It is time for us to firmly pledge to take every possible
step to eliminate the occurrence of sexual violence
in armed conflict and in the resolution of disputes
between Member States and to establish an institutional
mechanism based on dialogue and diplomacy.
The President: As we still have a number of names
inscribed on the list of speakers for tonight, I would
once again like to remind all representatives to keep
their statements to no more than four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): Thank
you, Madam President, for convening this meeting,
which deals with many issues, including ending the
cycles of sexual violence in conflict situation.
In the Republic of Yemen, women enjoy a high
social standing. Our customs and traditions, as well as
our national laws, prohibit any physical attacks against
women and any violations of their dignity. However,
such violations have assumed a significant dimension
during the historic conflict in Yemen today, due to the
unprecedented attacks against women and children
perpetrated by the terrorist Houthi militias.
38/53

13/04/2022

Since 2014, women have been subjected to a number
of violations linked to armed conflict at the hands of
the terrorist Houthi militias, which have violated all
Yemeni customs and traditions, as well as the provisions
of international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. Such violations, to name a few, have
included kidnapping and disappearing women activists,
preventing them from practicing their right to speech
and demonstration, fabricating malicious accusations
against them and subjecting them to mock trials.
The Security Council Panel of Experts on Yemen
documented some of the crimes perpetrated by those
militias against women and girls, such as arbitrary arrest
and sexual aggression at the Houthi detention centres
in Sana’a. The Security Council, in its resolution 2564
(2021), included the leader of the Houthi militia, Sultan
Saleh Aida Zabin, in the sanctions list, clarifying that
the related sanctions had been imposed as a result of
the role played by him in implementing a policy of
intimidation and the use of systematic arrest, detention,
torture, sexual violence and rape against politically
active women. The Yemeni Government welcomed the
resolution, which brings some justice to Yemeni women
in areas under the control of the Houthi terrorist militias.
The Yemeni Government has put in place an
action plan to respond to Security Council resolution
1325 (2000) on women and peace and security. That
action plan, which was established by representatives
of various stakeholders, focuses on increasing the
participation of women in the legislative, executive and
judicial sectors, as well as in the security forces, the
army and the local and international mechanisms, in
order to monitor the implementation of international
conventions, address conflicts and maintain peace;
establishing early warning mechanisms that take
into account women’s increased participation in
preventing violence and extremism; implementing
laws, rehabilitating police and military forces to
prevent violence against women; providing health,
psychological and legal support to women and girls
who are victims of violations and violence; establishing
guidelines for service providers, while implementing
programmes to empower women in times of conflict
and beyond; providing girls with education and
establishing rehabilitation centres for women and girls
that have been subjected to violence; and meeting the
needs of vulnerable women and girls who are refugees
and displaced victims of violence, while ensuring the
participation of women in disarmament plans, the
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

provision of humanitarian assistance and implementing
programmes in hosting communities.
The Republic of Yemen has ratified a number of
international agreements and conventions, especially
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, in order to
ensure the protection of women in conflict situations,
while also strengthening their role in preventing
conflict and building peace.
The Yemeni Government has supported the efforts
of the Independent National Commission of Inquiry to
investigate allegations of violations of human rights
throughout the Yemeni territories, pursuant to the
State decision which established the Commission. Its
mandate is to investigate cases and transfer violations
to the judiciary and initiate prosecution against
violators. The ninth report of the Commission looked
into 40 types of violations against women, the latest of
which was the kidnapping and arbitrary detention by
the terrorist Houthi militias of citizen Intisar Hammdi
and others, while subjecting them to unjust trial upon
false and unlawful allegations and sentencing them to
prison terms.
In conclusion, the Yemeni Government once again
reaffirms our firm commitment to the protection of
women and the prevention of violations against them,
especially amid the ongoing conflict. We call on the
international community to support our national efforts
to address the challenges confronting the Yemeni
women, especially in areas under the control of the
Houthi militias and to protect women so as to enjoy
their rights ensured by Yemeni and international laws.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Latvia.
Mr. Pildegovičs (Latvia): Latvia thanks the United
Kingdom presidency of the Council for hosting this
timely and pertinent debate and aligns itself with the
statement delivered on behalf of the European Union
and its member States and the statement delivered on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security (see S/PV.9016), which underline the use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war in conflicts around
the world.
Please allow me to focus on the crimes perpetrated
by Russia in Ukraine.
Latvia strongly condemns the atrocities and
grave violations of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law by the Russian

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Federation. Brutal Russian aggression, enabled by
Belarus, on civilians and civilian infrastructure,
including maternity hospitals and other health-care
facilities, schools and shelters, that has killed and
gravely injured civilians, including pregnant women
and newborns, have left the world reeling. The recent
attack on Kramatorsk train station mainly killed
women, children and elderly persons looking for safety.
Latvia condemns in the strongest terms the atrocities
surfacing from Bucha, the liberated areas around Kyiv
and other regions, including rape and sexual violence
against women and girls, perpetrated by the Russian
armed forces. We are increasingly hearing stories of
rape and sexual violence used as a weapon of war by the
Russian armed forces. The Council has determined that
rape and other forms of sexual violence can constitute
war crimes, crimes against humanity or a constitutive
act with respect to genocide. For all atrocity crimes,
Russia must and will be held accountable.
In that regard, Latvia has initiated national
criminal legal procedures to gather evidence on crimes
against humanity, war crimes and crimes against peace
perpetrated by the Russian military. Latvia has also
decided to provide an additional financial contribution
of €100,000 to the International Criminal Court (ICC)
to support it in the investigation of crimes perpetrated
in Ukraine. Latvia welcomes criminal proceedings
initiated against Russian military at the national level
in other countries. Latvia also welcomes the support
countries have shown to the ICC and encourages the
member States of the Rome Statute that have not yet
done so, to act likewise.
The Security Council has a specific responsibility
to take timely and decisive action in order to protect
populations by preventing atrocity crimes. In practice,
however, the deliberations of the Council often fail
to generate solutions, including in situations where
atrocity crimes are already being committed. The
expectation of the international community that the
Council will take timely and decisive action to protect
populations from atrocity crimes has therefore not yet
been fulfilled. As a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, Latvia is of
the view that it is necessary to maximize the Security
Council’s efficiency, effectiveness, transparency and
accountability. We encourage Member States that have
not done so to join the code of conduct elaborated by the
ACT group regarding Security Council action against
genocide, crimes against humanity or war crimes,

22-3182239/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

13/04/2022

as well as the Political Declaration on Suspension
of Veto Powers in Cases of Mass Atrocity. It is also
important to strengthen synergies between the Council,
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Human Rights
Council to comprehensively strengthen the protection
of human rights and the prevention of sexual violence.

We welcome some modest positive trends in certain
countries, as identified in the Secretary-General’s
report, but we remain deeply concerned that not enough
action is being taken on the ground in relationship to
assisting victims and, in particular, women and girls
who gave birth as a result of conflict-related rape.

Latvia reiterates the importance of the full
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security, and its follow-up resolutions, in
particular resolutions 2106 (2013) and 2467 (2019) and
their provisions regarding accountability for conflictrelated sexual violence, as well as services to the
survivors. Latvia calls on all relevant United Nations
mechanisms, including the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
to maintain their focus on the situation of civilians
affected by the Russian aggression in Ukraine. Latvia
continues to support the work of these mechanisms,
as well as directly support those caught in the war
in Ukraine.

In our view, the International Criminal Court
(ICC) is the most effective and relevant international
instrument to assist Member States in establishing
accountability and ending impunity. In that context,
we welcome the action of the ICC in relation to the
first international conviction on a charge of forced
pregnancy in February 2021.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Austria.
Mr. Almoslechner (Austria): Austria aligns itself
with the statements delivered on behalf of the European
Union (EU)and the Group of Friends on Women, Peace
and Security (see S/PV.9016).
We commend the United Kingdom for its efforts
to organize the annual open debate on conflict-related
sexual violence, with a special focus on accountability
as prevention. We thank the briefers for their insights
and Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Patten for presenting the annual report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/272), which paints a bleak picture of
the consequences of conflict-related sexual violence in
relation to unwanted pregnancies of women and girls as
a result of rape in conflicts.
Austria strongly condemns all form of sexual and
gender-based violence committed in armed conflicts.
We urge all responsible parties to stop this heinous
crime, and we stand in full solidarity with all victims
and their families.
It is each State’s responsibility to ensure
accountability and access to justice for victims of
conflict-related sexual violence. In accordance with
resolution 2467 (2019), Member States have the
obligation to apply a survivor-centred approach and
focus on access to medical and psychosocial care.
40/53

We urge the members of the Security Council to
take bolder action and not shy away in order to address
conflict-related sexual violence in all country-specific
situations and to apply the sanction regime to any
perpetrators in that respect.
Austria also recognizes that the crime of conflictrelated sexual violence also affects men and boys
and persons with diverse sexual orientations and
gender identities, which must not be forgotten.
Austria is proud to support its national human
rights institute — the Ludwig Boltzmann Institute
of Human Rights — which currently works with the
Princeton University Liechtenstein Institute on SelfDetermination and other partners on a study on the
nexus between conflict-related sexual violence against
men, boys and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer and intersex persons and human trafficking. We
invite all interested delegations to assist in the release
of this study here in New York on 9 May during an
expert seminar at our Permanent Mission.
Austria remains a strong supporter of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Patten, as
well as UN-Women and the United Nations Population
Fund in its efforts to address the scourge of conflictrelated sexual violence. We applaud the Special
Representative’s efforts in working with conflictaffected Member States and armed groups in order to
address the situation of victims. Furthermore, Austria
continues to support the United Nations Trust Fund to
End Violence against Women.
Let
me
briefly
specific situations.

mention

two

country-

Together with EU member States and in
close coordination with the United Nations High
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

Commissioner for Refugees and UNICEF, as well as
other United Nations agencies, Austria will continue to
support dedicated efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
catastrophe of the Ukrainian people caused by the
unprovoked and unjustified military aggression of the
Russian Federation, which Austria strongly condemns.
We repeat our call to the Russian Federation to
immediately cease its military aggression and withdraw
all its troops from Ukrainian territory and to respect its
sovereignty in its internationally recognized borders.
We echo other colleagues who have underlined that
there will be no impunity for the Russian military and
decision-makers who are responsible for the killings of
civilians and sexual violence, including rape committed
against women and girls in Ukraine.
Further, Austria closely follows the development
of women’s rights in Afghanistan and continues to
support efforts by UN-Women and other United Nations
agencies to protect women and girls from violence
and contributing to their development, participation
and empowerment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): I would like to begin by thanking
the presidency of the United Kingdom for convening
today’s open debate on conflict-related sexual
violence. I thank the briefers for their updates and
valuable insights.
Nepal supports the normative framework of the
Security Council for ending sexual violence in conflict.
Conflict-related sexual violence is unforgivable, and
the perpetrators of such crimes must therefore be
held accountable.
It is the primary responsibility of the State to prevent
violence against women. However, a State’s ability is
largely circumscribed by its level of socioeconomic
development, legal and institutional framework, and
commitment to the rule of law. Therefore, there is a need
for strong international support to enable a Government
to address the underlying causes of conflict and protect
women and girls while bringing perpetrators to justice.
We must ensure the inclusion of women in
State architecture, increase their participation at
decision-making levels with regard to conflict
prevention and resolution, implement gender-responsive
sectoral reforms, and ensure the establishment of early-

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

warning and early-response systems in order to mitigate
the risk of violence against women.
We believe that an enhanced level of participation
by women in peacekeeping missions would greatly
help protect women and girls from violence. As one of
the largest troop- and police-contributing countries,
Nepal is committed to increasing the number of women
peacekeepers. Nepal is also committed to a zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse, and
is striving to maintain the goal of a zero-case scenario.
As a post-conflict country, Nepal has made
significant efforts to ensure women’s dignified
representation in governance structures and has
remained a proactive promoter of the women and peace
and security agenda.
In 2011, Nepal was the first country in South Asia
and the second in Asia to adopt a national action plan
for the implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and
1820 (2008). Women’s participation in decision-making,
protecting women and girls from sexual and genderbased violence, and ending impunity were among our
topmost priorities in the national action plan. A second
plan is being finalized that is advancing the women
and peace and security agenda while addressing
the concerns of victims of sexual violence, female
combatants and children born of wartime rape.
Nepal is committed to resolving conflict-related
sexual violence cases to ensure justice for victims. The
process is led by two transitional justice commissions:
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and
the Commission of Investigation on Enforced
Disappeared Persons. The Government is committed to
providing the necessary support to those independent
Commissions so that they can conclude a remaining
yet vital part of Nepal’s unique home-grown peace
process while ensuring justice for victims and holding
perpetrators accountable.
In conclusion, Nepal stresses the need for the
inclusion and participation of women in governance
architecture, conflict prevention, peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction while emphasizing the
necessity of addressing the underlying root causes of
conflict with a view to bringing about enduring peace
and prosperity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.

22-3182241/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Mrs. Mudrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement delivered by the delegation of the
European Union, and I wish to add some remarks in my
national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to thank the United
Kingdom presidency for having convened this timely and
critically important debate. I would also like to express
my gratitude to the briefers for their presentations.
The topic is more than relevant for my country
given the recently reported acts of sexual violence
perpetrated by Russian soldiers in Ukraine. It is a sad
reality that women and girls are particularly vulnerable
to sexual violence and rape during wartime. The
inhuman cruelty of the Russian invaders has turned
the lives of millions of Ukrainian women and girls into
horrific nightmares.
Reports of revealed facts and cases are piling up
daily. Several hotlines have been opened in Ukraine for
the survivors and witnesses of such crimes. La StradaUkraine manages one of those hotlines. On Monday
the President of that non-governmental organization,
Kateryna Cherepakha, briefed the Security Council
(see S/PV.9013) about nine reported cases of rape by
Russian soldiers in temporarily occupied towns and
villages in the Kyivska, Khersonska and Chernigivska
regions; 12 women and girls suffered in those attacks.
Ukrainian officials are now talking about hundreds of
such cases. However, they have been unable to assess
the full scale of those atrocities. Many survivors remain
in life-threatening situations, in territories that are
under the control of Russian troops and cut off from
help and connection.
Many victims are extremely traumatized; they
are not ready to talk about what happened. They
first require urgent care, especially medical and
psychological, empathy, emotional support, respect for
their personality and dignity, and recovery.
Regrettably, many were killed by Russian soldiers,
who then tried to hide their crimes. Moreover, in
some cases the bodies of the victims were burned. It
speaks volumes that despite the extensive, credible and
clear evidence, Russia continues to deny the obvious.
We have not heard of any investigation launched
by Russia. That can mean only that the atrocities
committed by Russian soldiers against the civilian
population in Ukraine, including sexual violence, were
not perpetrators’ excesses but a coordinated, systemic
and sanctioned practice. The fact that female prisoners
42/53

13/04/2022

of war have also been exposed to torture and sexual
violence is additional proof of that assumption.
The sexual violence perpetrated by the Russian
military in Ukraine also targets men and boys, although
the vast majority of victims are women and girls.
All those crimes run counter to international
law and Security Council resolutions on conflictrelated sexual violence, for which States bear the
primary responsibility.
Ukraine has called for an immediate, full and
transparent investigation of all war crimes, including
sexual violence. We commend in that regard the
involvement of the relevant United Nations bodies,
including the setting up of a United Nations Commission
of Inquiry and the referral of the situation in Ukraine
to the Office of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court.
We also welcome the initiative of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict to enhance joint actions
and programmes with the Government of Ukraine
to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual
violence and strengthen survivor-centred responses
by supporting and reinforcing national mechanisms
and institutions.
All war crimes, including the sexual violence
committed by Russians in Ukraine, in particular in
the liberated territories, are documented by the Office
of the Prosecutor General of Ukraine, in cooperation
with the national police and other pretrial investigation
agencies and health-care facilities. Prosecutors and
investigators are also cooperating closely with human
rights defenders and non-governmental organizations
that provide the women affected with medical and
psychological support.
The truth will be established, and it is an important
task for all of us, including the Security Council, to
ensure that all responsible are brought to justice despite
the attempts made to misuse the Council’s permanent
seat in order to escape responsibility.
The President: I thank the representative of
Ukraine for her important words and contribution to
this debate.
I now give the floor to the representative of Chile.
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

Mr. Vidal (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Chile wishes
to thank the Permanent Mission of the United Kingdom
for having convened this open debate.
Our country aligns itself with the statements made
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security (see S/PV.9016) and of the LGBTQI
Core Group.
At the outset, Chile expresses its rejection and
condemnation of any and all acts of sexual abuse or
exploitation in conflict situations or as a tactic of war.
Likewise, it expresses its concern at the situation of
the victims of sexual violence in conflict, since, as
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/272) indicates,
sexual violence in conflict, including rape, sexual
slavery, forced prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced
abortion, forced sterilization, forced marriage and
other forms of sexual violence, as well as the impunity
from which their perpetrators benefit, still prevail.
Such assaults on the integrity and human rights of
the victims of those crimes, especially when they are
used as a brutal tactic of war, have many devastating
consequences for survivors and their families. Sexual
violence in conflict is not only a reflection of the
gender inequalities underlying it but also represents
an additional obstacle to ending cycles of violence, in
which the survivors of such abhorrent acts and their
families must often cope with post-traumatic stress and
social stigmatization, without any guarantee of access
to justice or reparations.
The women and peace and security agenda clearly
advocates for the full, equal, effective and meaningful
participation of women in peace processes, conflict
prevention and resolution, and peacebuilding. For
Chile, there can be no participation without ensuring
protection. The prevention of sexual and gender-based
violence is therefore an integral part of the agenda. The
peaceful resolution of conflicts entails addressing their
root causes.

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

imperative to hold perpetrators of sexual and genderbased violence accountable in order to systemically
combat the impunity that enables them to carry out
such crimes without suffering any consequences for
their actions.
Lastly, given the urgency of combating sexual
violence in conflicts, we must move from aspirations
to obligations and from commitments to their
implementation. Accordingly, Chile fully supports the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in order to increase support for survivors and
their inclusion. That is the only way to ensure their
empowerment and their full, equal and meaningful
participation in negotiations and peacebuilding
processes and in peace and security decision-making
at all levels.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alateek (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
At the outset, my country’s delegation would like to
sincerely thank the delegation of the United Kingdom
for convening this meeting today. We also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for
her valuable briefing. We also thank Ms. Nadia Murad
for her important briefing, as well as the other briefers.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia condemns sexual
violence in all circumstances and situations, especially
in conflict situations, which presents many challenges,
including those related to access to legal and justice
services. While we deplore all forms of sexual violence
in conflict situations in the context of the resurgence
of all kinds of crises throughout the world, my country
stresses the need for the international community to
work together in order to ensure fairness for victims,
pursuant to the national laws of their countries and
leading to full justice.

We see that cycles of violence are repeated when
there is impunity. Accordingly, it is our duty to
guarantee access to justice and comprehensive legal
services for survivors, particularly women and girls,
with accessible mechanisms that ensure confidentiality
for victims so that they can report incidents of violence.

My country also believes in the importance of
listening to the voice of women who live in vulnerable
communities and meeting all their humanitarian needs,
while involving them in developing and implementing
humanitarian programmes, especially women affected
by armed conflict, in order to devise plans that respond to
their actual needs, particularly in emergency situations.

In addition, accountability mechanisms can serve
as a strong deterrent to future acts of violence and must
be put in place in a timely and functional manner. It is

Our world is experiencing many rapid changes and
successive and overlapping crises every day, which have
added a new dimension to the negative repercussions

22-3182243/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

of the coronavirus disease pandemic in the health,
economic and social contexts, with an evident impact on
humanitarian work. Those challenges compel countries
to put in place joint and comprehensive strategies for
strengthening the role of women in responding to such
crises and facilitating their access to essential services,
particularly women who support their families, in order
to enhance their capabilities and resilience.
Given the importance of the role of women in
resilience and community-building, my country
provides women with humanitarian support based on
an approach that targets women and their needs in
keeping with the findings of international reports on
women and their needs in affected countries.
We also communicate with our partners in targeted
countries to put in place humanitarian and relief
programmes without discrimination, while focusing
on alleviating the suffering of women and supporting
them to lead a dignified life. Through the King
Salman Centre for Humanitarian Aid and Relief, my
country has supported and enabled women at relief and
humanitarian levels in areas affected by disasters and
armed conflict.
We have implemented more than 788 projects in
79 regions throughout the world in the amount of more
than $520 million, which have benefited 109 million
women. The projects have helped women to participate
more in the economic field and workforce, advance
their economic capacity-building and participate more
in education and learning programmes in countries
affected by armed conflict. Our support has included
providing psychosocial and societal services, as well
as providing female refugees with legal and protection
services against the effects of violence.
My delegation notes the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/272), which covers the period from
January to December 2021. We support the findings of
the report concerning the phenomenon of terrorist and
other armed groups that use sexual violence as a means
to destabilize vulnerable societies. We stress that the
illegal flow of small arms and light weapons contributes
to fuelling sexual violence related to conflict on a large
and systematic scale.
We would also like to highlight the violations and
acts of sexual violence documented in the report and
committed by the Houthi terrorist militias against
women in regions under their control in Yemen.
The report mentioned the horrors committed by the
44/53

13/04/2022

Houthis, which is consistent with the approach adopted
by that terrorist militia, including the perpetration of
crimes against civilians in Yemen, especially women
and children. We stress the importance of the necessary
measures being taken by the Security Council to address
sexual violence in conflict and punish its perpetrators.
The report of the Secretary-General sadly
documented acts of sexual violence in conflict areas.
The international community, especially donor
countries, must make greater efforts to address
crimes of sexual violence in conflict situations. We
stress in that regard the dire need for the international
community to coordinate among its humanitarian,
development and peacebuilding activities in order to
ensure comprehensive and sustainable development,
with the participation of women as a fundamental pillar.
An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure,
which is why we believe that States must strengthen
preventive and proactive measures and enhance
awareness-raising programmes in order to address the
root causes of sexual violence in conflict situations. We
also believe that promoting leadership roles of women
in political, security and judiciary institutions will be
an important step to that end.
Based on its international obligations and its
support for all efforts to achieve international peace
and security, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia implements
the resolutions adopted by United Nations organs and
mechanisms, including resolution 1325 (2000). Through
our Vision 2030 initiative, we believe that women play
an important role in society and we also believe in the
importance of the equal participation of women with
men and the need for women to fully participate in all
efforts to maintain peace and security at all levels of
decision-making.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Yoseph (Ethiopia): My delegation requested
the right to participate in today’s open debate to provide
some information on my country and briefly share the
measures taken and mechanisms put in place to address
crimes of sexual violence against women. There will be
a special focus on the challenges we have faced since
the treasonous attack against our National Defence
Force on 4 November 2020. That attack brought
about an unprecedented security challenge, which has
seriously affected the lives and the overall well-being
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

of our people, especially those in Afar, Amhara and
Tigray states.
During and after the adoption of law enforcement
measures and by the time the aggression had expanded
to the adjacent regions, women and children had fallen
victim to the most atrocious forms of violations, which
were systematically carried out by the Tigray’s People’s
Liberation Front. The Government of Ethiopia takes all
allegations on violations of human rights seriously and
with a high level of responsibility and due diligence.
Accordingly, with regard to the allegations, in
the aftermath of the November attack three layers
of investigations have been established, including
investigation by the Ethiopian Federal Police, the
Joint Committee of Inquiry, the Ministry of Women,
Children and Youth Affairs, the Attorney General and
the Minister of Defence, as well as investigation by
regional police forces. In addition, the Ethiopian Human
Rights Commission has published reports on alleged
human rights violations that required the adoption of
measures of accountability and redress.
Apart from its own investigations, on 24 March
2021 the Commission concluded an agreement with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to conduct joint investigations. The
Government allowed full access, at the request of those
two institutions, and when the investigation report
was published in November last year, the Government,
despite its reservations about the report, recognized
it as an important input to measures of accountability
and prevention.
All the investigation mechanisms I have
mentioned unearthed substantial information on
alleged violations. On the one hand, they disproved,
by evidence, the accusations against the Ethiopian
National Defence Force, including the systematic
commission of sexual violence. On the other hand,
they provided recommendations for accountability,
redress and prevention. To date, 30 security officials
have been charged, 10 of whom were convicted and
sentenced to prison terms ranging from 10 to 25 years.
An interministerial task force was also established
to follow up the implementation of the accepted
recommendations of the joint report.
Since June 2021, women and children in Afar and
Amhara regions have endured unimaginable suffering
and systematic sexual violence at the hands of the
criminal group. On 11 March, the Ethiopian Human

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Rights Commission published its investigation of those
gross violations of rights, including mass murders and
sexual violence. In addition, women in Tigray continue
to experience violence, with no recourse for justice or
redress. It should also be noted that close to 12,000
convicts and detainees were released from all prisons
across the Tigray region by the criminal group, which
has exacerbated the situation.
Nonetheless, we seek to reiterate the cardinal
principle that Governments have the primary
responsibility to ensure respect for and the protection
and fulfilment of human rights. In that regard,
the capacity of national enforcement and judicial
institutions is indispensable for ensuring accountability
and redress for human rights violations. Our experience
has shown that national mechanisms are the most
effective in reinstating justice. In that connection,
we must emphasize the need to carefully approach
conflict-related human rights violations. We have seen
that human rights are politicized and used against
countries like mine.
In the past 15 months, the level of hostility and
vilification against Ethiopia has been driven not by
human rights concerns but by a short-sighted and
politically motivated agenda. We therefore call for
extreme care and caution to ensure authenticity. The
politicization of human rights, double standards and
selectivity lead only to irreparable damage to the
credibility of the international system and undermine
collective efforts to promote and protect human rights.
We trust in the responsible approach of the
members of the Council to make sure that the work
of this principal organ does not undermine national
efforts to address human rights concerns. It is also
particularly important that no aspect of the Council’s
engagement interferes with the credibility of the work
of other organs of the United Nations.
In conclusion, I would like to reassure the Council
that Ethiopia maintains a zero-tolerance policy on
sexual violence. No allegation will go unheard or
uninvestigated or — when suspects are found guilty
by due process of the law — unpunished. Under the
criminal laws of Ethiopia, sexual violence is a crime
with no statute of limitations. Such crimes are also not
eligible for pardon or amnesty. Perpetrators are and
will be held accountable and punished with the full
force of the law.

22-3182245/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden.
Ms. Eneström (Sweden): The LGBTI Core Group
is honoured to present this statement to the Security
Council on the occasion of this annual open debate on
sexual violence in conflict.
At the outset, we would like to express full solidarity
with women and girls, in all their diversity, living in
conflict situations and other emergencies and crises.
We know that women and girls, including lesbian,
bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons,
are particularly negatively impacted by conflict. We
stand in solidarity with all women and girls affected
by the situation in Ukraine. We are also deeply shocked
by the personal testimonies of rape and sexual violence
that are now emerging.
The LGBTI Core Group recognizes the need to
ensure that the work of the Security Council is inclusive
and responsive to the diverse needs of all individuals
affected by conflict, including lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex persons. In that respect, we
thank the United Kingdom for chairing this important
meeting. We pay tribute to all victims and survivors
of conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence,
including those who are victims of that kind of violence
and discrimination, based on the real or perceived
sexual orientation, gender identity or expression of
sex characteristics.
The members of the United Nations LGBTI Core
Group are deeply concerned about the fact that, despite
the robust framework to prevent and address sexual
and gender-based violence in conflict put in place by
the Security Council over the past decade, the level of
compliance by parties to conflict remains in most cases
insufficient. The tools to address those most abhorrent
violations are available to us. We must all redouble our
efforts to see them implemented.
It is alarming and unacceptable that actual or
perceived sexual orientation or gender identity can
increase the chance of someone becoming the target
of rape, sexual slavery, forced prostitution, forced
pregnancy, forced abortion, forced sterilization, forced
marriage and other forms of sexual and gender-based
violence linked to conflict. We are concerned that the
number of reports about such violations has increased
in a number of conflicts.
46/53

13/04/2022

Furthermore, we are deeply concerned by the fact
that the widespread underreporting of such crimes,
retaliation, discrimination and stigmatization continue
to be the norm in the case of conflict-related sexual
violence based on sexual orientation or gender identity,
thereby contributing to the widespread impunity for
the perpetrators. Factors such as the criminalization
of sexual orientation and gender identity, fear of
stigmatization and reprisals, cultural norms, a lack of
awareness, adequate support services and avenues for
accountability for survivors particularly contribute to
underreporting and must therefore be addressed.
In that regard, we call on all parties to conflicts
to respect international law, including international
humanitarian law, and human rights to break the vicious
cycle of sexual violence, underreporting, impunity
and retaliation, and provide targeted gender-sensitive
services to address the needs of LGBTI victims and
survivors of sexual violence, including access to justice,
assistance, reparations and judicial redress. To that end,
we welcome the role of the Team of Experts on the Rule
of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict and encourage
it to take into consideration the special needs of victims
and survivors who were targeted based on their real
or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity and
expression or sex characteristics.
Therefore, the Core Group urges Member States to
facilitate the full, equal and meaningful participation of
LGBTI victims and survivors of sexual violence in the
decision-making processes that affect them, including
transitional justice strategies.
Likewise, the Core Group calls for the
implementation of strategies to ensure access to
comprehensive
specialized
services,
including
psychosocial health care and services, sexual and
reproductive health services and legal and livelihood
support and services, for survivors of sexual and
gender-based violence, adapted to their needs and
provided without discrimination, as well as appropriate
consideration to avoid discrimination on the grounds
of sexual orientation, gender identity and expression or
sex characteristics and vulnerability to violence when
adjudicating asylum claims.
Members should recognize that all survivors,
including LGBTI persons, are unique individuals,
with different experiences and needs, and that any
support to assist and empower survivors must be
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

contextualized, paying particular attention to multiple
and intersecting vulnerabilities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Bae (Republic of Korea): My delegation would
like to commend the United Kingdom for convening
today’s important meeting.
At the outset, the Republic of Korea deplores the
fact that the appalling situation in Ukraine as a result of
Russia’s aggression places women and girls at increased
risk of sexual and gender-based violence. The unfolding
tragedy in Ukraine highlights the critical importance
of the women and peace and security agenda. Against
that backdrop, I would like to highlight the following
four points.
First, a survivor-centred approach is required to
address conflict-related sexual violence. We must
ensure that survivors of sexual violence receive
non-discriminatory access to all the services that they
need. In accordance with the Action with Women and
Peace initiative, the Republic of Korea has underscored
the significance of the survivor-centred approach. At the
third international conference on Action with Women
and Peace, held in Seoul last November, we once again
shed light on the need to strengthen women’s role and
leadership in building and sustaining peace through the
survivor-centred approach.
Secondly, we must end the culture of impunity.
Sexual violence continues to be exploited as a tactic
of war, torture, terrorism and political repression in
both conflict and post-conflict settings. The protection
of survivors and witnesses from reprisals under an
effective accountability mechanism is key to ensuring
that perpetrators are held accountable. In that light,
my delegation commends the work of the Team of
Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in
Conflict to assist rule-of-law institutions in enhancing
accountability for conflict-related sexual violence.
Thirdly, we need to step up our efforts to tackle
the root causes of conflict-related sexual violence. To
that end, it is imperative to address structural gender
inequality and to ensure equal opportunities for women
and girls. Women and girls have been increasingly and
systematically excluded from economic participation,
public education and access to essential services in
conflict-affected countries. My delegation deplores the
Taliban’s decision on 23 March not to reopen secondary

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

schools to Afghan girls, which contradicted its previous
commitments. We highlight the fact that all Afghan
citizens, including women and girls, deserve to have
an equal right to education at all levels, and call on the
Taliban to reverse that decision.
Last but not least, promoting women’s participation
in peacekeeping is essential to ensuring safe, enabling
and gender-responsive environments. As the host of the
2021 Seoul UN Peacekeeping Ministerial, the Republic
of Korea will continue to exert its active efforts to
increase the number of women military observers and
staff officers serving in United Nations peacekeeping
operations to 25 per cent by 2028.
The implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda, including preventing and responding
to conflict-related sexual violence, has a very special
meaning for the Republic of Korea. As a country that
experienced the tragedy of conflict-related sexual
violence, the so-called comfort women, we will
continue to endeavour to restore the honour and dignity
of the victims and survivors and to turn their painful
experiences and courage into a historical lesson to
prevent conflict-related sexual violence. As a candidate
for non-permanent membership of the Security Council
for the 2024-2025 term, we will also spare no effort in
achieving the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in peace processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Ms. Ighil (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I congratulate the delegation of the United Kingdom on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month, and I wish it every success in performing
its tasks.
Believing in the pivotal role of women in building
sound societies and in their active and valuable
participation in the political, economic and social
fields, Algeria seeks to empower women and protect
them against any abuse, in line with our Constitution,
which ensures the protection of women from all forms
of violence in all circumstances and in all professional,
private and public areas. Algeria is working hard
to strengthen its legal system and review its laws
on the protection and promotion of women at all
levels in order to ensure that they are in line with the
current requirements.

22-3182247/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

Algeria also seeks to enhance the role of women
as drivers for peace at the national and regional levels.
That is part of our vision for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) through our national plan of
action, which is a road map that identifies Algeria’s
priorities in promoting the role of women. We also
prioritize the women and peace and security agenda.
Additionally, within the League of Arab States,
Algeria spearheaded efforts to establish the Emergency
Committee for the Protection of Women during Armed
Conflict. That enabled the setting up of the Arab Women
Mediators Network by the Arab Women’s Committee
in 2020, with Algeria as a member.
Regarding the African continent, women are still
the main victims of conflicts, crises and enforced
displacement. Algeria has therefore always called
for promoting the participation of women in peace
processes and their empowerment within the African
Union. We hosted the first general assembly of the
Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
and Mediation, which provides an institutional
character to the role of women in peace negotiations.
That led to further discussion on developing strategies
to accelerate the role of women in peacebuilding
and encouraging dialogue among members of the
African Union. We sought to develop guidelines that
take into account gender perspective in conflict and
post-conflict recovery.
It has been more than 20 years since the adoption
of the women and peace and security agenda by the
Security Council and 14 years since the adoption of
resolution 1820 (2008), on sexual abuse in areas of
conflict. However, women and girls in areas of conflict
still face tremendous challenges, particularly in relation
to sexual violence. There has been a recent increase
in sexual violence owing to the coronavirus disease
pandemic and its repercussions, with the absence of the
minimum level of guarantees for the rights of victims,
including access to legal aid and justice.
To ensure that sexual violence in areas of conflict
is effectively addressed and ended, in accordance with
international humanitarian and human rights law and
other relevant United Nations resolutions, and out of
our conviction that procedures and mechanisms need
to be put in place to end these crimes and prevent
their recurrence, I would like to make the following
main points.
48/53

13/04/2022

First, accountability is key to response and
prevention in conflict zones. Realizing justice is a vital
step in the assistance provided to survivors so that
they can rebuild their lives. It gives them a chance to
reintegrate into their societies.
Second, efforts to achieve justice and accountability,
including reparations, should be human rights-based
and take the comprehensive and non-discriminatory
interests of the victims into consideration. They should
be undertaken with the participation of the victims.
Third, we need to promote the legal framework to
bring perpetrators of violence to justice and protect
victims while ensuring them access to justice as soon
as they are subjected to violence, because ending
impunity will deter future violence.
Fourth, the role and prerogatives of peacekeeping
operations should be enhanced when it comes to
monitoring violations of human rights and addressing
sexual violence. Similar mechanisms should be
included in all processes without exception.
Fifth, gender-equality policies should be enhanced,
and active and comprehensive national programmes
and plans of action should be developed for the
empowerment and protection of women, particularly in
situations of conflict. This would also include measures
to address violence against women and girls in national
development policies.
Sixth, all stakeholders, Governments, parliaments,
national
human
rights
institutions,
women’s
organizations, the private sector, civil society
organizations and the media need to be engaged so that
they all work to raise awareness of the risks of sexual
violence. There should also be specialized entities
for accountability.
Seventh, all obstacles should be removed so
that women can work to build peace by playing the
role of community leaders and defenders of human
rights in conflict and occupied zones in order to
address sexual violence, human rights violations and
enhance accountability.
Addressing the issue of sexual violence in a
comprehensive and just manner in conflict zones
requires the international community, through the
Security Council, to deal with all cases objectively,
on a non-selective and unbiased basis, because sexual
violence in conflict zones must be condemned anywhere
and regardless of the identity of the perpetrator. There
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

must be accountability, especially if those who commit
such grave violations are those in power, as is the case
in areas under the control of occupying Powers.
Accordingly, I would like to refer to some
facts that have been documented by a coalition of
non-governmental organizations on the repeated and
stark violations committed by Moroccan occupation
forces in Western Sahara. Sexual violence has been
used as a tool to intimidate women who are striving to
defend human rights, as is the case for Sultana Khaya
and Aminatou Haidar, for example. The violations have
been documented by the Special Rapporteur on the
situation of human rights defenders. These systematic
and repeated violations require greater attention from
international bodies, particularly the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
as this lies at the core of its mandate.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): Guatemala thanks the delegation of the United
Kingdom in its capacity as President of the Security
Council during the month of April for convening today’s
open debate. We also thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the other briefers for
their briefings.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
Guatemala has paid particular attention to this issue.
Sexual violence against women during armed conflicts
has historically been used as a tactic of war to terrorize
people and is a flagrant violation of human rights. It is
therefore pertinent to redouble our efforts aimed at its
total eradication.
It is disturbing that even today sexual violence
continues to be used to generate income through
trafficking and sexual slavery, including as
compensation for fighters of extremist groups. We
strongly condemn all such acts as clear violations of
international law and international humanitarian law.
As set forth in resolution 1820 (2008), Guatemala
reiterates its deep concern that, despite its repeated
condemnation of violence against women and
children in situations of armed conflict, including
sexual violence in such situations, and its calls to
all parties to armed conflict to desist from such acts
with immediate effect, such actions sadly continue to
occur, and in some situations have become systematic

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

and widespread, attaining an alarming degree of
brutality. We also express our concern on the increase
in incidents of rape and other forms of sexual violence
against children in 2021, especially with the increasing
number of girls affected by this situation, as noted in
the latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/272).
We call on Member States to prioritize and maintain
support services for child survivors of sexual violence,
in particular to promote and ensure continued access
to medical, psychosocial and legal assistance in these
reprehensible cases.
We must emphasize the very important role that
women can and should play in peacebuilding. There
is an important link between the full and meaningful
participation of women in conflict prevention and
resolution and in reconciliation and reconstruction
activities, as well as in ensuring the effectiveness and
long-term sustainability of such activities. Women
need to be able to participate on an equal footing in all
activities to maintain and promote peace and security.
The international community must remove barriers
to strengthening the role of women in decision-making
processes in conflict prevention, conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. There is still a need to increase women’s
representation at all decision-making levels in national,
regional and international institutions and mechanisms
for conflict prevention and resolution. Gender-equality
issues must be considered in all deliberations of the
Security Council in order to achieve sustainable peace.
As a State Party to the International Criminal
Court, Guatemala notes that the Rome Statute
constitutes the most progressive international legal
framework for gender-sensitive war crimes we have
seen to date. Its provisions need to be incorporated into
national contexts so that States have a comprehensive
framework for investigating sexual and gender-based
violence crimes, specific procedures to support victims
and witnesses, and programmes aimed at teaching
women about the laws that apply to them, including
resources to monitor the implementation of gendersensitive laws and provisions for compensating victims.
Each of these components has a significant effect on
women’s access to justice.
Finally, my delegation considers it of utmost
importance to keep this issue on the agenda of
the Security Council, taking into account the
interdependence of the pillars of peace and security,
sustainable development and human rights. Women

22-3182249/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

are agents of change and play an important role in
strengthening the social fabric of their societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Muhammad Bande (Nigeria): I would like
to thank the presidency of the United Kingdom for
the month of April for organizing today’s important
open debate under the theme “Accountability as
prevention — Ending cycles of sexual violence in
conflict”. I also would like to extend our gratitude to
our briefers for their informative briefings.
Sexual violence in conflict continues to inflict
pain and trauma on its victims around the world. It
has a devastating impact on individuals, families and
communities. Unfortunately, women and girls are
disproportionately impacted by armed conflict and are
usually seen by perpetrators as the spoils of war. We
must therefore collectively do more to prevent such
crimes and bring the perpetrators to justice.
Today’s open debate bears great relevance with
respect to the terrorist atrocities of Boko Haram in the
north-eastern part of Nigeria, as well as related banditry,
especially in some parts of Nigeria as well, which have
led to a large displacement of people. Violence against
women and girls, especially within Boko Haram, has
been rampant. Murder, rape and forced marriages have
been used as weapons by Boko Haram.
Nigeria has always acted in a concerted manner
to ensure accountability for crimes of sexual violence.
It has also collaborated with the United Nations and
other international partners to enhance protection
against those abhorrent transgressions. Over time,
such cooperation has eased the problem and made
communities and areas far more secure. The problem is
still a challenge for us.
It is imperative to state that the perpetrators of
sexual violence must be held accountable, yet the
capacity of States to do so needs to be strengthened
for better assurance of success. Beyond the law
enforcement approach, however, dealing with the
sociopolitical economy of conflicts in a holistic manner
is crucial to finding potential remedies to the situation
of conflict around the world. In that regard, multilateral
cooperation should be enhanced so as to strengthen
States’ capacities and capabilities to deal with threats
posed by violent conflict, criminality and terrorism.
50/53

13/04/2022

The Government of Nigeria has taken steps to
rehabilitate victims of sexual violence, including
rape, abduction, forced marriages, sexual slavery and
other grave violations by Boko Haram, by putting in
motion several legal and economic and social remedies,
including taking perpetrators to court, the reintegration
of victims and rehabilitation programmes designed to
meet the needs of victims on an especially urgent basis.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts of the United
Nations aimed at improving inter-agency coordination,
advocacy and technical support at the country level.
In all that, priority must be accorded to addressing the
root causes of conflict, such as poverty, human rights
abuses, exclusion and, in our context, climate change.
Nonetheless and in spite of daunting challenges,
Nigeria has been at the vanguard of promoting the
involvement of women in conflict resolution and in
the promotion of peace and security. It is committed
to ensuring the security of women and girls during
armed conflict and after and to enhancing their active
and direct participation in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding. It has also taken measures to enhance
the security of women and girls in internally displaced
persons camps, reduce their vulnerabilities and promote
their safe return to their homes.
We are convinced that the United Nations remains
the central platform for raising awareness of the plight
of women and girls in conflict, including the peace
and security agenda of the United Nations. We also
acknowledge the progress made so far by the various
United Nations mechanisms in addressing conflictrelated sexual violence, especially the untiring efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Nigeria stands ready
to continue to work with the United Nations and
international partners in that important endeavour.
We take this opportunity to assure the Security
Council that the Government has intensified its effort
to secure the release of all abducted girls, especially
those in the horrific situation of the Chibok girls.
Furthermore, trauma centres have been established
in different parts of the country with an adequate
complement of teams of psychosocial counsellors and
health professionals to assist victims on their journey
towards recovery.
The absence of accountability for conflict-related
sexual violence can prevent reconciliation, weaken
the rule of law, undermine the development of strong
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

institutions and reduce the likelihood of an inclusive,
full and equal participation of women in political
and economic processes. It is against that backdrop
that Nigeria joined the Safe Schools initiative in 2014
in response to the growing number of attacks on our
schools, including, of course, the kidnapping of the
Chibok girls in Borno state, Nigeria. That initiative is
really an important one globally, and Nigeria is glad
to have hosted one such initiative last year in Abuja.
That is one of the many things that need to be done
collectively.
In conclusion, we call on all States Members of
the United Nations to consider innovative ways to
leverage peace processes and political settlements to
achieve accountability and justice for conflict-related
sexual violence, thereby laying the foundations for
transformation and inclusion.

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

That person, Sultana Khaya, advocates armed
violence against civilians in the Moroccan Sahara.
She has taken courses in indoctrination, weaponshandling and military exercises from members of the
Algerian military and Frente POLISARIO mercenaries.
She is in no way a human rights activist, but rather an
agent of the Frente POLISARIO and Algeria calling
for violence and military action. She participated in
courses and military exercises from 1 to 12 June 2019,
organized by the Algerian Frente POLISARIO, during
which she called for armed violence against civilians in
the Moroccan Sahara.
I would like to show Council members these
photos, which were taken at that time. She is armed
with a machine gun and wearing a military outfit. She
is being used by the Frente POLISARIO and Algeria
to mislead the international community about alleged
human rights violations in the Moroccan Sahara.

Nigeria is committed to ensuring that women and
girls enjoy their full rights and that those who have
perpetrated sexual violence in conflict are dealt with
in accordance with our national laws and international
obligations. Achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals will be mirage, without the full, free, meaningful
and equal participation of women and girls all over the
world.

Human rights are fully and entirely protected
in the Moroccan Saharan, in accordance with the
highest international standards. Resolution 2602 (2021)
attested to Morocco’s respect for human rights and the
role played by Morocco and its national institutions, in
particular the National Human Rights Council and its
commissions in Dakhla and Laayoune, in the promotion
of human rights.

The President: The representative of Morocco has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. Given
the late hour, I would be grateful if he could keep his
remarks brief. I now give him the floor.

That person has not been subjected to sexual abuse
or surveillance, as Algeria claims. She is acting freely.
Moreover, she was contacted by the National Human
Rights Council of Morocco. She refused to meet with
the Council because she does not want to talk about
human rights, but prefers to weaponize them.

Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): Once
again, the Algerian delegation is trying to lead the
international community awry and to attack my
country, Morocco, through the ad nauseam repetition
of baseless lies, fabrications and falsifications on the
subject of Moroccan Sahara.
The Algerian delegation cited the case in which
Sultana Khaya fallaciously claimed to be a human
rights defender. That is a lie. The person mentioned by
the Algerian delegation has nothing to do with human
rights. She works for Algeria and its separatist group
linked to terrorism in the Sahara, the Frente Popular
para la Liberación de Saguía el-Hamra y de Río de Oro
(Frente POLISARIO), to weaponize the noble values
of human rights, liberty and democracy that prevail
in the Moroccan Sahara for the purpose of separatist
propaganda, contrary to Security Council resolutions.

That person left Morocco and its southern provinces
with a Moroccan passport and travelled to Geneva, to
the University of Boumerdes in Algeria and throughout
the world to spread lies about Morocco. That is because
Morocco respects and promotes internationally
recognized human rights.
The Algerian delegation referred to the Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders,
Ms. Mary Lawlor. I would like to correct the Algerian
delegation because it is lying yet again. Ms. Lawlor is
convinced of the fallacious nature of the allegations
made by Sultana Khaya and definitively abandoned
that case. Ms. Lawlor took that decision when she saw
these truthful photos. She understood that Sultana
Khaya was exploiting human rights for political and
separatist purposes.

22-3182251/53

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

Women and peace and security

The Algerian delegation raised the alleged case of
sexual violence in Moroccan Sahara. That is absolutely
false. However, what is true is the case of a young
Algerian Hirak men and women who are raped and
sexually abused in Algerian police stations. That is
a reality and has been covered by international and
national media.
There is also the case of the violations of the rights
of women and sexual violence in the Tindouf camps in
Algeria, which is under the supervision of the Algerian
authorities. I would like to refer to the cases of women
and girls in the camps, who have been left to the
mercy of the separatists Frente POLISARIO, which is
spreading terror in the camps and is not purely civilian
in nature, but heavily militarized.
The Spanish newspaper El Mundo has reported
that the more than 150 young girls were being held
against their will in those camps. In particular Maloma
Morales de Matos, Darya Embarek Selma, Nadjiba
Mohamed Kacem, Koria Badbad Hafed and many
others were all victims of torture in the camps with the
complicity of Algeria. They suffered sexual violence
and sexual abuse.
The so-called head of the Frente POLISARIO,
separatist Brahim Ghali, is wanted in Spain for crimes
against humanity, rape and sexual violence against
Khadijatou Mahmoud Mohamed Zoubeir. As I said,
that person is wanted by the Spanish courts for crimes
against humanity.
Algeria is in no position to talk about human rights.
I would also refer to the case of child soldiers in the
Frente POLISARIO, with the blessing of Algeria. Here
are photos of child soldiers in the Tindouf camps in
Algeria, with Algeria’s blessing and complicity. These
are real photos, and some appear on separatist websites
of the Frente POLISARIO. They have deprived those
children of their most fundamental rights, and Algeria
then comes to the Security Council to talk about the
situation of human rights in the Moroccan Sahara. The
situation of human rights in the Moroccan Sahara is a
thousand times better than the situation in Algeria.
Algeria is a serial violator of human rights and
international law. My delegation would have liked
not to have to make this additional statement, but as
the Council heard, the delegation of Algeria attacked
Morocco and the Moroccan Sahara during a debate
that has nothing to do with the question of Moroccan
Sahara. The question of the Moroccan Saharan has
52/53

13/04/2022

never been noted in any of the reports — not the
reports of the Special Representative nor those of the
Secretary-General. As I said, the human rights situation
is genuinely much better than in Algeria.
In March and May 2020, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR) published two press statements on the
Hirak movement and the deteriorating human rights
situation in Algeria during which it reiterated that it
was increasingly concerned by the situation in Algeria,
where the right to freedom of opinion and expression, the
right to peaceful assembly and the right to participation
in public life continue to be attacked through the use
of unnecessary and disproportionate force against
peaceful protesters and through continuous arrests. It
is quite rare that OHCHR would publish two alarming
press communiqués on a single country in such a short
space of time. That demonstrates the severity and the
scale of human rights violations in Algeria.
In conclusion, on 8 March, during the forty-ninth
session of the Human Rights Council, the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights made
the following oral statement.
(spoke in English)
“In Algeria, I am concerned by increasing
restrictions on fundamental freedoms, including an
increase in arrests and detentions of human rights
defenders, civil society members and political
opponents. I call on the Government to change
course and take all necessary steps to guarantee its
people’s rights to freedom of speech, association
and peaceful assembly.”
The President: The representative of Algeria has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I ask her
to make her remarks brief. She will be the last speaker.
I give the floor to the of representative Algeria.
Ms. Ighil (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): It appears that
the representative of Morocco really believes in lying
until people believe his lies. Once again, he is repeating
before the Security Council lies and fabrications about
Sahrawi children who are subjected to violations in
refugee camps and his false accusations about recruiting
them. It is a hopeless attempt to convince some that his
accusations are true. Those accusations are refuted and
contradicted by United Nations reports and agencies, as
well as non-governmental organizations that visit the
22-31822

13/04/2022

Women and peace and security

refugee camps regularly. That phenomenon simply does
not exist in those camps.
In January, Mr. Stéphane Dujarric, the Spokesperson
for the Secretary-General categorically denied the false
information reported by the Moroccan media about
the alleged presence of child soldiers during a visit
to refugee camps by the Personal Envoy for Western
Sahara. It is a desperate attempt to defame the struggle
of the Sahrawi people and mislead the international
community about the core of the conflict, which is the
Moroccan occupation of Western Sahara.
Instead of providing that false information, the
representative of Morocco should have focused on the
situation of children in his country, who are suffering
from hunger and poverty. There are a great many

S/PV.9016 (Resumption 1)

school drop-outs in that country, where a large number
of children use drugs. Innocent children are being used
as a political tool by Morocco rulers, leading to tragic
circumstances in which they are subjected to all forms
of sexual violence by some who enjoy the protection of
the authorities and officials. This is the bitter truth that
is ignored by the representative of Morocco.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. The late hour and the large
number of speakers today only reflects the strength of
concern and interest in this topic. I would like to thank
the interpreters and the Secretariat in particular for
staying so late.
The meeting rose at 7.50 p.m.

22-3182253/53
