A/64/PV.110

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

110

th plenary meeting
Thursday, 19 August 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 3.25 p.m.
Agenda item 70 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Draft resolution (A/64/L.66)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Members will
recall that the Assembly considered, in a joint debate,
agenda item 70, “Strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the
United
Nations,
including
special
economic
assistance”, and its sub-items (a) and (b), as well as
agenda item 71, “Assistance to survivors of the 1994
genocide in Rwanda, particularly orphans, widows and
victims of sexual violence”, at its 59th and
60th plenary meetings, on 7 December 2009.
I should like to proudly note that my country, the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, is one of the Member States
that, through their letter to me dated 8 August 2010,
asked for this meeting to be convened in order to show
solidarity with the affected country.
At the outset, I would like to thank the ministers
and high-ranking officials who are with us at this
meeting to demonstrate the great importance that they
attach to it. I would also like to pay tribute to
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his important
efforts and for the visit he made to Pakistan. I thank
him very much indeed and assure him once again that

we stand with him in providing support to sisterly
Pakistan and all affected citizens of that country.
As we meet, an unprecedented humanitarian
disaster is unfolding in Pakistan. A staggering
20 million people stand affected by heavy rains and
devastating floods. The number was estimated at
around 14 million only six days ago, when I decided to
convene this meeting. The pace at which this crisis has
escalated is astounding. The resultant human tragedy is
heart-rending. As they await help, hundreds of
thousands of survivors are at serious risk. This is an
extraordinary emergency situation. It requires an
extraordinary response.
Today’s meeting is a part of that response. It is
also a direct and timely manifestation of the
extraordinary convening power of the General
Assembly. The high-level participation reflects the
seriousness attached to the situation by the
international community. This meeting, I am sure, will
send out a strong message to Pakistan and its people
that the world stands by them in these difficult times. It
is a solemn occasion to express our solidarity and
sympathy with the affected populations. More than
that, today’s meeting is demonstrative of the
international community’s commitment to act, an
opportunity to step forward and show to the people and
the Government of Pakistan that we are ready and
willing to assist them in every possible way.
Natural and environmental disasters have also
recently struck other parts of Asia and beyond, causing
widespread destruction and loss of life. Severe

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-48926 (E)

*1048926*

A/64/PV.110

flooding and landslides in China have taken a heavy
toll, with more than 1,200 people killed and hundreds
still missing. There has been significant destruction
and loss of life due to floods in India. In Russia,
wildfires have killed dozens of people and erased
whole villages and city suburbs, affecting thousands
more. Let me convey our condolences and solidarity
with all the affected populations on these tragic losses.
Coming back to Pakistan, it is there that we are
confronted with one of the most challenging disasters
in recent years. I commend the efforts and
determination of the people and the Government of
Pakistan in coping with the situation. However, given
the magnitude of the challenge, they cannot do it alone.
International assistance must complement and support
the national efforts.
The immensity and scale of this catastrophe is
shocking. More than 10 per cent of the population of
Pakistan is now affected. An estimated 20 per cent of
the land area is reportedly under water. Millions of
people are in immediate need of food, clean drinking
water, emergency health services and shelter. We are in
a race against time in reaching out to these people with
the required assistance. The response so far has not
been sufficient, due mainly to lack of supplies, and the
relief and rescue work has also been hampered by
infrastructure damage and continuing rains. To save
lives, in particular to prevent the serious threat of
water-borne diseases, we must act faster. That is the
immediate priority.
It is encouraging that many Member States have
stepped forward to help. The United Nations system
has led the international response, providing food,
clean water and temporary shelter to many. But many
more are yet to be reached. Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon was himself on the ground. The United
Nations has launched an initial appeal for $460 million
to meet the most immediate needs. To date, barely half
of that amount has been pledged. I call on all Member
States to urgently bridge this gap.
Beyond this initial phase, a far greater and
sustained commitment and support will be required for
long-term
rehabilitation
and
reconstruction.
Displacement of people, wide-scale destruction of
homes, standing crops, livestock and other means of
livelihood, in addition to extensive damage to roads,
bridges, schools, health facilities and other
infrastructure, means billions of dollars of loss to the

2

economy, with exact figures yet to be evaluated. This
will be a huge undertaking.
The draft resolution that I have presented to the
Assembly
in
document
A/64/L.66,
entitled
“Strengthening emergency relief, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and prevention in the wake of
devastating floods in Pakistan”, is in my view an
important and timely response by this Assembly to the
situation at hand. It serves three main purposes: first, it
expresses strong solidarity with Pakistan and the
people affected by floods; secondly, it calls for
international assistance in support of the efforts of the
Government of Pakistan; and thirdly, it focuses on both
the emergency phase and the medium- and long-term
phases requiring rehabilitation and reconstruction.
It thus provides an excellent framework for the
international community to translate the expression of
its solidarity by mobilizing and extending tangible
support and assistance to Pakistan. Its adoption with
the Assembly’s full support and consensus will be but
one measure of hope and relief to the affected
populations in Pakistan, letting them know that the
world cares and that help is on its way.
I would also like to raise two important points.
First, we must support the United Nations Central
Emergency Response Fund in every way we can so that
it can intervene in emergency situations such as this.
Secondly, we must henceforth be alert and work
together in dealing with climate change and its
consequences. We need also to take the issue of climate
change very seriously so that the forthcoming
conference in Mexico will be a new opportunity for a
change of attitude.
I pay tribute once again to the Secretary-General
for all his efforts, and now give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I would like to thank
the representatives of Member States for coming
together for the people of Pakistan.
Visiting Pakistan on Sunday, I was honoured to
carry with me the sympathy and solidarity of all the
world’s peoples. This is what I saw: village after
village washed away; roads, bridges and homes
destroyed; crops and livelihoods wiped out. I met many
women and men, who have very little in the best of
times, awash in a sea of suffering. They shared their
fears of the next wave — the next wave of water, the
next wave of disease, the next wave of destruction.

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

The eyes see, the ears hear, yet somehow the
mind struggles to grasp the full dimension of this
catastrophe. Almost 20 million people need shelter,
food and emergency care. That is more than the entire
population hit by the Indian Ocean tsunami, the
Kashmir earthquake, Cyclone Nargis and the
earthquake in Haiti combined. At least 160,000 square
kilometres of land are under water — an area larger
than more than half the countries of the world. Make
no mistake: this is a global disaster and a global
challenge. It is one of the greatest tests of global
solidarity in our times.
I therefore want to thank the international
community for all that it has already done. Thanks to
its help, we are feeding people and providing clean
water, medicine and shelter. United Nations agencies,
international non-governmental organizations and aid
groups such as the Red Cross/Red Crescent have
mobilized to support the Government’s response. We
are getting the aid in by whatever means —
helicopters, trucks and even mules. Nearly 1 million
people have received a month’s food rations from the
World Food Programme.
Similar numbers now have emergency shelter and
clean water, helped by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF, the United
Nations Development Programme, the International
Organization for Migration and many others. The
World Health Organization is treating health threats as
they arise. But the needs are great and this disaster is
far from over. The rains could continue for weeks, and
only now are we beginning to understand the true
scope of the disaster.
Pakistan is facing a slow-motion tsunami. Its
destructive power will accumulate and grow with time.
I have discussed this harsh reality with President
Zardari and Prime Minister Gillani. We fully agree on
what must be done.
International humanitarian organizations are
straining every muscle to deliver, but they need
massive additional support. Eight million people need
food, water and shelter; 14 million need health care,
with a special emphasis on children and pregnant
women. We have issued an emergency appeal for
$460 million over the next 90 days. We already have
more than half — about 60 per cent — thanks to the
generosity of key donors, but all of those resources are
needed and they are needed now.

10-48926

Pledges made today must be followed up with
action — action that delivers change on the ground.
And when the waters finally recede, recovery and
reconstruction must begin. Agricultural losses alone
will exceed $1 billion, according to the World Bank.
Farmers will need seeds, fertilizers and tools to replant,
lest next year’s harvest be lost along with this one. In
the longer term, the huge damage to infrastructure —
schools, hospitals, irrigation canals, communications,
transport links — must be repaired.
We are considering convening a high-level
meeting on Pakistan when world leaders gather for the
Millennium Development Goals summit in September.
In October, the Friends of Democratic Pakistan will
meet in Brussels to explore these matters in depth. And
ultimately, we must recognize that climate change will
bring more incidents of extreme weather. That is why
we must invest more in reducing the risk of future
disasters.
The United Nations has made disaster risk
reduction a priority. In 2005 the Hyogo Framework
offered a pragmatic blueprint for action. Last year, we
introduced the first global assessment report on
disaster risk reduction. Clearly, we must follow
through on these recommendations.
This disaster is like few the world has ever seen.
It requires a response to match. Pakistan needs a flood
of support, yet in the media we hear talk of so-called
fatigue. There are suggestions that Governments are
reluctant to cope with yet another disaster — that they
hesitate to contribute more to that part of the world.
But let us remember that if anyone should be fatigued,
it is the ordinary people I met in Pakistan — women,
children and small farmers tired of troubles, conflict
and hardship. Instead of fatigue, however, I saw
determination, resilience and the hope and expectation
that they will not be alone under the darkest of skies.
When faced with the tsunami, the earthquake in
Haiti and other natural disasters, we showed
extraordinary humanity. Let us do so again today.
Together, let us stand with the people of Pakistan. Let
us act so that this natural disaster does not become a
man-made catastrophe. Let us give this our all.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Makhdoom Shah Mehmood Qureshi, Minister for

3

A/64/PV.110

Foreign Affairs of Pakistan. I welcome him to the
United Nations and express our fullest solidarity with
his country.
Mr. Qureshi (Pakistan): I convey to you, Sir, the
gratitude of the people and Government of Pakistan for
this timely initiative to convene a plenary meeting of
the General Assembly to consider the humanitarian
situation resulting from floods in Pakistan.
Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing on the situation in Pakistan and
the humanitarian crisis caused by the floods. The
people of Pakistan have deeply appreciated the
Secretary-General’s close personal engagement in the
rescue and relief operations in Pakistan, and his visit to
the affected areas.
I would also like to thank the honourable
ministers for their presence to express solidarity and
support to the people of Pakistan.
What we face in Pakistan today is a natural
calamity of unprecedented proportions. These are the
worst monsoon floods in living memory. According to
the United Nations reports, the present humanitarian
crisis in Pakistan is larger than the combined effects of
the tsunami and the 2005 earthquake.
Pakistanis are a resilient people. We are no
strangers to challenges and difficulties. This is a nation
that suffered the ravages of the 2005 earthquake and
bravely bore the loss of 80,000 of our brethren. We are
the people who, with relentless courage and
determination, have borne the brunt of the international
fight against terrorism and extremism. This is the
nation that has braced itself with fortitude against the
loss of thousands of its men, women and children to
suicide attacks. We are the people that the international
community looks towards as a bulwark against
terrorism and extremism. This is the nation that now
looks towards the international community to show a
similar determination and humanity in its hour of need.
The situation is indeed critical and alarming. I
stand before the General Assembly as the voice of
20 million Pakistanis devastated by the floods, who
have lost their homes and hearths, their kith and kin,
their lands and their crops, their lives and their
livelihoods. One in 10 Pakistanis has been rendered
destitute. Twenty per cent of our land is submerged in
water.

4

Ours is primarily an agrarian economy. Seventy
per cent of our population is employed in the
agriculture sector, and that is where we have been hit
the hardest. Over 17 million acres of agricultural land
has been submerged. Standing crops worth billions of
dollars have been destroyed. Over 3.5 million children
are at high risk of contracting deadly waterborne
diseases. Schools will not be opening soon after
summer vacations, as they are being used to provide
shelter to flood survivors.
In the province of Punjab, almost 1 million acres
of cotton growing area is affected, and crops worth
$1 billion have been destroyed. In the South, standing
crops worth $1.2 billion over an area of 100,000 acres
face complete destruction in Sindh province. In the
North, over 325,000 acres of land stand submerged,
and crops worth $500 million have been destroyed in
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. In Balochistan,
villages and towns are being inundated as I speak.
Over 70 per cent of the roads and bridges in the floodstricken areas have been destroyed, with none
remaining intact in the Swat valley. Over 1 million tons
of wheat stored in warehouses has been swept away.
Unfortunately, these are only initial estimates,
and the situation is still evolving. The situation is
expected to get worse as the second and third waves of
floods inundate more lands and uproot more people.
The numbers will surely go up as the waters recede and
the affected areas become accessible to damage
assessment. The aftermath of the floods in the medium
to long terms will pose more daunting challenges. The
reconstruction and rehabilitation costs are going to be
huge, but our immediate challenge is to meet the food,
health and clean drinking water needs of the millions
displaced, and to rebuild the infrastructure destroyed
by the floods.
Our difficulties do not end there. Our urban
infrastructure will come under severe stress as millions
of people migrate to bigger cities in search of shelter
and jobs. Another serious problem with long-term
socio-economic implications is the loss of land and
potential decline in the arability of flood-affected
lands. The food security of the sixth most populous
country in the world is at risk. The possible threat of
food riots and related violence cannot be ruled out.
The Government of Pakistan has mobilized all its
national resources to provide rescue and relief to the
affected people. Hundreds of thousands have been

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

rescued and evacuated from riverine areas. Provision of
food, shelter and clean drinking water and prevention
of water-borne diseases and epidemics remain our top
priorities. The entire nation stands united and
determined to overcome this challenge. The people of
Pakistan have opened up their hearts and hearths to
their brothers and sisters.
We are also determined to turn around the
economy destroyed by the floods. We have decided to
set up an independent national entity to mobilize
maximum domestic resources and to ensure their
effective and transparent use. This entity will comprise
men of integrity who will supervise the collection,
management and distribution of relief funds among the
flood-affected people.
Our commitment and resolve notwithstanding,
the scale of the challenge is colossal, far too big for
any developing country to handle alone. We hope that
the international community will come forward in all
earnestness. We trust that we will be provided with
much-needed support to augment our national relief
and rescue efforts.
The people of Pakistan greatly appreciate the
launch of a $460-million Pakistan Initial Floods
Emergency Response Plan by the United Nations, for
relief and immediate recovery of the affected people.
We have also requested the World Bank and the Asian
Development Bank to assist the Government of
Pakistan in carrying out a comprehensive damage
needs assessment. We hope that it will be completed at
the earliest possible date.
This disaster has hit us hard at a time, and in
areas, where we are in the midst of fighting a war
against extremists and terrorists. The people of
Pakistan have stood by their brave security forces in
the fight against terrorism. Our successes have been
lauded by the international community, but these
successes have come at a heavy price. More than
10,000 innocent civilians have fallen victim to
terrorism, and more than 2,500 Pakistani soldiers have
given their lives. Our material losses exceed
$43 billion.
The gains that we have made against the terrorists
are substantial. Yet we remain exposed. The peace and
relative calm achieved as a result of the democratic
Government’s relentless efforts are still fragile and
need to be consolidated. The massive upheaval caused
by the floods and the economic losses suffered by

10-48926

millions of Pakistanis must be addressed urgently. If
we fail, it could undermine the hard-won gains made
by the Government in our difficult and painful war
against terrorism. We cannot allow this catastrophe to
become an opportunity for the terrorists.
Climate change, with all its severity and
unpredictability, has become a reality for 170 million
Pakistanis. The present situation in Pakistan reconfirms
our extreme vulnerability to the adverse impacts of
climate change. It also complicates the reconstruction
and rehabilitation scenario in Pakistan. Nature has
made a graphic endorsement to strengthen the case for
a fair and equitable outcome from the ongoing United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
negotiations.
The sympathy and solidarity that I witness here
today from all present is very reassuring. I wish to go
back to Islamabad with a clear message for the people
of Pakistan that they are not alone in this hour of trial
and that the international community stands ready to
support and assist them. We look forward to the
international community’s help in undertaking
immediate relief measures and addressing the longterm reconstruction and rehabilitation needs of affected
people and areas.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We shall now
take action on draft resolution A/64/L.66, entitled
“Strengthening emergency relief, rehabilitation,
reconstruction and prevention in the wake of
devastating floods in Pakistan”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.66?
Draft resolution A/64/L.66
(resolution 64/294).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to The Honourable Hillary Rodham Clinton,
Secretary of State of the United States of America.
Ms. Clinton (United States of America): I
listened with great interest and concern as Foreign
Minister Qureshi detailed, with sombre eloquence and
painful specificity, what the people and Government of
Pakistan are facing today.
We are here, at the request of the Government of
Pakistan, to help them respond to the worst natural
disaster in their history. As Foreign Minister Qureshi
pointed out, the flooding, which has affected more than

5

A/64/PV.110

20 million Pakistanis — more than the population of
New York State — is so enormous that it is almost hard
to fathom. And the rain continues to fall, so the extent
of the devastation is difficult to gauge.
This flooding has already affected more people
than the Indian Ocean tsunami, the Haiti earthquake
and the 2005 Pakistan earthquake combined. And, as
we meet, we fear that a new wave of water may be
about to sweep through areas that have already been
devastated and reach those yet untouched.
My thoughts and prayers are with those who have
lost loved ones and who have been displaced from their
homes and left without food and water. The United
States has taken, and continues to take, swift action to
help, and on behalf of President Obama and the
American people, I want to state our resolve to help
Pakistan to meet the immediate crisis and then to
recover from it.
I want the people of Pakistan to know that the
United States will stand with you during this crisis. We
will be with you as rivers rise and fall. We will be with
you as you replant your fields and repair your roads.
We will be with you as you meet the long-term
challenges to build a stronger nation and a better
future.
Under the direction of the Government of
Pakistan and the National Disaster Management
Authority, the United States has been working since the
earliest days of the flooding to provide assistance to
those it can reach and who need it most. Our civilian
helicopters began assisting in relief efforts almost
immediately. American military helicopters were
redirected to rescue Pakistanis within hours of the
Pakistani Government’s request for help. Less than a
day later, American military aircraft began delivering
400,000 hallal meals from storehouses in Dubai.
These efforts continue, and, to date, United States
aircraft have carried more than 6,000 Pakistanis to
safety and distributed more than a million pounds of
relief supplies. We have also provided enough heavyduty waterproof sheeting to construct temporary
shelters for more than 100,000 people, and we have
supplied the Pakistani Government with rescue boats,
concrete-cutting saws, water filtration units and a
dozen prefabricated bridges.
The initial response by the Pakistani Government
and people, the United States and the international

6

community has helped to alleviate suffering and save
lives. But the combined efforts so far pale against the
magnitude of the challenge.
It is difficult to overstate the scope of this
catastrophe. And, unfortunately, we believe it is likely
to get worse before it gets better. More than 800,000
homes have already been damaged or destroyed. Two
million people have been forced to flee. Hundreds of
bridges have been washed away, cutting off
communities from relief supplies. As the Foreign
Minister said, so much of this year’s agricultural
production has been wiped out, and farmers’
submerged fields cannot be replanted this season.
Many communities face shortages of clean drinking
water and are vulnerable to cholera and other
epidemics.
Experts predict that the flooding will not recede
until mid-September, and if the monsoon rains
continue, the devastation will spread to new areas,
driving yet more people from their homes.
So we know we face a humanitarian disaster of
monumental proportions, and it is creating economic
and security problems. Here at the United Nations, we
often speak of a desire to forge a more humane
fellowship with humankind, and today we must match
that aspiration with action.
Now, I realize that many countries, including my
own, are facing tough economic conditions and very
tight budgets. We have also endured an unrelenting
stream of disasters this year, from the earthquake in
Haiti to the wildfires in Russia. But we must answer
the Pakistani request for help.
On 11 August, the United Nations issued a
$459 million emergency flood response plan, and
asked for the international community to respond. At
the outset of this meeting today, existing pledges of
assistance put us halfway towards that goal. That is a
solid start, but we must close the gap.
With a new pledge that I am making today, of
$60 million, the United States will be contributing
more than $150 million towards emergency flood
relief. Approximately $92 million of that total is in
direct support of the United Nations relief plan. These
funds are being use to provide critical supplies and
support operations of the Pakistan National Disaster
Management Authority and other organizations inside
Pakistan. The United States is providing technical

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

assistance and mobilizing
resources as well.

military

and

civilian

Today I want to call on the American public and
American corporations to support these relief efforts.
Every dollar makes a difference, and Americans can
send help to Pakistan by contributing to the
Department of State’s Pakistan Relief Fund. Please, go
to www.state.gov/pakistanrelief, or make a $10
contribution through your mobile phone by texting the
word “flood” to the number 27722.
Beyond our immediate response, the United
States is committed to the long-term goal of working
with Pakistan to improve conditions in the country. We
demonstrated that commitment with a multi-year,
$7.5 billion non-military assistance package,
authorized by the Congress and agreed to by the
President. We will now take some of those funds that
were directed to initiatives that I announced just last
month in Islamabad to support Pakistan in its
reconstruction efforts.
In all of our work, we are seeking to strengthen
Pakistan’s democratic institutions. Our approach to
relief and rebuilding will be based on the same
foundation of partnership that we believe is important
between our country and Pakistan. It will be up to
Pakistan’s elected leaders to head up this effort, and
those elected officials, in turn, will be accountable to
the citizens of Pakistan.
In my visits to Pakistan since becoming Secretary
of State, I have spoken often about our desire to build
an enduring partnership, and today we are once again
reaffirming that commitment. I believe Pakistan will
come through this crisis because of the strength,
resilience and courage of the people. As we meet today
during the holy month of Ramadan, we must all
embrace a spirit of compassion and make it our
mission to provide that relief.
A few days ago, an American helicopter rescued a
pregnant women who was about to give birth. They
were able to carry her to safety. Her home was under
water. She was facing complications that could have
claimed her life and the life of her child. Like all
Pakistanis affected by the floods, this mother and baby
still face many difficulties in the months and years
ahead. But they will have an opportunity to rebuild
their community and to contribute to a strong, secure,
prosperous Pakistan. I believe in that baby’s future.

10-48926

Civilization has thrived on the banks of the Indus
River for more than 5,000 years. It will continue, and if
we come together now, we can meet this challenge and
ensure that future generations in Pakistan have the
opportunity to realize their own God-given potential.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Steven Vanackere, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Belgium.
Mr. Vanackere (Belgium): I have the honour to
speak today on behalf of the European Union (EU) for
all 27 Member States, our European institutions and
our citizens, and also to bring a special message of
support from the EU High Representative, Catherine
Ashton, who would have liked to represent the
European Union here today and who is looking forward
to the time when that will be possible.
I would like first of all to express our solidarity
with and our sincere condolences to the Government
and the people of Pakistan following the tragic loss of
life in the monsoon floods in the North and centre of
the country. As Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said,
our minds struggle to grasp the full dimension of this
catastrophe, of this slow-motion tsunami. We share the
grief of the affected families and express our heartfelt
sympathy with those who have lost so much as a result
of this unprecedented catastrophe.
The European Union welcomes the adoption
today by the General Assembly of resolution 64/294,
which encourages the international community to help
Pakistan. I can assure the General Assembly that the
European Union and all of its member States will
contribute to the full implementation of the resolution.
The European Union is actively participating in
the immediate global response to this humanitarian
disaster and strongly supports the efforts of the United
Nations and the Pakistani authorities as they provide
vital assistance to those in need. I would like to stress
one thing: We will continue to support this work as
long as is needed. The international community is in
this for the long term. The EU will work with Pakistan
to mitigate the impact of this disaster on the daily lives
and well-being of the Pakistani people.
The European Union and Pakistan share a longlasting friendship. Last June, the second EU-Pakistan
summit set the basis for a strategic dialogue, which
includes the promotion of disaster risk reduction and

7

A/64/PV.110

the effective provision of humanitarian assistance.
Before this disaster, the European Union had already
allocated more than €400 million in assistance to
Pakistan for the period 2007-2010 for economic
development and trade, as well as for governance and
human rights.
Today, I can say that the European Union is
considerably stepping up its support for Pakistan and
for the Pakistani people. Since the beginning of the
crisis, the EU and its member States have committed
over €110 million, and I am pleased to announce that
this amount will be increased by €30 million, which
means that, in total, the European Union has committed
more than €140 million, or the equivalent of
$180 million. And let me underline that this
humanitarian assistance is provided on the basis of the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence, and according to the needs on the
ground.
In addition to the humanitarian funds, there are
in-kind contributions from a large number of EU
member States that need to be coordinated in order to
maximize their impact on the ground. That is why the
European Union has dispatched a full team of the
European Union Civil Protection Mechanism to
Islamabad.
In the wake of this crisis, there is no room for
complacency. The number of people who are in dire
need of assistance is rising and will continue to do so
as assessments continue and access improves. In order
to provide the most adequate and comprehensive
response, notably to address the food, sanitation and
health needs, the European Union’s institutions are
working hand in hand.
The EU High Representative, Catherine Ashton,
together with her colleagues at the European
Commission in charge of humanitarian and
development aid, is coordinating the EU assessment of
both the short- and long-term implications of the crisis.
The European Commissioner for International
Cooperation, Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response,
Kristalina Georgieva, will be travelling to Pakistan in a
few days to underpin EU efforts to assist the victims of
this humanitarian disaster and support the coordination
efforts of the United Nations and the Pakistani
authorities.
As we all know, access remains a major
challenge, and we are examining very carefully how all

8

necessary assets can be deployed and mobilized as a
matter of priority. But in a region still affected by a
conflict that has triggered the displacement of millions
of people since 2009, it is crucial that humanitarian aid
be perceived as neutral and in line with international
humanitarian law and on the basis of the humanitarian
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence.
I would like to particularly stress that point today,
the second World Humanitarian Day, which is
dedicated to all relief workers, including those who
have lost their lives while helping others.
As is the case within the European Union,
coordination is also paramount for international actors.
The national and provincial Pakistani authorities are
clearly leading the response. At the same time, we
would encourage all organizations to work with the
United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Emergency Relief
Coordinator
to
strengthen
the
coordination,
effectiveness and efficiency of the assistance. As we
have seen in the case of Haiti, the consequences of a
natural disaster can be overwhelming, and it is crucial
that all actors cooperate to make the response as
effective as possible.
Let me conclude with a few words on Pakistan’s
security and stability. The EU strongly encourages the
international community to support Pakistan in a
lasting manner and a durable way. Only if efforts are
sustained can there be a long-term recovery. Pakistan
will be particularly high on the agenda of the next
informal meeting of the EU Foreign Affairs Ministers
at the beginning of September, and we are looking
forward in particular to hosting the Friends of
Democratic Pakistan ministerial meeting in October in
Brussels, which will provide an opportunity to take
stock of the relief provided and plan for rebuilding
efforts.
As was said at the beginning of this meeting,
humanity is calling. It is in times of adversity that we
realize that true solidarity is not only about words and
convictions; it is also about actions that make a
difference in the lives of people. Let us now make sure
that our solidarity is efficient, coordinated and
sustained.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Temor Yakobashvili,
Deputy Prime Minister of Georgia.

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

Mr. Yakobashvili (Georgia): To begin, I would
like to thank the President of the General Assembly for
convening this plenary meeting to mobilize
international efforts to alleviate the effects of the
unprecedented humanitarian disaster unfolding in
Pakistan.
I would like to convey the sympathy of the
people of Georgia to the people of Pakistan, and to
express our gratitude to the Secretary-General for the
leadership and courage he has demonstrated at this
critical moment. We applaud his prompt response and
commend all nations that have demonstrated
international solidarity with the people in the afflicted
areas of Pakistan.
My country is well aware of the hardships caused
by forced displacement. Coping with displacement on
the scale seen here is an extremely difficult challenge
for any Government and often requires concerted
international efforts. The hardships faced by displaced
persons should be alleviated as much as possible in
these early days in order to prevent the deepening of
the humanitarian crisis.
All displaced persons should be allowed to return
to their homes and communities in safety and dignity,
in accordance with international humanitarian law, and
the international community should begin to support
this process as soon as it can be safely executed.
As part of the wider international efforts, the
Government of Georgia has decided to allocate
$100,000 to the United Nations emergency flash
appeal. We fully support the leadership of the United
Nations in delivering humanitarian assistance to the
people in need and would like to encourage the United
Nations and its agencies to continue providing
emergency aid. We would also encourage the United
Nations to seek ways to meet the needs of those
affected with a long-term perspective. It is our
experience that displacement often lasts longer than
anticipated, and this eventuality must be planned for
with so many families in need.
On behalf of the Government of Georgia, I once
again extend my deepest sympathy and condolences to
the people who have suffered in this dreadful disaster.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Ms. Lene Espersen, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Denmark.

10-48926

Ms. Espersen (Denmark): At the outset, I should
like to express my own behalf and on behalf of the
Government and people of Denmark our sincere and
heartfelt sympathy and solidarity with the hard-tried
people of Pakistan, who have suffered such tragic loss
of human life and livelihood following the devastating
floods.
I wish, of course, to associate myself with the
statements that have already been made by many of my
colleagues, including by my Belgian colleague on
behalf of the European Union presidency. I also wish to
emphasize at the outset of my statement that the
Government of Denmark fully agrees with the
Secretary-General’s intervention at the opening of this
debate. The scale of the natural disaster that has struck
Pakistan is so large and so devastating that it calls for
nothing less than our full support for the people of
Pakistan.
The message is clear. We must act now to help
the millions of people trapped in this disaster and to
avoid the potentially disastrous long-term impact on
the livelihoods of Pakistan’s people and the very fabric
of Pakistani society.
First, we must pledge and deliver without delay a
response with humanitarian assistance that matches the
magnitude of this disaster. Secondly, we must move
quickly and be ready when the waters recede in order
to help the Pakistani people with the means to
reconstruct their houses, their villages and their
country. And thirdly, we must be ready to continue to
support the Government of Pakistan and the Pakistani
people in their long-term effort to build a democratic,
stable and prosperous Pakistan free from conflict and
poverty.
If we do not respond and if we do not help the
people of Pakistan in these challenging times, we quite
simply fail in our humanitarian obligation. But the
humanitarian disaster could also very well further
destabilize an already troubled region.
To effectively meet the challenges, we need more
than ever a swift and coordinated international
response. The United Nations has, in close
coordination with the Pakistani Government,
responded to the crisis and launched an initial
emergency response plan. Like many others, Denmark
responded immediately to this call for assistance, and I
call upon all members of the international community
to do the same. There is no time to waste. I should like

9

A/64/PV.110

to commend the United Nations for its constructive
cooperation with the Pakistani Government.

democratic and prosperous Pakistan. This and nothing
less is what the situation demands.

Whereas today’s meeting is, of course, focused
on the humanitarian situation in Pakistan, it is
important to see this in context. Pakistan is also toiling
with an armed conflict and almost daily horrifying
terror attacks against innocent people, organizations
and democratic institutions. I wish to express our
continued support for the Government of Pakistan’s
determination to combat and stop the militants and its
efforts to strengthen democracy and restore and build
governance across the country, not least in such areas
as Malakand, Swat and South Waziristan. We look to
the Pakistani Government to provide the necessary
leadership, courage and vision both in dealing with the
immediate situation and urgent needs, and also when
facing
the
more
fundamental
challenge
of
strengthening the social contract between the people of
Pakistan and the democratically elected Government.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Lawrence Cannon,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Canada.

We must act now, and Denmark stands ready to
do so. The Danish Government had, at the outset of the
floods, already approved $11 million in immediate
humanitarian aid and the dispatch of necessary
technical experts to Pakistan. We are closely following
the situation and constantly reviewing the need for
further Danish support, whether in the form of further
funding, logistical support or technical assistance.
Implementation is already under way and relief is
being provided as we speak. Our engagement builds on
long standing ties between Danish humanitarian
organizations and local Pakistani organizations on the
ground. In addition to our humanitarian response, the
Danish Parliament only last week approved a further
$22.5 million for medium- and long-term development
assistance to Pakistan. The major part of this will be
directed to early recovery and reconstruction activities
through the Multi-Donor Trust Fund managed by the
World Bank and through UNICEF.
There is an imminent risk that the natural disaster
will lead to deeper poverty and marginalization in
central and remote areas of Pakistan alike. It is
therefore more crucial than ever that the international
community and the Friends of Democratic Pakistan
support the democratic Government in responding to
the humanitarian crisis and fighting poverty and
extremism. The international community must help
Pakistan in this humanitarian crisis and provide support
to the Government’s long-term efforts to build a stable,

10

Mr. Cannon (Canada): On behalf of the
Canadian people, I should like to begin by offering my
deepest condolences to all those who have been and are
still so cruelly affected by the terrible natural disaster
in Pakistan.
I thank the President of the General Assembly for
having convened this meeting.
The floods in Pakistan serve as a powerful
reminder that every day millions of people worldwide
require urgent humanitarian assistance. Clearly, the
humanitarian needs resulting from the floods require an
immediate and sustained international commitment.
Canada will continue to be part of that response.
Canada has heard the call of the SecretaryGeneral on the international community to provide
immediate support and assistance to the people of
Pakistan. In this regard, we fully support resolution
64/294 and its emphasis on supporting the Government
of Pakistan as it seeks to meet the urgent needs of its
people.
Canada has acted quickly to respond to the
devastation caused by the floods. Immediately after the
first wave of flooding, Canada announced a
contribution of $2 million to meet urgent humanitarian
needs.
(spoke in French)
Following the launch of the initial flood
emergency response plan for Pakistan by the United
Nations on 11 August, Canada announced that we
would provide up to $33 million in response to the
immediate needs of flood-affected Pakistanis. Of those
funds, up to $25 million will be provided for
humanitarian assistance to help meet such priority
needs as access to food, water, sanitation, emergency
medical care, shelter and essential household goods.
The remaining $8 million will be used to acquire
materials urgently needed by the country. That will
include, for instance, the building of bridges to help the
Government of Pakistan to restore access to
communities cut off by the flooding and to help local

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

authorities to provide security to those affected by the
disaster.
(spoke in English)
Canada has a long-standing and valued friendship
with Pakistan. We were one of the first countries to
establish diplomatic relations with Pakistan, and have
maintained a strong development partnership for over
40 years. Canadians have been shaken by the images of
devastation and inspired by the resolve and
determination of the people of Pakistan to overcome
this tragedy.
Canada will continue to work with the
Government of Pakistan, United Nations agencies and
humanitarian organizations on the ground to ensure
that our collective assistance reaches the affected
populations as quickly and as effectively as possible.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Egemen Bağiş, Minister
for European Union Affairs and Chief Negotiator of
Turkey.
Mr. Bağiş (Turkey): I would like to begin my
statement by reading out a message to the General
Assembly from His Excellency Prime Minister Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan.
“Pakistan has experienced the most
destructive natural disaster of its history. On
behalf of my nation and my Government, I would
like to express our deepest sorrow for the flood
disaster that has shattered the lives of millions of
Pakistanis. The Government and the nation of
Pakistan have mobilized all their resources
against this disaster, but more needs to be done.
This is an emergency that needs an appropriate
and immediate global response.
“It is not only a necessity but also a
humanitarian responsibility for all nations to act
in unity and solidarity against this and other
disasters. The United Nations is certainly the
primary Organization to demonstrate this will.
Today is the day to extend a swift, strong and a
determined helping hand to Pakistan. Turkey and
the Turkish people will remain in solidarity with
Pakistan and we will do our best to heal the
wounds of the Pakistani people.”
In the spirit outlined in the message of Prime
Minister Erdoğan, let me continue by expressing my

10-48926

heartfelt condolences to the people and Government of
Pakistan for all those who lost their lives as a result of
the floods. We wish strength to the bereaved families
who lost loved ones.
This is one of the gravest disasters experienced
by the international community. The scale of the
destruction is unprecedented in its proportions. We
highly appreciate the fact that the General Assembly
has been convened for this special meeting to discuss
this very urgent and important issue, which coincides
meaningfully with World Humanitarian Day. I am
confident that all of us are here to help mitigate this
disaster.
I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
personal engagement and commitment to Pakistan. The
United Nations has a crucial role in evaluating,
assisting and coordinating the needs of the affected
populations. We praise the leadership of the SecretaryGeneral and applaud United Nations staff for their
effective hard work on the ground. We also would like
to thank the President of the General Assembly for his
leadership.
The tragedy in Pakistan outlines a new challenge
for all of us. In the face of such unprecedented natural
disasters, it is vital to win the hearts and minds of the
affected peoples. Natural disasters can generate social
upheaval. Destabilized communities, displaced peoples
and personal tragedies can turn into security problems.
It is our common responsibility to heal the suffering as
quickly as possible. It is encouraging to see that the
international community is taking this threat very
seriously. This high-level meeting sends the message
that the people of Pakistan are not alone.
Our prompt response, political determination,
global solidarity, organizational efficiency and
logistical success should set an exemplary standard for
similar emergencies and disasters in the future. The
noble people of Pakistan should hear and feel that their
well-being is being taken seriously by the international
community and that we stand by them in this dire
moment. I am certain that the relief operations will
respect Pakistani sovereignty. Similarly, the pride of
the Pakistani people should be duly respected during
the relief operations.
The welfare and stability of brotherly Pakistan
have always been of the utmost priority for Turkey. My
nation has always been in full solidarity with the
people of Pakistan. Our relationship is time-tested and

11

A/64/PV.110

unique. Turkey immediately expressed its strong
resolve at all levels to support Pakistan, including its
readiness to provide humanitarian assistance. That has
been unequivocally underlined by President Gül and
Prime Minister Erdoğan on every occasion.
To date, Turkey has sent four shipments of
humanitarian assistance to Pakistan. One hundred and
forty tons of humanitarian cargo, worth more than
$2 million, have been transferred. The aid sent includes
food rations, sheltering equipment and other aid
material required by Pakistani authorities. Turkey has
also transferred $10 million to Pakistani authorities for
urgent needs. Furthermore, the Turkish armed forces
will be sending two C-130 cargo planes carrying
medical supplies.
I am proud to say that the Turkish Red Crescent
and Turkish volunteer organizations and relief
associations were among the first international groups
to reach Pakistan. They have already distributed
supplies in coordination with local authorities. We are
also in the process of constructing two field hospitals,
which we will staff with health care personnel. Those
hospitals will be operational on Saturday.
Moreover, my Government has initiated an
additional nationwide people-to-people donation
campaign that will reflect the Turkish nation’s warm
feelings towards Pakistan during this holy month of
Ramadan. The Turkish business world is also leading
another campaign, with our chambers of commerce
taking the lead by making a $1-million donation. The
Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Presidency
of Religious Affairs will also initiate similar campaigns
in the very near future. Yesterday, the Organization of
the Islamic Conference held an extraordinary session in
Jeddah on this matter. Turkey participated actively in
that meeting.
The international community — including the
United Nations system, major development partners
and the European Union — are facing yet another test
against an enormous catastrophe. This plenary meeting,
the ongoing global efforts and the responses voiced
from this rostrum are all very encouraging. This should
be a long-term and well-coordinated effort. As a first
step, we need to have an effective outcome from this
meeting, along with resolution 64/294, which we have
just adopted.
As always, our bigger challenge will start after
the floodwaters subside and once the emergency is

12

over. We should remain vigilant and focused on
Pakistan until normalcy returns to the displaced
millions. Our attention span should not be limited to
the evening news. The region, the continent and the
world cannot afford another case of instability. Turkey
will be at the forefront of this great humanitarian
effort. As always, our message is peace at home and
peace in the world.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Her Excellency Ms. Gunilla Carlsson, Minister
for International Development Cooperation of Sweden.
Ms. Carlsson (Sweden): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this meeting, which offers an opportunity
for the international community to reiterate its
solidarity with the Pakistani people, along with an
exchange of views on our future engagements. Sweden
supports the statement made by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Belgium on behalf of the European
Union.
On behalf of the Swedish Government and
people, let me express our deepest sympathy with the
people of Pakistan. The floods that have ravaged that
country have caused unprecedented damage. So far,
approximately 20 million have been affected. Along
with loss of lives, there is a large number of displaced,
and homes, livelihoods and infrastructure have endured
extensive damage. Sweden is deeply concerned by the
severe situation and wishes to extend its assurance of
committed, strong support to Pakistan.
Sweden appreciates the good cooperation
between the Pakistan Government and the United
Nations, resulting in the response plan. The Swedish
contribution to the flood response so far amounts to
$11 million. I am pleased to announce that Sweden
tomorrow will take a decision to commit another
$8.2 million in support of the international efforts to
help the Pakistani people in this crisis. We will ensure
support, not least to the most vulnerable. That is why
we also, on a regular and annual basis, provide core
funding to major humanitarian organizations, such as
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and UNICEF. I assure the General
Assembly that we will continue to assume our
responsibility.
The situation in Pakistan, like the aftermath of
the earthquake in Haiti, demonstrates the importance of
a well-coordinated international humanitarian system
in order to ensure a quick and efficient response. In

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

recent years, we have put a great deal of effort into
developing the humanitarian response system under the
leadership of the United Nations. Sweden remains
strongly committed to the work of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Emergency Relief Coordinator in this regard. The
efficient functioning of the Central Emergency
Response Fund (CERF) as a key enabler of an initial
humanitarian response serves as an excellent example.
Sweden is one of the two largest donors to CERF. We
urge Member States to enhance their contributions to
that mechanism.
Protracted armed conflicts, population growth,
urbanization, increased food prices and climate change
are sources of tremendous and increasingly complex
challenges. Not least, severe natural catastrophes, as
we have seen in Pakistan, require the development of a
proactive approach alongside a reactive humanitarian
response system. To that end, we need to focus even
more of our efforts on preparedness and prevention.
The international humanitarian community must be as
efficient in providing mechanisms in this field as it is
in developing the humanitarian response system.
Efficient and viable solutions to ensure enhanced
resilience at the country level must be found in
collaboration with disaster-prone countries, drawing on
their experience and knowledge. Close cooperation
between national Governments, which hold the primary
responsibility, and international efforts is a prerequisite
for the construction of solid structures of disaster risk
reduction at the country level. Building local
preparedness and preventive efforts is crucial to
limiting long-term vulnerability.
In this regard, Sweden supports the important
work carried out by the International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction in building disaster-resilient
communities. Disaster risk reduction measures must be
an integral part of our work in order to ensure a muchneeded proactive approach. Let me take this
opportunity to extend my sincere thanks to the
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. John Holmes,
whose tireless efforts over the past three years have
been key to addressing humanitarian needs globally.
As I return to Sweden shortly, our hearts,
thoughts and efforts are with the Pakistani people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to The Right Honourable Andrew Mitchell,

10-48926

Secretary of State for International Development of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Mr. Mitchell (United Kingdom): The British
Government would like to express its deep sadness at
the loss of life and destruction that has been caused by
the floods in Pakistan and our concern for the
continuing suffering of the Pakistani people.
I have come straight from Pakistan today and the
area devastated by flooding. Yesterday, I visited the
village and camp at Pir Sabak, where I saw scenes of
total destruction of homes, livelihoods and all basic
services, with watermarks over 12 feet above ground
level on those walls left standing — an eloquent
testament to the destructive force of the wall of water
that has swept all before it over 1,200 miles of
Pakistan, leaving utter devastation in its wake.
The British Government strongly supports the
leadership of the Government of Pakistan and the
United Nations in responding to this immense
humanitarian crisis. We welcome this special meeting,
which brings the international community together at a
time of great need to focus on responding to the initial
emergency response appeal in connection with the
floods.
Britain wishes to offer the most forthright support
to the Secretary-General and to respectfully suggest
that the response of the international community so far
has been woefully inadequate. The only acceptable
outcome from today’s special meeting is that the
United Nations appeal should be fully funded, if not
over-funded, by the time we conclude tonight. If this is
not the case, the world will rightly draw the conclusion
that the international community had failed in its duty.
The British Government has already made a
significant commitment of nearly $50 million to the
humanitarian response. This is helping to provide
1.5 million people with safe drinking water and
sanitation supplies, and nutritional support for the
vulnerable women and children so grievously affected.
We have also accelerated a programme to provide new
bridges to replace some of those washed away by the
floods. The Royal Air Force is helping to transport
vital equipment, including tents and shelter kits, and
Britain is offering bridging expertise to help restore
transport networks. We have brought forward our
programme of $50 million of bridge repairs in Khyber
Pakhtunkhawa.

13

A/64/PV.110

Yesterday in Pakistan I announced additional
support which will provide thousands of people with
emergency shelter and will help humanitarian agencies
to continue to address specific needs. Today I can
announce that Britain will double its contribution to
this emergency relief, to just under $100 million. We
were amongst the first to rally to Pakistan’s support,
with the early deliver of shelter, food, medicines and
clean water, and we are now identifying additional and
specific interventions, working with the Government of
Pakistan and our partners in the United Nations and
civil society, for this further $50 million of aid and
support.
As the Secretary-General has urged, it is now
imperative that all wealthy countries step up and give
vigorous support to Pakistan.
In addition to this, I would also like to recognize
the significant, generous contribution that members of
the British public have made through the British
Disasters Emergency Committee appeal, raising nearly
$25 million so far for the relief effort.
I can also report from my visit and meeting with
Manuel Bessler, head of the Pakistan office of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA), that the cluster system appears to be working
well. Britain underlines the need for strong
coordination and would urge donors to support the
considerable efforts of OCHA on the ground.
We should not lose sight of the immense longerterm effort that will be required to restore Pakistan’s
infrastructure and rebuild lives and livelihoods.
Maintaining progress on economic growth and
stabilization and on the vital programme of reform will
also be critical — indeed, fundamental — to Pakistan’s
recovery.
Our resolution today draws attention to the
growing effects of climate change, where expert advice
suggests that the next 15 years will see an increase of
50 per cent in disaster emergencies. We know that in
the first week of flooding in Pakistan more rain fell
than in the whole of the previous 10 years.
I would like to conclude by recognizing, on
World Humanitarian Day, the extraordinary work of
humanitarian workers throughout the world, including
those in Pakistan, and in particular those who have
made the ultimate sacrifice.

14

Finally, no one can have witnessed such scenes of
total destruction as I saw yesterday in Pir Sabaq. And
now is the time for all of us to respond with
commitment and determination to the plight of
desperate people in Pakistan, and for the international
community to shine a light of hope into the darkness
and despair which we are seeing so widely spread
across Pakistan today.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Peter Power, Minister of
State for Overseas Development of Ireland.
Mr. Power (Ireland): I would like to begin by
thanking the General Assembly and His Excellency
Mr. Ali Treki for the initiative to convene this special
plenary meeting of the Assembly in response to the
terrible catastrophe that has befallen Pakistan. I would
also like at the outset, on behalf of Ireland, to associate
our country with the statement made by the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Belgium on behalf of the European Union. I welcome
the additional funding provided by the European
Union.
A disaster of this scope and magnitude requires a
global response which must have the United Nations at
its centre. The people of Pakistan need clean water,
food, shelter and medicines, and it falls to us, the
global community, to get these life saving supplies to
Pakistan and distributed to the population as soon as
possible.
This crisis has not occurred in an instant,
devastating all before it, as was the case with the Asian
tsunami and the Haiti earthquake. In some ways, the
full measure of the devastation still remains unseen,
completely covered by the flood waters. It is clear
nonetheless that the scale of this crisis is of epic
proportions. Over 1,000 people have lost their lives.
Up to 20 million people have lost everything: their
homes, livelihoods, livestock and possessions. It is our
global responsibility now to ensure that the people
whose lives have been devastated by this tragedy
receive the aid they so desperately need as soon as
possible. That must be our clear focus today.
The international humanitarian response needs to
scale up to meet the enormity of this challenge. The
rains and flooding continue and may persist into
September, further complicating the relief effort. The
damage to infrastructure as well as the sheer number of
people affected makes it extraordinarily difficult to

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

deliver the comprehensive response that is required.
But the global community must meet this challenge.
The Government of Pakistan is facing the
enormous responsibility of leading the response to this
disaster. We are here today to clearly demonstrate
global solidarity with the Pakistani people in this
humanitarian effort. I would emphasize, however, the
vital role the United Nations must play in coordinating
the global response to ensure that appropriate
assistance is provided to all those in need, as soon as
possible.
Coordination and cooperation provide us with the
best strategy for an effective humanitarian response.
Anything less will result in further loss of life. All of
our experience from previous disasters points to the
vital importance of delivering aid in a coordinated
manner. The importance of putting proper coordination
structures in place was a key lesson from the response
to the Haiti earthquake earlier this year.
We must also remain aware of the enormous
challenges faced by individual people caught up in this
crisis. People are understandably desperate to provide
for their families, to help feed their children and to
rescue those still trapped by the rising flood waters. It
is our job to help them.
Today is World Humanitarian Day, and I would
appeal to all those responding to continue to observe
best international humanitarian principles to ensure
that those in need receive the most timely and
appropriate assistance. Adherence to those principles is
the best way to ensure that aid reaches those most in
need.
As I said, this is a moment of global solidarity.
We meet in difficult times for all our countries, facing
the enormous challenges arising from the international
financial crisis. However, what we are witnessing in
Pakistan is a crisis threatening the very survival of
millions of people. This is a global emergency, and we
need a global response.
The Irish Government and the Irish public have
already contributed extremely generously to the
humanitarian response, and the funds continue to arrive
in support of Irish non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) and aid agencies. The Irish Government has
prioritized in recent years the pre-positioning of
emergency assistance to enable the fastest possible
release of humanitarian assistance by our partners in

10-48926

the event of a sudden onset emergency such as the
floods in Pakistan. This strategy has been implemented
by pre-positioning funding with a number of key Irish
NGOs and through annual contributions to the Central
Emergency Response Fund. It has provided partners
with the necessary flexibility and early resource
mobilization which is vital for their initial response.
In addition, since 2007 Ireland has pre-positioned
emergency non-food items through a partnership with
the World Food Programme. These supplies have
proven invaluable in providing early and speedy
humanitarian assistance. Earlier this week, a
consignment of tents from Irish Aid’s stores arrived in
Islamabad for distribution through the International
Organization for Migration. Ireland is also working
with our standby partners to support their operations
through the provision of personnel from our Rapid
Response Corps.
Ireland has provided further resources to a
number of key responding partners in this emergency.
We have provided funding support to some of our
partner NGOs such as Concern and Trócaire. Ireland
also prioritizes the coordination role of the United
Nations, and we have provided targeted funds to the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA) for its response. Here, I would like to
commend Mr. John Holmes and all of his colleagues in
OCHA for their excellent work to date.
I am pleased to be able to announce today a
doubling of humanitarian assistance from the
Government of Ireland to €2 million in total, but I
emphasize that this is our initial humanitarian response
for the relief phase. Further funding will be provided
once a comprehensive post-disaster needs assessment
has been carried out. We believe that this increase is
warranted by the evolving situation on the ground.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives), Vice-President, took
the Chair.
This year started with the devastating earthquake
in Haiti. We continue to work closely with our partners
in that country to ensure that the recovery is as
effective and comprehensive as possible. Humanitarian
disasters do not respect annual calendars, and we are
now faced with a further enormous challenge in
Pakistan. I would appeal to the United Nations and to
all our partner Governments represented here today to
keep up the momentum on the humanitarian response
to this disaster.

15

A/64/PV.110

I will conclude by saying that it is particularly
appropriate that this meeting is taking place on World
Humanitarian Day. We now have an opportunity to
save lives and relieve human suffering, which is, after
all, the overarching objective of any humanitarian
response. Assisting and facilitating the humanitarian
response in Pakistan must be a key priority for us all.
As a global community, we will be measured by how
we respond to the enormous needs of the Pakistani
people in this time of unprecedented crisis.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Werner Hoyer, Minister of State at
the Federal Foreign Office of Germany.
Mr. Hoyer (Germany): First of all, let me thank
the President of the General Assembly for convening
this special Assembly meeting. His initiative to
summon this important gathering is timely and greatly
appreciated.
Germany fully aligns itself with the statement
just delivered by Belgian Foreign Minister Vanackere
in his capacity as President of the Council of the
European Union.
We listened carefully to the Secretary-General’s
dramatic report on the situation. Personally, I was
deeply moved by his account of the plight of the
Pakistani people.
Today, Pakistan is facing an unprecedented
natural disaster, which has caused tragic loss of life,
enormous damage and tremendous suffering. I would
like to join those speakers who have expressed their
sincere condolences to the Pakistani people. In
Germany, our thoughts are with the many victims and
their families — with those who have lost everything
in this disaster and now struggle to recover.
After having received the dramatic reports from
Pakistan and in response to the initial flood emergency
response plan of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian
Affairs
(OCHA),
the
German
Government immediately started its humanitarian
assistance operations.
Today, I can announce that we have just decided
to further increase our humanitarian aid to $32 million.
This is on top of the German contributions of roughly
$18 million to the European Union humanitarian funds,
and to the United Nations Central Emergency
Response
Fund.
The
German
Government’s
humanitarian aid therefore currently stands well above

16

$50 million. I am particularly grateful to the citizens of
my country for their more than 30 million
contributions and private donations, and I call upon my
compatriots to continue this necessary and valuable
effort.
The bilateral funds go to United Nations
humanitarian
organizations,
the
International
Committee of the Red Cross, non-governmental relief
organizations and German implementing agencies.
They serve to distribute food and drinking water and to
provide medical care and shelter to the people in need.
Numerous humanitarian aid organizations in the
affected areas are already working hard to alleviate the
suffering of those affected by the flood.
We thank the Secretary-General for his leadership
and also express our support for the important work of
his Special Envoy, Jean-Maurice Ripert.
In a disaster of such dimensions, the coordination
of aid efforts is also of paramount importance. We
commend
United
Nations
Emergency
Relief
Coordinator Sir John Holmes and OCHA for their
tireless and successful efforts to coordinate the
international relief reaching Pakistan.
As my Irish colleague just mentioned, today,
19 August, is World Humanitarian Day. It was created
to highlight the role of the many dedicated
humanitarian workers who, under difficult and
sometimes very dangerous circumstances, provide lifesaving aid to the victims of humanitarian disasters.
Therefore, allow me to express our gratitude to the
Pakistani and international aid workers in the affected
areas who relentlessly work for the suffering
population. Their contribution to mitigating the
consequences of this crisis is invaluable. They deserve
our greatest respect.
So far, our assistance has been focused on the
immediate relief and early recovery period. But we
must not forget that Pakistan will be confronted with
far bigger challenges when the full scale of destruction
becomes visible. Damaged infrastructure and destroyed
crops and livestock will have massive consequences
for the livelihoods of the people and the already
strained economy of the country. We all agree that the
international community must stand by Pakistan,
including after the waters have receded and the
television cameras have been cut off.

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

Germany will support Pakistan in meeting the
immediate needs caused by the floods, and we will
sustain our support through our long-term development
cooperation to overcome the structural challenges the
nation faces.
We have built a strong partnership in the
framework of the Friends of Democratic Pakistan to
jointly ensure a strong and stable Pakistan. Germany
will continue to work with the Pakistani Government in
this framework.
We believe that Pakistan plays a vital role in its
region. A stable, democratic and prosperous Pakistan is
paramount for peace in South Asia and far beyond. In
the face of this tragedy, our friendship and support is
even more important. I can assure the General
Assembly that Germany will continue to stand by
Pakistan in this challenging time and offer its full
assistance.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Osamu Fujimura, State Secretary for Foreign
Affairs of Japan.
Mr. Fujimura (Japan) (spoke in Japanese;
interpretation provided by the delegation): I offer
sincere prayers for the victims of the devastating floods
and express my deepest condolences to the bereaved
families. I also extend Japan’s sympathies to all those
affected by the disaster. We express our profound
respect for the relief efforts undertaken by the
Government of Pakistan, other Member States, the
United Nations and other international organizations
and non-governmental organizations. We also welcome
the decision of the United Nations, at the initiative of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and General Assembly
President Treki, to convene this meeting.
The recent flooding in Pakistan has caused
serious damage, with significant loss of life and
property, and has had a grave impact on the entire
Pakistani economy and society. In particular, there
remain substantial need for emergency humanitarian
assistance aimed at addressing the deteriorating
hygiene situation and the shortages of water and food,
among other problems. In addition, there is an urgent
need to rebuild basic infrastructure, including roads,
bridges and communications and agricultural
infrastructure destroyed in the disaster, as well as to
meet basic human needs through improvements in the
health and sanitary situation.

10-48926

The Government of Pakistan and the international
community should therefore make a concerted effort to
focus on emergency assistance and to address the
challenges of rehabilitation and reconstruction with a
view to stemming the vicious cycle of disaster and
poverty. Upon request from the Government of
Pakistan and the initial flood emergency response plan
for Pakistan announced by the United Nations on
11 August, Japan has swiftly implemented its pledge of
humanitarian assistance totalling approximately
$14.4 million for those affected by the disaster. Japan’s
assistance consists of $13 million in emergency grant
aid, $200,000 for emergency relief goods and
$1.2 million for emergency relief by Japanese
non-governmental organizations through the Japanese
platform. Japan will continue to actively implement
emergency humanitarian assistance based on the local
needs of Pakistan in order to promptly provide support
for those affected.
In consideration of the great need for
transportation by helicopter of relief goods to the
afflicted people, the Government of Japan began
making the necessary preparations to dispatch
helicopters to Pakistan on 19 August. Moreover, in
order to alleviate the vulnerabilities of the poor, Japan
stands ready to support, to the greatest extent possible,
Pakistan’s efforts through the phase of emergency
relief, rehabilitation and reconstruction in a seamless
manner and to consider the utilization of expertise and
technology derived from Japan’s own past experiences
with disaster. In this connection, Japan has decided to
participate in the damage needs assessment to be
conducted by the World Bank and the Asian
Development Bank.
The current disaster is one of the gravest natural
disasters experienced by Pakistan since its
establishment. It may well be said that this is a time in
which Pakistan is being put to the test. Japan has been
a solid partner of Pakistan since its foundation and the
people of Japan have always stood by the people of
Pakistan in times of difficulty. In April last year, Japan
hosted the Pakistan donor conference, as well as the
Friends of Democratic Pakistan ministerial meeting in
Tokyo to support our friend. Japan continues to make
every effort, in cooperation with the international
community, to support the Government of Pakistan
towards restoring stability and reconstructing the
affected areas. Japan looks forward to the early
rehabilitation and reconstruction of Pakistan under the

17

A/64/PV.110

robust ownership of its Government and people. It is
my sincere hope that those who have suffered losses in
the disaster will overcome the current difficulties and
regain their livelihoods through reconstruction.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Her Excellency Ms. Reem Ibrahim Redha Al Hashimi,
Minister of State of the United Arab Emirates.
Ms. Al Hashimi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to thank the President for
having organized this meeting. Today, we are talking
about what we can expect from the General Assembly
at moments such as this. I would like to convey our
sincere condolences to the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Pakistan following the terrible material and human
loss that his country has suffered following the floods.
We reaffirm our solidarity with the people and
Government of Pakistan and our desire to continue to
provide assistance to save the victims and restore their
normal living conditions as soon as possible.
The United Arab Emirates has long-standing links
with Pakistan, including our provision of development
assistance, directly or indirectly through various
international organizations, to Pakistan since 1975. The
United Arab Emirates has stood shoulder to shoulder
with Pakistan whenever it has had to cope with natural
disasters, including the events in the Swat valley.
Following the 2005 earthquake, we provided
emergency aid, chartered aircraft to deliver medicine
and supplies to affected regions. We have done the
same since the beginning of the current disaster. We
will continue to provide direct assistance in
coordination with the competent authorities in
Pakistan.
The United Arab Emirates contributions to
international efforts include medical supplies, tents,
blankets and food. Three helicopters have been
chartered to transport victims and casualties. Over and
above the immediate assistance provided, we will
undertake to allocate $5 million to the United Nations
fund to assist victims. We understand the great
magnitude of the devastation to the country.
Henceforth,
international
assistance
must
be
commensurate with the needs of rebuilding
infrastructure to ensure that the situation is reversed.
We thank the Secretary-General for his role in
coordinating efforts.
The floods in Pakistan once again sound the
alarm bell regarding climate change. We need to take

18

this issue seriously. We need to take tangible measures
in order to limit its impact. This will require
strengthening capacity and development and measures
at the international and local levels. The different
aspects of climate change, such as changes in
temperatures, need to be borne in mind. We do not
want such a thing to happen again.
The Acting President: I give the floor to Her
Excellency Ms. Ingrid Fiskaa, State Secretary in the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Norway.
Ms. Fiskaa (Norway): Let me join other speakers
in expressing my profound sympathies to the people
and Government of Pakistan for the human suffering
and tragic loss of life caused by this devastating flood.
Norway enjoys close people-to-people relations with
Pakistan. Many Norwegians whose roots are in
Pakistan are now in distress over affected relatives.
The flooding in Pakistan is not only an
unprecedented situation and one of the greatest
disasters witnessed in recent years; it is more than
anything a story of millions of personal tragedies. It is
the story of the father who stayed behind to save the
family’s livelihood and who is worried about its wellbeing.
The first wave of floodwater caused hardship to
millions of people. Infrastructure and livelihoods have
been hit, with devastating long-term effects. The
second wave of suffering, bringing waterborne
diseases, could be even more deadly. We must
therefore act now and provide immediate emergency
relief to minimize the deadly impact of this second
wave while we can.
We meet here today at the United Nations to
support the people of Pakistan and to help the
Government of Pakistan to coordinate and provide the
necessary humanitarian assistance to its affected
population, with the assistance of the United Nations.
Our united message to the flood victims must be that
we will help to save their lives, we will assist them
through their suffering now, and we will continue to
support them through the recovery phase. I appeal to
all donors to ensure that their assistance and funding
are made available immediately.
The international community and humanitarian
actors should align their support with the priorities of
the Pakistani Government and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. The initial flood

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

emergency response plan for Pakistan is an important
platform to this end, and we expect it to result in a
better response. Good humanitarian coordination
means ensuring that help is directed where the needs
are greatest and is provided in accordance with the
principles of humanity, neutrality, independence and
impartiality.
The One United Nations programme in Pakistan
is a close partner of the Pakistani Government, and we
welcome the Government’s constructive decision to
allow the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service to
deploy assets in the country. We encourage the
inclusion of the education cluster in the forthcoming
update of the response plan.
Once again, women, children and the elderly
have been the hardest hit by natural disaster. We urge
the Pakistani Government and all humanitarian actors
on the ground to pay special attention to the different
needs of women, girls, men and boys in this dire
situation.
Norway has already given 115 million Norwegian
kroner — about $19 million — including in Central
Emergency
Response
Fund
contributions,
in
humanitarian assistance to the flood victims. Our funds
have been channelled through the response plan to
organizations that are close to the flood victims and
have long experience in operating in Pakistan.
Norway’s assistance is already available to the
recipient organizations. To support national ownership
and leadership, we have also earmarked part of our
contribution for the National Disaster Management
Authority in Pakistan.
What is unfolding in Pakistan is a reminder that
we may be facing a world where disasters made worse
by climate change will drive millions of people from
their homes, threaten lives and destroy ecosystems. Let
this be a reminder that triggers our immediate response
as well as our concern in the long term.
Behind every loss of life stands a grieving family.
Let our efforts be intensified by the plea of the parents
who have lost their livelihoods and now risk losing
what is dearest to them — their children. Let this
meeting be a call for concerted action — a call on us to
act immediately and resolutely in line with our
universal humanitarian beliefs — to save lives,
alleviate suffering and ensure the human dignity of the
people of Pakistan.

10-48926

The Acting President: I now give the floor to
Ms. Joke Brandt, Director-General for International
Cooperation of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Netherlands.
Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): The Netherlands
would like to associate itself with the statement made
by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium on
behalf of the European Union. Therefore, I will keep
my statement short by focusing on three points.
First, I would like to thank the President for
convening this important meeting. As others have
already pointed out, there is no room for complacency.
The gravity of the humanitarian crisis and the
continued threat of flooding in many areas require an
urgent response and a continued strong engagement on
the part of us all.
The Netherlands is no stranger to the havoc that
water can wreak. We strongly sympathize with the
Pakistani people and the affected families who have
suffered the loss of loved ones or watched their homes
and livelihoods being washed away. The impact of this
disaster is unprecedented and almost beyond
imagination. The Netherlands, like others, stands ready
to help a friend in such dire need.
Secondly, the Netherlands and Pakistan maintain
a long-standing relationship, which is also reflected in
a structural development partnership. In response to
this disaster, the Netherlands — besides making
substantial contributions through the European Union
and the Central Emergency Response Fund — has
contributed €3 million for emergency aid: €1 million
channelled through the International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies and €2 million to the
United Nations initial floods emergency response plan.
I am pleased to be able to announce that the
Netherlands will contribute another €3.6 million to the
response plan to be channelled through the World Food
Programme and UNICEF, which will bring the total
Dutch contribution to the United Nations appeal to
€5.6 million and our total contribution to the response
to the floods to €6.6 million, or almost $9 million.
Additionally,
a
consortium
of
Dutch
non-governmental organizations is raising funds among
the general public to enable its members to express
their solidarity with the people of Pakistan in these
difficult times. So far, €2.5 million have been
contributed by the Dutch public.

19

A/64/PV.110

Finally, a disaster of this magnitude requires
coordination and cooperation among all organizations
and institutions involved. The Netherlands calls upon
all stakeholders to work with the Government of
Pakistan in a concerted effort to ensure the maximum
effectiveness of the emergency operations. As we have
seen, the coordinating role of the United Nations, and
in particular the role of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, are crucial to an effective
response.
This afternoon, we have again been made aware
of the daunting challenges ahead of us. Now, we must
also show the resolve and commitment needed to
ensure that assistance reaches the people of Pakistan as
quickly and effectively as possible.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
His Excellency Mr. Attilio Massimo Iannucci, Special
Envoy for Afghanistan and Pakistan of the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Italy.
Mr. Iannucci (Italy): In taking the floor at this
plenary meeting of the General Assembly, Italy fully
endorses the statement delivered by His Excellency
Mr. Steven Vanackere, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Belgium, on behalf of the European Union. In our
national capacity, both Foreign Minister Frattini and I
wish to express to His Excellency Minister Qureshi our
deepest condolences for the victims of the immense
catastrophe that has struck Pakistan and the solidarity
of the Italian people with the people of Pakistan in this
moment of great difficulty.
Italy acted promptly to provide immediate
assistance to the victims of the flooding in the country.
An emergency flight sponsored by Italian Cooperation
arrived in Islamabad on 7 August with a 30-ton cargo
of basic goods with a total value €330,000, including
medicine, generators and water purification units.
These items were immediately distributed to the people
of Pakistan with the assistance of the National Disaster
Management Authority. Italy immediately made a
€1-million contribution — €400,000 to the
International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies and €600,000 to the World Food
Programme — to support humanitarian assistance
activities, such as the distribution of basic goods and
food and the provision of medical care.
We are in the process of allocating €1 million —
€600,000 to UNICEF and €400,000 to the World
Health Organization — to support activities in the

20

areas of health and sanitation, as provided for in the
framework of the initial flood emergency response plan
for Pakistan. Italy is also preparing a €1.5-million
bilateral initiative. The local authorities will be
consulted to ensure that the initiative fully meets the
needs of the affected communities.
In general, Italy is examining its cooperation
programme in Pakistan, together with the Islamabad
authorities, to ensure that it is compatible with the new
priorities of rehabilitating the social and economic
fabric of the country in the wake of the tragic floods.
This programme consists of initiatives — some already
operational, others to be launched shortly — focused
largely on the development of areas devastated by the
floods that had already been impacted by the
democratic Government of Pakistan’s fight against
terrorist elements in the country.
In fact, we need to keep in mind the Pakistani
Government’s fight against the Taliban in the areas on
the border with Afghanistan, which has thus far had a
positive effect on the Afghan theatre and the
consolidation of democracy in Pakistan. A massive
physical and social reconstruction is required in the
areas affected by the conflict and by the tragedy of
internal displacement, with the ultimate goal of
promoting economic development in rural and
depressed areas of the country in order to break the
vicious cycle of poverty that foments extremism and
provides fresh recruits to the armed militancy.
Given the commitment of Islamabad’s democratic
Government, Italy’s action is grounded in the
awareness that prompt and effective assistance to
Pakistan should address clear and precise political,
strategic and humanitarian needs in areas affected by
widespread instability and where the interests of the
main international stakeholders do not always
converge. Therefore, as early as the donors conference
for Pakistan held in Tokyo on 17 April 2009, Italy
announced €62 million in new development plans for
priority sectors, including €2 million for agriculture,
€40 million for rural development and microcredit, and
€20 million for training, with a geographical
concentration on the tribal areas bordering
Afghanistan. I am pleased that the Pakistani authorities
have recently taken the action needed to finalize the
related intergovernmental agreement on the last two
programmes.

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

We are also finalizing an €80-million debt-toproject swap that will be used for development and
reconstruction projects. In this connection, the Joint
Committee on Management has just approved a new
series of projects designed by authorities of the
Pakistani provinces and Italian partners that address
the needs and priorities that have arisen in the wake of
the floods.
In terms of projects targeting the post-emergency
phase, Italy has already announced that it will allocate
€4 million to the World Bank’s Multi-Donor Trust
Fund towards the reconstruction and development of
the
North-West
Frontier
area
through
the
implementation of projects to be identified by the
damage needs assessment as soon as the rains have
stopped.
Our actions and assistance programmes are
elements of the broader political and strategic support
provided by Italy to the democratic Government of
Pakistan at the bilateral level and as a European Union
member. President Zardari’s visit to Rome a year ago
and his meetings with President of the Republic
Giorgio Napolitano, Prime Minister Berlusconi and
Foreign Minister Frattini allowed my country to
consolidate this support at the highest levels. It was
also an occasion for reinvigorating our economic and
trade relations in fields that are essential to Pakistan’s
economic development, such as agro-industry, marble,
gemstones, energy and infrastructure.
As the Foreign Minister’s Special Envoy for
Afghanistan and Pakistan, I can assure the Assembly
that Italy is committed, within both the group of
special representatives and the Friends of Democratic
Pakistan, to communicating the urgent need for
increased assistance to Pakistan. This is a commitment
that Italy will reiterate in Brussels on 14 and
15 October at the ministerial meeting of the Friends of
Democratic Pakistan.
In conclusion, here too, in addressing a
catastrophe that the United Nations has called
unprecedented, Italy wishes to convey to the
international community the message that it is urgent
and necessary to provide concrete assistance to the
Government of Pakistan.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Yemen.

10-48926

Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. At the
outset, allow me, on behalf of the Group, to thank the
President of the General Assembly for having
convened this timely meeting to consider the
humanitarian situation resulting from the floods in
Pakistan. Our thanks also go to the Secretary-General
and United Nations organizations for their efforts to
alleviate the suffering of the people affected by the
floods.
The Group of 77 and China express their deepest
condolences and sympathy to the Government and
people of Pakistan for the loss of many precious lives
and the massive destruction of property and
infrastructure caused by the most devastating floods in
the history of the country, which have shocked us all.
The Group of 77 and China take this opportunity
to convey our assurance of continued support to
Pakistan, where millions have been affected by this
natural calamity. We also thank the Foreign Minister of
Pakistan for his statement on the humanitarian situation
in Pakistan in the wake of the floods and for
elucidating the need for relief and rehabilitation.
The alarming frequency and ferocity of natural
disasters is a major concern faced by the world, and in
the past few years many countries have been severely
impacted by these disasters. The implications of such
disasters in developing countries are particularly
immense, due mainly to the lack of resources, their
long-lasting consequences on affected populations, and
their adverse impact on the environment and
livelihoods of millions of people.
We acknowledge the efforts being undertaken by
the Government of Pakistan for the rescue and relief of
the affected populations, in cooperation with the
international community. We emphasize that the needs
of those affected by the disaster are urgent and should
receive substantial immediate, medium- and long-term
assistance from the international community. The
Group of 77 and China urge the international
community to continue to help Pakistan to cope with
the challenges it faces in the wake of these
unprecedented floods.
The Group of 77 and China reiterate their
commitment and full support for the guiding principles
contained in the annex to resolution 46/182 of
19 December 1991 as the framework for the provision
of United Nations humanitarian assistance. These

21

A/64/PV.110

principles — neutrality, humanity and impartiality —
should remain the basis of all responses to
humanitarian emergencies and guide the efficiency and
coordination of humanitarian assistance by the United
Nations and all relevant organizations.
We would like to thank the President of the
Assembly for convening this meeting on World
Humanitarian Day, which was designated by the
General Assembly to contribute to increasing public
awareness about humanitarian assistance activities
worldwide and the importance of international
cooperation in this regard, as well as to honour all
humanitarian and United Nations and associated
personnel who have worked in the promotion of the
humanitarian cause and those who have lost their lives
in the course of their duties.
In conclusion, we hope and pray that the people
of Pakistan, with the help of the international
community, will be able to cope with this massive
disaster.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Tag-Eldin (Egypt): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM).
At the outset, I would like to extend our sincerest
and most heartfelt condolences to the Government and
people of Pakistan for their losses and the suffering
they have endured during the horrific disaster that has
plagued the country over the past weeks.
The Non-Aligned Movement expresses its deep
appreciation and gratitude for the convening of this
important meeting at this timely juncture to consider
the current humanitarian situation resulting from the
continuous monsoon floods in Pakistan. Moreover, the
Movement commends the rapid response of the
Secretary-General and the United Nations in support of
the relief efforts in the immediate aftermath of the
calamity.
Pakistan is currently witnessing one of the
gravest natural disasters in its recent history. The
current monsoon rains have resulted in floods of
unprecedented
magnitude
that,
according
to
preliminary assessments, have destroyed almost
900,000 homes, hundreds of roads, many bridges,
educational
and
health
facilities,
electricity
transmission lines and Government buildings, affecting

22

nearly 20 million persons and resulting in the loss of
crops vital to domestic food consumption and export.
Unfortunately, this disastrous situation could
worsen, as it is feared that further heavy monsoon rains
will continue, thus increasing the risk of floods in
many areas of Pakistan and making the danger of the
outbreak of waterborne and communicable diseases
even more imminent. The Non-Aligned Movement is
ready to join hands with the international community
in preparing for this disaster of still unforeseen
consequences by taking concerted and expeditious
action to avert the expected aggravation of the current
situation in Pakistan.
NAM acknowledges the tremendous efforts
exerted by the Government of Pakistan to mobilize all
available resources to address this serious situation. We
must recognize the gravity of the calamity, which has
inflicted losses of billions of dollars on the Pakistani
economy through the destruction of infrastructure and
millions of acres of farmland. Over 3.2 million
hectares of standing crops, representing 16 per cent of
the total cultivable area, have so far been damaged.
Furthermore, we must be aware not only of the
current consequences of the disaster, but also of its
repercussions on the livelihood of the Pakistani
population in the months to come, in particular in the
agricultural sector, where the loss of stored planting
seeds and the destruction of standing crops and
irrigation systems are likely to lead to severe food
shortages in the near future.
As the situation worsens, the resolve of the
members of the Non-Aligned Movement grows
stronger. Many members of the Movement have,
during the past few weeks, committed themselves to
contributing to the international assistance efforts and
to supporting the Pakistani Government’s attempts to
alleviate the suffering of millions of persons and to
deal with the enormity of this challenge. In this regard,
two Egyptian planes have already arrived in Islamabad,
carrying hundreds of tons of medicine, medical
supplies and equipment, tents and food aid.
Today, the Movement reaffirms the readiness of
its members to intensify their efforts and increase their
assistance to the Government of Pakistan through
bilateral, regional and multilateral emergency relief
and development frameworks.

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

At this juncture, the international community has
to augment its efforts not only to address the short-term
relief measures, but also to take into consideration the
need for the long-term rehabilitation of the affected
population and the reconstruction of infrastructure in
the affected areas. Now is the time to deliver on the
commitments the international community has made to
provide predictable emergency relief assistance and aid
for the short and long term, to overcome the effects of
this disaster.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tajikistan.
Mr. Aslov (Tajikistan) (spoke in Russian): The
Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), on
whose behalf I am speaking, is deeply grieved by the
ongoing, unprecedented floods in Pakistan, which have
taken hundreds of precious lives and had a severe
impact on the lives of one in ten Pakistanis.
We would like to thank the President of the
General Assembly, Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki, for
having convened this timely plenary meeting to
consider the humanitarian situation resulting from the
floods in Pakistan. No one could remain indifferent in
the face of all that was said by the Secretary-General at
his briefing following his visit to Pakistan a few days
ago with the Emergency Relief Coordinator and UnderSecretary-General
for
the
Coordination
of
Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. John Holmes. We thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and look forward to
his leadership role in guiding the United Nations
system’s response to the short- and long-term
rehabilitation and reconstruction needs of Pakistan. We
would also like to thank Mr. Makhdoom Shah
Mehmood Qureshi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Pakistan, for his briefing on the situation on the ground
in his country and on the challenges that Pakistan is
facing now and could face in the short, medium and
long term.
Resolution 64/294 expresses the international
community’s commitment to and solidarity with
Pakistan in the wake of this unprecedented natural
disaster.
As we meet here, heavy monsoon rains continue
to lash parts of Pakistan, and fresh flooding in many
areas has been reported. Millions of people are being
rescued and evacuated from cities, towns and rural
areas. While there are initial estimates of the

10-48926

destruction, it will be weeks before the world knows
the real cost of the disaster.
The OIC extends its deepest condolences to the
Government and the people of Pakistan, and to the
families of the victims of this unfolding disaster. We
also share the pain and hardship being faced by
millions of our brothers and sisters who have been
rendered homeless by this natural calamity and are
living in very difficult circumstances, in the midst of
Ramadan. We urge Member States to make generous
contributions towards the speedy relief and
rehabilitation of those brothers and sisters who await
our help in this holy month of Ramadan, a time which
teaches us to feel and share the pain of others.
The Secretary General of the Organization of
Islamic Conference, His Excellency Mr. Ekmeleddin
Ihsanoglu, has urged States members of the OIC and
their
citizens,
philanthropists,
civil
society
organizations and the international community at large
to contribute towards humanitarian assistance for the
victims of these devastating floods in Pakistan.
However, we are acutely aware that recovery from
disasters of this scale and magnitude takes years and
requires substantial, long-term commitment and
support from the international community.
The Organization of the Islamic Conference
appreciates and acknowledges the efforts being
undertaken by the Government of Pakistan for the
rescue and relief of the affected populations under
extremely difficult and challenging circumstances, in
cooperation with the international community. We once
again urge the international community to redouble its
efforts to help the victims of this enormous
devastation. The OIC stands with the people and
Government of Pakistan in this unprecedented time.
We stand ready to extend help in every possible
manner.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mr. Christian (Ghana): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the African Group. Permit me at the
outset to express its thanks to the President of the
General Assembly for convening this meeting.
We also express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his timely visit to Pakistan and
for mobilizing international donor support to assist the

23

A/64/PV.110

several million people who are in desperate need of
food, clothing, shelter and medicine.
What has occurred in Pakistan is a disaster of
stupendous proportions, and the African Group
expresses its sympathy and condolences to the
Government and the people of Pakistan. We have been
shocked by the loss of life and the immense damage to
infrastructure and property and to crops and livestock,
and by the consequent humanitarian crisis.
The international response to the humanitarian
crisis in Pakistan is at a critical juncture. As the scope
of the disaster unfolds, with the threat of more rain and
the potential spread of disease and illness, there is an
urgent need for more intensified efforts to alleviate the
sad plight of the millions of people affected by this
disaster, some of whom are desperate and in dire need
of aid. Resources, therefore, are quickly needed.
The cry of distress is a call to rescue, and the
African Group pledges its support to the Pakistan
Initial Floods Emergency Response Plan; it commend
the Secretary-General and the United Nations for the
great efforts made in marshalling funds for Pakistan.
We also express our appreciation to the Member States
who have already provided emergency relief and
assistance.
The African Group endorses resolution 64/294,
adopted by the Assembly this afternoon, and urges
Governments, international organizations, civil society
and the private sector, in the spirit of international
solidarity and cooperation, to extend assistance to
enable the Government and the people of Pakistan to
overcome this tragedy.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Sea (Cambodia): I have the honour and the
great privilege to speak on behalf of the Group of
Asian States. At the outset, I would like to express our
deep gratitude to the President of the General
Assembly for convening today’s plenary meeting for
timely consideration of the humanitarian situation
resulting from the floods in Pakistan.
Above all, allow me once more to convey, on
behalf of all members of the Asian Group, our
profound condolences to the Pakistani people and to
the bereaved families of the victims of this catastrophe.

24

Since today, 19 August, is also World
Humanitarian Day, declared by the Assembly two years
ago, I wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
brave humanitarian workers who devote their time and
energy to the rescue of victims of catastrophes in
Pakistan and in other places around the world.
The destructive force of the monsoon rains in
Pakistan that began at the end of July has ravaged the
country with massive floods. A natural disaster of great
magnitude has crippled nearly one fourth of the
country, where thousands of towns and villages have
simply been washed away. Roads, bridges, buildings,
crops and millions of livelihoods have been lost. An
initial assessment of the scale of the damage indicates
that about 20 million people have been affected by this
disaster and that more than 3 million children are at
terrible risk of contracting deadly diseases.
Ever since the disaster struck Pakistan, the United
Nations has been on the front lines with the countries
of the region, which have been very actively engaged
in the process. The professionalism and swiftness with
which the Organization, especially the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, reacted to this
tremendous disaster deserve much praise and
admiration. We see that the United Nations and the
international community are moving as fast as they can
to provide emergency relief and assistance on ground.
The visit of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to
Pakistan last week was a reassuring gesture to the
Pakistani people at this very difficult time. His visit
gave the people great comfort at this time of grief and
distress.
On behalf of all ASEAN member States, I wish to
extend my deep appreciation to the Secretary-General
and his able team, headed by Mr. John Holmes, for the
leadership they are providing in response to the
tragedy. We welcome the responses of the international
community, Governments and non-governmental
organizations in dealing with a catastrophe of this
nature. All of us responded out of a profound sense of
common humanity. At the head of all is our world
Organization, which has been helping millions of
people affected and coordinating relief assistance in the
country effectively.
We have also taken into account the fact that the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
has launched an initial appeal for $460 million, which
is most urgently required to mitigate the adverse

10-48926

A/64/PV.110

impacts of the floods and for adequate reconstruction
needs in Pakistan. While those relief efforts have
restored some measure of normalcy to some affected
communities by ensuring the availability of various
public services, such as clean water and basic health
care, it is very important to note that such valuable
support must be maintained during the long
rehabilitation and reconstruction process.
In conclusion, I would like to express once again,
on behalf of the Group of Asian States, our deepest
condolences to the victims of the disaster and to fully
share our sympathy and solidarity with the people and
Government of Pakistan.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Suriname.
Mr. Mac-Donald (Suriname): I have the honour
to take the floor on behalf of the 14 States members of
the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) to express our
profound sympathy to the Government and people of
Pakistan on the destruction, devastation, and loss of
lives and livelihoods caused by the ongoing and
unprecedented floods in Pakistan.
CARICOM would like to associate itself with the
statements made on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China and the Non-Aligned Movement.
We would like to thank the President of the
General Assembly for convening this meeting to
address the humanitarian crisis unfolding in Pakistan
and ways for the international community to increase
its relief assistance to millions of people so heavily
affected by this disaster and in urgent need of lifesaving assistance.
As a group of States constantly embattled by
natural disasters, Caribbean countries are acutely aware
of the enormous suffering caused by a disaster of such
magnitude, having witnessed earlier this year one of
the worst natural disasters in the history of our sister
country Haiti. Given the size of our countries, it felt as
if the entire Caribbean region had been hit by the
massive earthquake.
As the numbers of those affected by the floods in
Pakistan are already alarming and expected to rise,

10-48926

there is need for the international community to
commit itself urgently to providing continued
assistance to the Pakistani people while action is taken
to assess the total destruction. In this regard, it is
encouraging to note that the generosity of donors is
being demonstrated through increased funding. The
rapid involvement of the International Red Cross and
Red Crescent societies in regard to this disaster strikes
a positive note and should be further supported. It is
testimony to the very ideals we all hold dear that, in
times of enormous suffering, we will come to aid those
in their darkest hour of need.
CARICOM has taken note of the briefings by the
Secretary-General and the Emergency Relief
Coordinator, and thanks the Secretary-General for his
leadership, his swift action and for his previous
statement, which should guide the actions of the
international community in its support to the Pakistani
people. In Islamabad on 15 August, the SecretaryGeneral said: “These unprecedented floods demand
unprecedented assistance. The flood waves must be
matched with waves of global support”.
We also thank the Foreign Minister of Pakistan,
His Excellency Mr. Makhdoom Shah Qureshi, for
sharing with us in this Assembly the dire situation
currently on the ground in his country and the actions
taken by his Government. CARICOM countries would
like to request him to convey to the Government and
people of Pakistan the solidarity of the Governments
and peoples of the Caribbean region.
In closing, CARICOM, as a society of small
nations with limited means at its disposal, stands ready
to extend help in all ways within its possibilities and
calls upon the international community to stand in
unity with the Pakistani people, especially after the
floods have ceased to be headlines in the international
media but when destroyed livelihoods are yet to be
rebuild.
Finally, in my national capacity, I would like to
associate myself with the statement delivered on behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

25
