3

General Assembly-Second Emer1ency Speclal Sesaion

C onsidering that the immediate withdrawal of the
Soviet forces from Hungarian territory is necessary,
l. Calls again upon the Government of the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics to withdraw it, forces
from Hungary without any further delay:
2. Considers that free elections should be held in
Hungary under Lnite<l :--Jations auspices, as soon as
law and order have been restored, to enable the people
of Hungary to deterrnine ior thernselve, the form of
government they wish to estahlish in their country;
3. Reaffirms its request to the Secretary-General to
continue to investigate, through representatives named
by him, the situation caused by foreign intervention in
Hungary and to report at the earliest possible mornent
to the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretary-Ceneral to report in the
shortest possible time to the General Assembly ori
compliance herewith.
571 st plenary meeting,
9 November 1956.

Resolution l 006 (ES-U)
The General Assembly,
I

Considering that the military authorities of the Union
of S~>Viet Socialist Republics are interfering with the
transportation and distribution of food and rnedical supplies urgently needed by the ci vilian population in
Hungary,
1. Calls upon the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to cease immediately actions against the Hungarian
population which are in violation of the accepted
standards and principles of international law, justice
and morality;
2. Calls upon the H ungarian authorities to facilita te,
and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics not to
interfere with, the receipt and distribution of food and
medical supplies to the Hungarian people and to cooperate fully with the United Kations and its specialized agencies, as well as with other international
organizations such as the International Red Cross, to
provide humanitarian assistance to the people of
Hungary;
3. Urges the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and the Hungarian authorities to co-operate fully with
the S~cret';ry-General and bis duly appointed representat1ves m the carrying out of the tasks referred
to above.

II
. Consi~ering that, as a_ result of the harsh _and repress1ve action of the SoVJet armed forces, mcreasingly

large numl>ers of refugees are being obliged to leave
l{ungary and to seek asylum in neighbouring countries,
1. Hequests the Senetary-General to call upon the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
consult with other appropriate international agencies
ami interestecl Government~ with a Yiew to ma.king
speedy and effective arrangements for emcrgency
as,;istance to L'fugees from IT ungary,
.?. L'rges Member State, to makc special ,·n 11 trilmtions for this purpose.
571st plen!lry mceti115;,
9 N Oi'!'mbn 1956

Resolution 1007 (ES-II)
J'he Ceneral Assembly,
Considering the extreme suffering to "hich the
Hungarian people are subjected,
rrrge1tt!J 1,,ishi11g etiectiYrly to t:1~i1nin~1-~" ''.t:s ~::.1~-fering,
Corrl'inred that humanitarïan dut,rs ,·;rn ',e f11lfill1::d
must effectively thruugh the intrn,;1'·onal ,,. u;,,:r1tic,1:
stipulated in Article 1, paragra)Jh .3, of the L k«t r u:
the United ~ ations,
l. Resofrcs to undertake on a large :-.ca1e ;n1:11t'diat,·
aid for the affected territuries bv furnishin ,. medical
supplie", f(,od~tuffs and ciothes; •
,.
2. Calls upon ail Memll('r States t.n pa:-ticip:itc lLl t 1,t
gn·atest extent possible in this relief acti, m ·
3. Requests the Secret:.iry--Gencral to 1mtici-take
immediately the necessary measures;
4. Urgently appeals to all countries concer•wd to
give full assistance to the Secretarv-Grneral in t !te
implementation of this task.
571st j'!enary meeting,
9 Novi1mber 1956.

Resolution 1008 (ES-li)
The General Assembly,
l. Derides to place on the provisiunal agenda uf its
eleventh reg1ilar session, as a matter of prioritv, the
que~tion 011 the agenda nf ils ,;erond emerg-ency ipecial
SCSSlOll;

2. Refers to its eleventh regular session for consideration the records of the meetings and the docu111ents
of its second emergency ~pecial session ;
3. Decides that, notwithstan_ding paragrapb 1
above, the second emergency spec1al session mav continue to consider the question, if necessary, prior- to the
eleventh regular session of the Assemhly .
573rd plenary meeting,
10 November 1956.
