S/PV.8491

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8491st meeting

Tuesday, 26 March 2019, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Moriko
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mrs. Mele Colifa
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Almunayekh
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. McBride
Mr. Hickey
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
Region (S/2019/229)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-08496 (E)
*1908496*

S/PV.8491

The situation in the Great Lakes region

The meeting was called to order at 3.30 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Great Lakes region
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region
(S/2019/229)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/229, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I now give the floor to Mr. Djinnit.
Mr. Djinnit (spoke in French): I have the honour
to present the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2019/229), which covers the period
from 1 September 2018 to 28 February 2019.
At the outset, I would like to welcome the recent
positive developments in the region, in particular the
holding of peaceful elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the signing of the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and the reaching of the peace agreement between
the Government of the Central African Republic and 14
armed groups, facilitated by the African Union (AU),
as well as the ongoing efforts to consolidate those
gains. Moreover, I would like to take stock of some
important initiatives that my Office has pursued during
the reporting period, in collaboration with the other
guarantors of the Cooperation Framework, namely, the
2/21

26/03/2019

African Union, the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) and the Southern African
Development Community.
(spoke in English)
First, as a follow-up to the decision of the eighth
summit of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held in
October 2017 in Brazzaville, the protracted presence
of disarmed Forces démocratiques de libération du
Rwanda (FDLR) combatants located in transit camps in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo was decisively
addressed and resolved. As a result of efforts of the
Joint Follow-up Mechanism, facilitated by my Office,
98 former combatants of the Forces démocratiques
de libération du Rwanda and their dependants were
voluntarily repatriated from the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to Rwanda, as well as 80 ex-Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) elements and their dependants from
the camps in Uganda and one former M-23 member
from Rwanda to the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Moreover, building on the momentum created by the
Follow-up Mechanism, in November 2108 all FDLR
camps in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo were closed by the Congolese authorities and
1,634 disarmed FDLR elements and their dependants
were successfully repatriated to Rwanda through
bilateral arrangements.
That shows that progress can be made even
on the most protracted issues when political will
is displayed by the leaders of the region. I seize
this opportunity to commend the three countries
concerned — the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Uganda and Rwanda — for their commitment and
cooperation. I encourage them to sustain that positive
momentum to conclude the repatriation of the remaining
former M-23 members in camps in Rwanda and Uganda.
It will also be important to monitor and support the
effective reintegration of the former combatants into
civilian life.
Secondly, during the ninth Regional Oversight
Mechanism summit, held in Kampala, leaders of the
region stressed the need to strengthen existing security
and confidence-building mechanisms and explore
avenues to further strengthen the bonds of friendship
and cooperation among the core counties of the region.
Accordingly, we have been working assiduously with
the ICGLR to suppor the operationalization of those
mechanisms, notably the Joint Follow-up Mechanism
on the Allied Democratic Forces and the Expanded
19-08496

26/03/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Joint Verification Mechanism, as important platforms
to exchange information and enhance regional
cooperation on the neutralization of negative forces. I
have also been encouraging leaders, including during
my most recent meetings with President Sassou
Nguesso of the Republic of Congo, President Museveni
of Uganda, President Lourenço of Angola and AU
Commission Chairperson Faki Mahamat, to assist in
defusing current tensions between some core countries
of the region. In that regard, I welcome the recent
initiatives taken by some leaders.
Thirdly, in extended consultations with all
stakeholders, we have been highlighting the urgency of
addressing the protracted refugee crisis in the region
and promoting a common regional approach on that
important issue. Those efforts culminated in the holding,
on 7 March, of a ministerial meeting on the refugee
situation in the Great Lakes region, which I co-chaired
together with the Prime Minister of Uganda and the
Executive Secretary of the ICGLR. The Ministers
stressed the importance of addressing the drivers and
root causes of forced displacement, while noting that
over 4 million out of the 6.3 million refugees on the
African continent originated from countries in the
Great Lakes region. They reviewed options for durable
solutions, including local integration of refugees in
host communities. The ICGLR was further requested
to develop a regional strategy and an action plan for
durable solutions for the region.
As this will be my last briefing as Special Envoy
for the Great Lakes region, allow me to use this
opportunity to take stock of progress and challenges
encountered during my tenure.
The region made important steps towards durable
peace and stability since the 1990s and early 2000s.
Despite persisting insecurity in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and South Sudan, the region today is largely
peaceful. Where cross-border clashes frequently
occurred, differences between Member States are now
mostly addressed through dialogue, albeit not always
conclusively. Serious efforts have been initiated to
promote regional cooperation and socioeconomic
integration, which need to be vigorously sustained and
supported by international partners.
That progress notwithstanding, the continued
presence of negative forces in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo perpetuates

S/PV. 8491

insecurity and mistrust between some countries.
Allegations of support by Governments of the region,
or their proxies, to such groups and cross-border
interference continue to threaten cordial relations and
stability. They are compounded by the continuing
illegal exploitation of, and trade in, natural resources.
The re-emergence of tensions between some countries
of the region have further hampered efforts to yield the
full potential of cooperation.
Those issues require our sustained attention.
Greater regional cooperation will be necessary to
effectively neutralize the negative forces operating
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and transform natural resources into vehicles of
shared prosperity. In addition to strengthening existing
confidence-building mechanisms, there is a continued
need to create opportunities for dialogue among the
countries concerned to address differences, where
they exist, and strengthen the trust and cooperation
among them.
Politically, significant opportunities for consolidating
regional peace and stability have emerged, including
with the recent developments in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the Central
African Republic. In that regard, I welcome the
recent visits by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi to the
countries of the region in an effort to strengthen ties
with his country.
That progress, however, remains fragile. We
need to capitalize on the opportunities and not waver
in our support to the respective parties to live up to
their responsibilities. Sustained efforts are required in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure that
differences across political parties are addressed and
consensus is promoted on ways to achieve peace and
development throughout the country.
On Burundi, we need to provide continued support
to the East African Community to promote effective
decisions on next steps in the facilitation process
to ensure a peaceful and inclusive political process
towards elections in 2020, in full respect of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.
In recognizing those continuing challenges, and in
line with the road map that I developed after assuming
the functions of Special Envoy, which the Council
endorsed, I have focused my engagement on key
priority areas to support the signatory countries in the

19-084963/21

S/PV.8491

The situation in the Great Lakes region

implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework in the following ways.
First, there is the matter of strengthening regional
ownership and the implementation process. Upon
assuming my functions, I realized that the summit
meetings of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held
regularly on the margins of the AU summit and the
General Assembly, were facing diminishing interest
and participation by leaders of the signatory countries.
In efforts to reinvigorate the Mechanism as a forum for
a regular exchange among leaders and the main vehicle
to govern the implementation of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, I recommended that the
summit be held in the region and be convened and
chaired by one of the signatory countries on a rotating
basis. Since the endorsement of that reform initiative
by the Heads of State in 2016, the chairmanship of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism has been held by the
Heads of State of Angola, the Republic of the Congo
and Uganda successively. The next summit of the
Mechanism is scheduled to be hosted in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in October, followed by Zambia in
2020. The reform was successful in promoting renewed
interest and ownership on the part of the signatory
countries in the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework implementation process. The annually
rotating responsibility affords the respective Chairs
an opportunity to provide leadership in addressing key
outstanding issues related to the regional commitments
under the Framework.
Secondly, there is the issue of maintaining regional
and international focus on the need to strengthen
cooperation on countering the negative forces and
building confidence among all countries. On every
occasion, I have encouraged creating opportunities
for dialogue among the leaders concerned to address
differences where they exist and promote cooperation,
most notably on the neutralization of negative forces.
That is particularly important in the light of persisting
mistrust and tensions among some countries of the
region. As a result of those commitments, in October
2018 in Kampala the ninth summit of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism reviewed in a closed-door session
the issues that contributed to mistrust among some of
the leaders and reflected on ways to resolve them. At
the summit, President Sassou Nguesso and President
Museveni were asked to take initiatives in that regard.
I am encouraged by ongoing efforts by leaders of
the region to help address the causes of tensions and
4/21

26/03/2019

promote dialogue in the region. International partners
should stand ready to support those commitments in a
concerted manner.
Thirdly, on the matter of promoting regional
cohesion and international attention with regard to the
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Burundi, recognizing the importance of political
stability at the national level for regional stability, and
in line with my mandate, support for peaceful, credible
and inclusive political and dialogue processes has been
one of my key priorities and a major area of political
engagement. I was given an opportunity from April
to June 2015 to promote a promising dialogue process
between the parties in Burundi, which, had it been
effectively supported by all, could have provided the
Burundian stakeholders with a better forum to address
their differences. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I was initially requested to explore avenues for
the United Nations to facilitate dialogue in that country.
In addition to frequent visits to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Burundi to encourage commitment
to dialogue and compromise, I promoted a concerted
regional and international approach to the situations
in those countries. I also facilitated joint action by the
guarantor institutions, which resulted in the holding
of six ministerial-level meetings, as well as working
visits to Kinshasa in May 2017 to engage national
stakeholders on the need for inclusive dialogue. The
role of the Special Envoy, working in collaboration with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Head of
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi, will
continue to be crucial in highlighting the importance of
peaceful and inclusive political processes in the region
and promoting sustained concerted support for the
countries concerned.
Fourthly, with regard to putting women’s
participation in peace and political processes at the
centre of advocacy efforts, I am pleased with the
momentum we have achieved in promoting women’s
participation in political and peace processes in the
region through strengthened advocacy with the support
of the Advisory Board of the Women’s Platform for the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. Effective
follow-up is now required to the joint United NationsAU-ICGLR solidarity missions to Burundi, the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
19-08496

26/03/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Congo and South Sudan, including the implementation
of the decisions of the gender ministers’ meeting held
in Uganda in November 2018. I call on the Council to
support the region in efforts to achieve a minimal quota
of 30 per cent women’s representation in political and
peace processes by 2020, in the lead-up to the twentieth
anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000).
Fifthly, there is the issue of encouraging a political
conversation on ways to transform natural resources
into vehicles of shared prosperity. In view of the lack of
tangible progress in curbing the illicit exploitation of,
and trade in, natural resources, addressing their role in
fuelling insecurity and building on the efforts by the
ICGLR, signatory countries agreed to our proposal to
initiate a political dialogue on ways to transform the
exploitation of natural resources into a driver of peace
and shared prosperity. Consultations to that effect have
been initiated with the countries concerned.
Lastly, there is the matter of promoting the rule
of law and respect for human rights. Recognizing the
centrality of respect for human rights, I am pleased
with the operationalization of the Great Lakes Judicial
Cooperation Network, which supports collaboration
between prosecutors and judicial authorities in the
region on cross-border crimes and serious human
rights violations. In efforts to further foster political
commitment and advance the fight against impunity,
I am also pleased to announce that my Office,
together with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the ICGLR, is
organizing a high-level conference on justice and good
governance in May in Nairobi. The support of the
Council for that initiative would be much appreciated.
(spoke in French)
Let me conclude by thanking the Council for the
support extended to me during my tenure. I sincerely
hope that the regional and international partners will
continue to work closely together for the establishment
of lasting peace and shared prosperity in the Great
Lakes region.
The President (spoke in French): I especially thank
Mr. Djinnit for his briefing because, as he mentioned,
this will be his last one before the Security Council in
his current capacity. Allow me, on behalf of everyone,
to express our gratitude for his outstanding work and
exemplary commitment and to wish him every success
in his professional future.

S/PV. 8491

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes Region, for his comprehensive briefing. We
thank him for his great personal contribution to the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, as well as for his contribution to the
settlement of a number of acute crisis situations in the
Great Lakes region.
We believe that the Framework continues to serve
as a the cornerstone of regional stability. We note
progress in the implementation of that document,
in particular the launching of the Joint Follow-up
Mechanism for the repatriation of former combatants.
We call on all signatories to unconditionally uphold
all their obligations, including respect for sovereignty,
non-interference in the internal affairs of others and the
strengthening of confidence-building measures. We are
convinced that the full implementation of the provisions
of the Framework will have a positive impact on the
overall situation in the region, which remains tense. In
that context, we supported the appointment of Mr. Huang
Xia, of the People’s Republic of China, as the new
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes region, and hope that he will be able to continue
his productive cooperation with the leaders of the
countries of the region, accelerate the implementation
of the Framework and make a significant contribution
to normalizing the situation.
One of the major factors in ensuring security
in the Great Lakes region is the stabilization of
the situation in its largest country, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Unfortunately, the successful
holding of elections has so far not resulted in any
perceptible strengthening of the country’s stability or
improvement in its socioeconomic situation. Militants
from neighbouring countries, particularly from the
Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda and the
Lord’s Resistance Army, have been taking advantage
of the overstretched army and police, which have
been busy at polling stations, to become more active
in the eastern regions of the country. The Congolese
army’s operation, supported by the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, against the Allied Democratic
Forces, which has been going on for several months

19-084965/21

S/PV.8491

The situation in the Great Lakes region

now, has had no tangible results either. Opposition from
illegal armed groups is complicating the ongoing fight
against the Ebola epidemic in two of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo’s eastern provinces. We hope
to see effective cooperation between the countries
of the region in preventing the virus from spreading
across their borders, and we are working on the issue of
supplying the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo with a Russian-made vaccine against the disease.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern about
the difficult humanitarian situation in the Great
Lakes region. However, we can point to some positive
developments in addressing the refugee problem, in
particular the gradual repatriation of Burundian refugees
from neighbouring countries that has begun thanks to
the stabilizing situation in their homeland. The first
reports of citizens of the Central African Republic and
South Sudan who had previously fled to the Great Lakes
region returning home are also grounds for optimism.
We welcome the measures being implemented within
the framework of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) to harmonize national
strategies for repatriating and reintegrating refugees
and eradicating the underlying reasons for the problem.
These efforts are being implemented in the spirit of the
Year of Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced
Persons: Towards Durable Solutions to Forced
Displacement in Africa proclaimed by the African
Union, and reflect the commitment of the countries of
the Great Lakes region to finding collective responses
to the challenges facing it.
We hope that the continuing differences between
the leaders of some countries of the Great Lakes region
will not affect their commitments to the principles
outlined in the Framework. We call on the States of
the region to set aside their differences and continue
to cooperate on the key issues that affect the stability
and security of the entire region. We believe that lasting
solutions to all these problems can be found only
independently, with support from the ICGLR and other
regional mechanisms, in accordance with the principle
of African solutions to African problems.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Djinnit for his dedicated service of nearly
five years. His efforts have been deeply appreciated, and
we wish him every success in his future endeavours.
We are all aware not only of the enormous potential
of the countries of the Great Lakes region but also of
6/21

26/03/2019

the history of conflict there that has destroyed millions
of lives and deepened the distress that has endured
for decades. Since 2013, the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region has provided a road map
for rebuilding confidence and mutual respect at the
State level. Reviewing many of the commitments made
six years ago, such as to respecting the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of neighbouring countries and
strengthening regional economic integration, we see
this agreement as every bit as relevant today. In fact, it
may have new importance in the Great Lakes.
In the Democratic Republic of Congo, President
Tshilombo Tshisekedi is providing new hope that
the status quo of insecurity and impunity will cease
and that the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
keep its commitments to further reconciliation,
tolerance and democratization. The United States
welcomes President Tshisekedi’s announcements on
key Congolese commitments in the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, including securitysector reform, the consolidation of State authority and
economic development. We are committed to working
with the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to seize this once-in-a-generation opportunity to
replace conflict with commerce and help permanently
transform the Great Lakes region into an interconnected
hub of prosperity.
Now is the time for regional leaders who are
also parties to the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework to live up to their commitment to adhering
to the principles of non-interference in the internal
affairs of neighbouring countries and denying support
or safe harbour to armed groups. Working together,
the countries of the region can use the tools at their
disposal, with the support of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Security Council and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, to tighten their grip on destabilizing actors,
not simply to protect civilians or provide humanitarian
aid, but to eliminate conflict from the Great Lakes
region altogether.
Recent examples suggest that such outreach is
already paying dividends. For example, the December
agreement, highlighted in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2019/229), between military officials from
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
19-08496

26/03/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

S/PV. 8491

conduct joint border patrols in insecure areas along
their shared border, could serve as a new beginning for
constructive cross-border cooperation. The repatriation
of combatants from the Forces Démocratiques de
Libération du Rwanda and the Mouvement du 23 mars
is an additional positive example of intra-regional
cooperation made possible by support from United
Nations missions. New opportunities for regional
economic integration and foreign direct investment
could also be in sight. Regulators will need to tackle
endemic corruption, particularly in the mining sector,
to help stop the financing that fuels armed groups and
makes peace so hard to achieve.

On the humanitarian front, the overall picture in the
most recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/229)
is still extremely gloomy, with more than 11 million
persons forcibly displaced in the Great Lakes region.
We remain deeply concerned by the epidemics such
as Ebola that have spread in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. While Ebola has so far not claimed any
victims across the border, we must continue to be very
vigilant. We are also still deeply concerned about the
human rights situation, particularly in Yumbi in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is unfortunate
that Secretary-General’s report does not adequately
reflect the situation there.

At previous Council meetings this year the
United States carefully described the threat of rising
tensions in the Great Lakes region. I will not rehash
them now, but it is important to remember that despite
those challenges, a remarkable opportunity has been
presented to the people of the Great Lakes, the United
Nations missions working in the region and the Council.
Let us build trust and confidence, and let us seize this
opportunity for peace together.

On the other hand, some new opportunities are
emerging. We welcome the fresh political momentum
initiated in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by
President Tshilombo Tshisekedi. We hope that that
momentum can also help to give new impetus to the
full implementation of the agreement.

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, I would like to thank the Special
Envoy for his briefing this afternoon, and above all for
the work that he has done over the years in implementing
his mandate.
I will focus my statement on two aspects, the first
of which concerns the security, political, humanitarian
and human rights situation in the Great Lakes region.
Despite the excellent work done by the Special Envoy,
the overall situation in the Great Lakes region remains
complicated. On the security front, the progress
made through the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme should not distract from
the fact that the number of cross-border incidents
is increasing, particularly around Burundi but also
between Rwanda and Uganda.
Eliminating the threat posed by various negative
forces will continue to require an integrated regional
approach and strong political engagement on the part
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region as a whole. In the current political
context, we welcome the peace agreement recently
signed in the Central African Republic and hope that
the upcoming presidential and legislative elections in
Burundi will be credible, transparent and inclusive.

My second point concerns economic cooperation
in the Great Lakes region. Economic cooperation,
including in the area of natural resources, remains one
of the key elements of the framework agreement. The
report cites several initiatives proposed by the Special
Envoy, such as the holding of a conference in Kigali
to promote peace, security and shared natural resource
management in the Greater Virunga Landscape or the
organizing of the second Private Sector Investment
Conference for the Great Lakes Region in November.
In that regard, we note that the level of cross-border
investment in the Great Lakes region unfortunately
remains too low, while the informal economic sector
continues to be widespread. We should perhaps consider
how the Framework Agreement could contribute to
improving that situation.
In conclusion, we believe that regional integration
is essential and, in reality, the only way forward in order
for the countries of the region to draw the maximum
benefit from all their resources while, at the same time,
strengthening peace.
Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank Special Envoy Djinnit for his briefing today,
for the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/229)
and for all his very diligent work and strong personal
dedication to these issues since 2014. We appreciate
all that he has done, and we wish him every success
for the future. It was particularly welcome today both
to hear about his recent successes and to be reminded

19-084967/21

S/PV.8491

The situation in the Great Lakes region

of all that he has achieved over that past five years.
We particularly welcome his success in securing the
voluntary repatriation of fighters from Rwanda and
combatants of the Mouvement du 23 mars from Uganda.
That is an important achievement. As Mr. Djinnit said,
it shows that we can make progress on these very
difficult issues.
In setting out today the six areas on which he has
focused over the past five years, I think that he helped
set the agenda for his successor when he takes over. I
would like to highlight three of those areas in particular.
First, we warmly welcome the emphasis that the
Special Envoy placed on promoting the participation of
women in political life and peace processes. We strongly
agree with the call that he made just now to support the
region’s efforts to achieve a minimum quota of 30 per
cent representation of women in political processes
by 2020 in time for the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000).
Secondly, we very much agree with the Special
Envoy about the importance of the rule of law and
human rights. In that regard, we strongly support his
plans for a high-level conference on justice and good
governance in May. The Special Envoy will have our
full support for that conference.
Thirdly, and this is a point that my colleague from
the United States also touched on, we very much agree
about the importance of tackling the exploitation of
natural resources, in particular by armed groups in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is very
good that Mr. Djinnit initiated political discussions with
the countries in the region on that issue. I think that
it will be very important that that dialogue continues
under his successor.
Let me just touch very briefly on three of the
country-specific issues that are mentioned in the
report. First, with regard to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we of course join the Special Envoy in our
commendation of the Congolese people for exercising
their democratic right to vote in a peaceful manner in
the recent elections. But we all know that democracy
is a process, not an event, and that it is vital that all
stakeholders in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
remain focused on supporting a more stable and
inclusive physical environment in the country. We fully
agree with the conclusions in the Secretary-General’s
report regarding the importance of resolving the issue
of foreign armed groups and their dependents in the
8/21

26/03/2019

Democratic Republic of the Congo and regional issues
involving refugee populations. Regional dialogue
will be vital to finding solutions that respect the
fundamental human rights of all those involved in or
affected by conflict.
Secondly, turning to the Central African Republic,
we attach great importance to ongoing efforts by the
parties to implement the Political Agreement for
Peace and Reconciliation and would encourage all
stakeholders to consider what role the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Region may be able to
play in supporting that process.
Finally, with respect to Burundi, we think that an
inclusive dialogue will be a vital precursor to credible
and inclusive elections. We welcome all the work that the
Special Envoy has done on that issue. All international
partners should continue to support the East African
Community in its efforts to end the political crisis in
Burundi and preserve the Arusha accords. Again, we
encourage all stakeholders to consider whether the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework could play
an enhanced role in promoting dialogue in Burundi
and to coordinate their efforts with the Framework in
that regard.
In conclusion, we look forward to hearing the
plans of Mr. Djinnit’s successor to further engage with
regional Heads of State and Government, picking up
on the six themes that he outlined, but in particular the
three on which I focused on. As he has shown during his
tenure, the role of Special Envoy has an invaluable part
to play in supporting and strengthening the partnerships
that will underpin greater regional stability. I thank
him for all that he has done.
Ms. McBride (South Africa): At the outset, let me
join others in thanking Mr. Djinnit for his briefing and
for his excellent work during his time as Special Envoy.
South Africa welcomes the progress registered
in the implementation of the commitments under the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region,
which was signed on 24 February 2013. We further
welcome the cooperation between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda and Rwanda, as well
as the support provided by the guarantors in the
repatriation of a large number of disarmed combatants
of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
and dependents. South Africa encourages those
19-08496

26/03/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Governments to complete the repatriation of the former
combatants of the Mouvement du 23 mars in accordance
with human rights principles and international and
refugee law. South Africa underscores the importance
of the cooperation of all countries in the Great Lakes
region in eliminating armed groups, which continue
to pose a persistent threat to regional stability
and integration.
My delegation welcomes the consensus reached by
the signatories to the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic through
the mediation of the African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, Mr. Smaïl Chergui. We
are particularly heartened by the agreement of the
formation of an inclusive Government in the context
of article 21 of the Agreement (see S/2019/145, annex).
We further welcome the peaceful holding of elections
and the peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
In that regard, South Africa supports the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) as part of the efforts to deliver
greater stability to the country and the region. South
Africa hopes that the new MONUSCO mandate will
help the new Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo to determine its priorities, assert its
authority throughout the entire territory, including the
eastern part of the country, concentrate on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and encourage
reconciliation in the country. Accordingly, South
Africa calls on the international community to provide
assistance to the newly inaugurated Government of
President Félix Tshisekedi and to help in building that
nation’s institutions, which are critical to peace and
security as well as democracy and development.
Burundi remains an important part in the stability
of the Great Lakes region. As such, South Africa
continues to support the intra-Burundi dialogue,
including the facilitation process led by the East
African Community in the spirit of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement, with the support of the
African Union and the United Nations. In that regard,
the efforts of the mediator, President Yoweri Museveni
of Uganda, and the former facilitator, former President
Benjamin Mkapa of the United Republic of Tanzania,
are acknowledged and commended. My delegation calls
for the continued support and mediation efforts of the
Secretary-General’s Special Envoy, Mr. Kafando. South

S/PV. 8491

Africa also calls for the global ceasefire agreement
and the Arusha accords to be implemented together, in
pursuit of a lasting solution to the current impasse.
Ultimately, a region that is politically stable serves
as a foundation for regional economic integration.
There is therefore a need to curb the persistent illicit
exploitation of, and trade in, natural resources, which
undermines the proper management of those resources.
South Africa commends the progress towards economic
and regional integration, including the Democratic
Republic of the Congo-Zambia road project, the joint
development road-rail bridge project linking Kinshasa
to Brazzaville, as well as the completion of 12 of the 15
one-stop border posts aimed at boosting regional trade.
In conclusion, we call on the Security Council to
reaffirm calls for all signatories to the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework to implement their
commitments under the Framework to ensure longterm sustainable peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, I would like
to thank the Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region,
Mr. Said Djinnit, for his very informative briefing.
Allow me to express our gratitude for his dedication,
commitment and the quality of his work during his
tenure. We also welcome the nomination of the new
Special Envoy, Mr. Huang Xia, and wish him every
success in the discharge of his responsibilities in that
important post.
Six years after the signing of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region, Poland welcomes progress
made in the fulfilment of several commitments, such
as improving cooperation on the repatriation of foreign
combatants, raising the profile of the women and peace
and security agenda in the region, as well as greater
economic cooperation.
Nevertheless, achieving stabilization in the entire
region will require reliable and inclusive electoral
processes, the restoration of the rule of law, respect
for human rights and good governance. Despite some
positive developments in that regard, violence, human
rights abuses, violations of international humanitarian
law and further displacement of people still impact
countries of the Great Lakes region. Poland is also
concerned about the increasing tensions between the
signatories to the agreement, especially given the recent
attacks at the borders of the Democratic Republic of the

19-084969/21

S/PV.8491

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Congo, Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda — tensions that
are fuelled by the threat posed by armed groups and the
illicit exploitation of natural resources. Poland believes
that countering illegal cross-border activities is an
integral part of responding to challenges in the region,
as it is an essential condition for curbing the activities
of armed groups and the successful submission of the
combatants to the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes.
We also stress that the reform and efficiency of
the justice and penal systems are key elements without
which efforts to achieve stability in the region will
not succeed. We commend the work of the Great
Lakes Judicial Cooperation Network and encourage
all the signatories to further coordinate their efforts
on that matter. In that regard, Poland welcomes the
announcement of the high-level conference on justice
and good governance to be held in Nairobi in May.
The root causes of the situation in the region
lie also in the weakness of State institutions. That
highlights the importance of building the capabilities
of national security services so that they can both take
on the responsibility for protecting civilians and also
safeguard their civil rights and freedoms. In addition,
all efforts aimed at improving the situation and provide
urgent humanitarian aid to the region need to be
complemented by long-term development programmes
for all conflict areas.
Poland considers the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework to be an essential mechanism for achieving
peace in the region. We call on all signatories to
promptly and in good faith fulfil their respective
commitments under the agreement. Poland welcomes
the outcome of the ninth high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism, held in Kampala in
October of last year, and calls on all the signatories to
fully implement the decisions reached there. Building
trust among the leaders and the peoples of the region
is necessary. We therefore encourage the signatories
to take all the necessary steps to reinforce cooperation
and foster good-neighbourly relations.
We appreciate all the efforts made by the Special
Envoy. We encourage his Office to further engage
in preventive diplomacy and the promotion of good
practices in the region. Moreover, Poland strongly
believes that one of the key elements of effective
United Nations support for the implementation of the
Framework is the close cooperation of the Office of the
10/21

26/03/2019

Special Envoy with the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, mainly through actively coordinating their
strategies and information-sharing. We welcome the role
that the African Union, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community have played in strengthening
the implementation of the Framework. We therefore
encourage the Special Envoy to focus his good offices
on supporting those efforts.
In conclusion, the regional dimension of the Great
Lakes crisis must not be overlooked. New regional
developments create a unique opportunity to effectively
address the challenges facing the region, but that will
require a strong political commitment on the part of
all parties.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting and Mr. Said
Djinnit’s briefing. We acknowledge his significant
efforts to promote peace and generate synergies in
the Great Lakes region. We wish him every success
in future.
Peru is closely following developments in the
region and is concerned about the continuing cycles
of violence, which create a fragile and volatile
environment that poses a serious risk to the civilian
population. In that precarious context, we reiterate the
relevance of the Framework for Peace, Security and
Cooperation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. We also underscore its importance in
defusing current tensions and ultimately promoting the
achievement of sustainable peace. We believe that the
regional approach it provides is essential and that, by
identifying common trends, it promotes complementary
and joint action alternatives in the political and social
spheres, while helping boost economic integration and
cooperation, particularly in cross-border regions.
We welcome the engagement of the Framework
countries in recent political processes, such as
elections in the Democratic Republic of Congo and
the promotion of the inter-Burundian dialogue. Those
forums for joint dialogue, starting with the meetings
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism, go hand in hand
with establishing confidence-building measures aimed
at overcoming potential conflicts and taking decisions
to increase economic integration and strengthen
institutions. Regional coordination and cooperation
should also be bolstered to ensure respect for
19-08496

26/03/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

international humanitarian law and combat impunity in
the face of reports of recurring human rights violations.
The humanitarian situation in the Great Lakes
region is also of great concern. The statistics are
alarming, with 22.7 million people in need of food
assistance and more than 11 million internally displaced
persons and refugees, who are exposed to serious
shortages and risks. In that regard, we welcome the
efforts made to allow for the repatriation of combatants
of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda.
We hope that the international community, in particular
those countries committed to peace and stability in the
region, will continue to provide stable and predictable
funding for the relevant humanitarian response plans.
We would also like to stress the importance of adopting
a regional approach to the Ebola virus crisis in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which is now the second outbreak ever recorded.
Peru reaffirms its commitment to achieving
sustainable peace in the Great Lakes region, including by
taking firm action against armed groups and the illegal
exploitation of resources, ending the humanitarian
crisis, promoting stability and guaranteeing inclusive
political processes in which women and young people
are duly represented. That should all be based on
coordinated action among the various components
of the United Nations system, in particular the
regional development group aimed at advancing the
implementation of the Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework, the Peacebuilding Commission, regional
organizations, humanitarian agencies and civil society.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I, too, would
like to thank the outgoing Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Said Djinnit, for his tireless
efforts and dedication over the past five years and for
all of the success he has achieved. We also welcome the
appointment of Mr. Huang Xia and wish him a steady
hand in his new and important position.
We are pleased to note the successes and positive
developments outlined in the Special Envoy’s briefing
today. At the same time, we must also note that many
threats to peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region remain on the agenda. Such threats are rooted
in unresolved political crises, the volatile security
situation and regional tensions.
Many of the previous speakers mentioned the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Against that backdrop, let me also say that we consider

S/PV. 8491

it to be of critical importance that President Tshilombo
Tshisekedi implement the political and economic reform
measures that he announced and set out a comprehensive
and sustainable reform programme. Let me also mention
that, like many others, we are also deeply concerned
about the Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and strongly condemn attacks against Ebola
treatment centres. We must prevent the politicization of
the Ebola and humanitarian crisis.
Turning now to Burundi, let me also emphasize that
we count on the Presidents of the countries in the region
to lead the inter-Burundian dialogue and guide it on a
successful path. The Special Envoy reminded us today
that progress can be made even on the most protracted
issues when political will is displayed by the leaders
of the region. We, too, would like to stress that point.
One good example that I would like to highlight in that
context is the repatriation of disarmed combatants and
dependants of the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to Rwanda. It shows how successful the region can
be when countries work together to advance common
peace and security objectives.
Germany remains committed to supporting regional
efforts. As Chair of the International Contact Group for
the Great Lakes Region, we convened consultations
on the region in New York and Berlin at the end of
last year. We also support the Special Envoy through
earmarked funding to the Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs.
Let me also say a few words about regional stability
issues, which are also of critical importance. The
security situation in the region remains volatile. We
are concerned about persistent tensions, the activities
of armed groups and continuous cross-border security
incidents, especially in the cross-border regions of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Burundi. We are also concerned about the deterioration
of relations between Uganda and Rwanda. The closing
of border crossings has consequences for guaranteeing
supplies and has a direct impact on the population.
We call on all actors to refrain from violence and
from engaging in any kind of proxy conflicts in
the region. Furthermore, we urge countries in the
region to cooperate to neutralize negative forces and
strengthen the relevant mechanisms of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. Sustainable
peace and the ensuing space for economic development
are achievable only through regional cooperation. We

19-0849611/21

S/PV.8491

The situation in the Great Lakes region

encourage regional actors to play an active role in
conflict resolution. We trust in our regional partners
to make effective use of existing mediation tools and
confidence-building measures.
Lastly, with regard to human rights and the
women and peace and security agenda, which was also
mentioned by the Special Envoy, we are concerned
about the shrinking political space and violations of
political freedom in the region. We strongly condemn
human rights violations by all actors, including State
security forces. The protection of children in conflict
situations must be a priority. However, we are also
encouraged by the progress achieved in raising the
profile of the women and peace and security agenda
in the region. We welcome the adoption of the regional
action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Nonetheless, sexual and gender-based violence
remains a source of deep concern. All perpetrators
must be brought to justice. Fighting impunity remains
key to delivering peace and security.
Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): The Republic of Equatorial Guinea
congratulates Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, for
his detailed briefing on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. We
appreciate the efforts of the various United Nations
peace missions in the countries of the region during the
period from 1 September 2018 to 28 February 2019.
Equatorial Guinea, faithful to the spirit and
commitment of resolution 2457 (2019), on building
a conflict-free Africa, a responsibility that falls
essentially to the member States, civil society and
institutions of the African Union, expresses its support
for all initiatives aimed at finding African solutions
to African problems, while recognizing the need for
effective and satisfactory partnerships for regional and
international cooperation. We consider compliance with,
and respect for, sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity, the principles of non-interference,
good neighbourliness and regional cooperation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and countries of
the region to be the foundation for their stability and
development and, as such, should be taken on board.
Along the same lines as the briefing, we, too,
welcome the recent positive developments in the region,
such as the holding of peaceful elections and transfer of
12/21

26/03/2019

power in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in South Sudan, under the auspices of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the peace agreement between the Government of
the Central African Republic and 14 armed groups,
facilitated by the African Initiative for Peace and
Reconciliation, and the current situation and return to
normalcy in Burundi, after the country approved a new
Constitution and took measures to hold elections by
2020. Its considerable contribution of troops to peace
missions reflects Burundi’s spirit of reconciliation
and tolerance.
Equatorial Guinea values the efforts made and the
support and contributions provided by the international
community to the countries of the region. We
encourage all other parties that are directly involved
to promote confidence-building measures and uphold
their commitments in general, in particular those
under the African Charter on Democracy, Elections
and Governance.
We commend the work that the Advisory Board
of the Women’s Platform for the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework is doing to ensure women’s
genuine participation in the political, peace and
security processes in the region. We appreciate the
approval by ministers responsible for gender issues
of the regional action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). It is a well-known fact that
violent conflict disproportionately affects women
and girls and intensifies existing gender inequalities
and discrimination. We value the regional efforts
undertaken by the Great Lakes Judicial Cooperation
Network to achieve peace and security, safeguard the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of all the
peoples of the region and combat impunity.
We condemn the activities of the illegal armed
groups in the region, foreign and domestic, and their
frequent or sporadic clashes with States’ military and
security forces, which result in cross-border security
incidents that have a negative impact on peace and
stability in the region. We commend the Special Envoy’s
good offices in the region with regard to monitoring
and ensuring dialogue on the effective implementation
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes for ex-combatants and people associated
with armed groups, activities that align with the
African Union agenda for promoting political, social
and economic integration and its pledge to end all wars
19-08496

26/03/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

on the continent by 2020, as cited in resolution 2457
(2019), and to achieve the goal of a conflict-free Africa,
as stated in the Solemn Declaration adopted on 26 May
2013, on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the
African Union.
We appreciate the measures that the Governments
of the region have taken to address the humanitarian
situation. However, we are concerned about the region’s
11.2 million forcibly displaced persons, including
7.2 million who are internally displaced, and its more
than 4 million refugees and asylum seekers. We are
also worried about the destabilizing activities of armed
groups and the ongoing conflicts between communities
that continue to be exposed to malnutrition, cholera,
measles and Ebola and need adequate technical and
financial assistance.
The efforts of the international community should
be aimed at promoting regional cooperation and
socioeconomic integration and providing sufficient
funds for carrying out the various regional humanitarian
response plans for refugees from Burundi, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan.
We condemn the frequent attacks on humanitarian
personnel and their transport and equipment, which are
violations of international humanitarian law. All parties
to armed conflicts must ensure and facilitate full, safe,
immediate and unhindered access for humanitarian and
medical personnel.
My delegation supports the collective efforts of the
United Nations, the African Union and other regional
and subregional organizations to address the conflicts
in the region properly, which has resulted in the signing
of a memorandum of understanding between the two
organizations as a concrete step towards implementing
their joint framework for enhanced partnership in
peace and security. We urge the African Union, the
International Organization of la Francophonie, the
Southern African Development Community and
international partners to continue to develop synergies
with the member States of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region for implementing the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region and
promoting effective cooperation and good-neighbourly
relations among all countries in the region, including in
combating armed groups and the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and pursuing economic integration.

S/PV. 8491

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Djinnit for his briefing. He has
been proactive in carrying out his duties with regard to
promoting peace and stability in the Great Lakes region
for more than four years. China appreciates his hard
work and tireless efforts. We welcome Mr. Huang Xia,
the newly appointed Special Envoy, and are ready to
continue to engage closely with all the parties involved
and to support the Secretary-General and the Special
Envoy in their work.
The Great Lakes region is located at the heart of
Africa, and the ability to maintain peace in the region
has a bearing on the overall stability and development
of the entire continent. Thanks to the joint efforts of
the international community and the countries of the
region, the political and security situation in the Great
Lakes region has seen many positive developments
since the second half of last year. The major parties
in South Sudan signed a revitalized peace agreement.
Presidential and parliamentary elections were
successfully held in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The main party in the Central African Republic
signed a peace agreement and formed a Government.
The situation in Burundi has remained stable.
The countries of the region have continued to
promote the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region and to strive to cooperate in the
areas of disarmament, demobilization and repatriation
and Africa’s economic integration. These positive
developments are not only conducive to promoting
peace, stability and development in the Great Lakes
region but also demonstrate that the countries of the
region can find African solutions to African problems
through regional cooperation. China welcomes those
efforts. At the same time, however, the Great Lakes
region is still dealing with multifaceted challenges. The
international community should continue to provide
assistance and work to actively maintain the current
positive momentum in the region. Right now we should
focus on the following three aspects.
First, we should continue to help safeguard regional
peace and stability. The international community,
including the countries of the region, should abide
faithfully by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, respect one another’s
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity as
well as the ownership and leadership of the countries
concerned in handling their internal affairs, and refrain

19-0849613/21

S/PV.8491

The situation in the Great Lakes region

from external interference. It is important to support
the African Union, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, the East African Community,
the Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
other regional and subregional organizations so that
they can continue to act as mediators and help the
parties concerned to resolve disputes peacefully. The
United Nations should leverage its full strength and
provide support for conflict prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Secondly, we should support the countries of the
region through capacity-building. In their efforts
to implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, especially in response to the threats posed
by armed groups, the countries of the region, as we
have seen, are confronted generally with problems
such as a lack of resources and insufficient capacity.
The international community should strengthen its
communication and cooperation with the countries of
the region and regional and subregional organizations,
provide the necessary funding and technical and
material assistance, according to their requirements,
and focus on helping them improve their capacities in
the areas of security, governance, the management of
natural resources and border control.
Thirdly, it is crucial to address the root causes
of conflicts. Poverty and underdevelopment have
seriously undermined sustained peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region. The international community
should fulfil its commitments in a timely fashion
by increasing humanitarian assistance and official
development assistance and helping the displaced and
refugees in the region to return home. In the meantime,
it is important to increase assistance and investment
in health, education, interconnectivity and other
infrastructure areas for the countries in the Great Lakes
region, effectively improve youth employment in Africa
and raise the living standards of the local populations.
China has consistently supported countries in
the Great Lakes region in advancing their peace
processes and has actively participated in United
Nations peacekeeping operations in the region. At the
same time, China provides assistance to countries in
the Great Lakes region in areas such as infrastructure
and agriculture. We stand ready to work with the
rest of the international community in our continued
effort to contribute to achieving peace, stability and
development in the region.
14/21

26/03/2019

Mr. Moriko (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region,
on his excellent briefing on the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
Côte d’Ivoire is pleased to note the positive signs
and progress made in the various peace processes
under way in a number of countries in the Great Lakes
region, which is suffering recurrent crises, in particular
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic and Burundi. Therefore, my country
welcomes the successful conduct of the electoral process
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, leading to a
peaceful presidential election on 30 December 2018. We
urge the Congolese authorities to build on that progress
to further strengthen the country’s stability.
Similarly, Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the signing, on
5 February in Khartoum, of a peace agreement between
the Government of the Central African Republic and
14 armed groups. We call on the Central African
stakeholders to fully implement their commitments to
meet the aspirations of the Central African people for
peace, security and development.
With regard to Burundi, my delegation welcomes
the decision of President Pierre Nkurunziza not to run
in the 2020 presidential election and the opening of the
Burundian political playing field to a new opposition
party. We call on the Government, the opposition and
all the Burundian people to work together to put an end
to the political crisis and restore stability in Burundi.
My delegation notes, however, that this progress
should in no way make us forget that the Great Lakes
region continues to face multifaceted challenges that
require a collective response, including the activities of
illegal armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Central African Republic, intercommunal
violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
clashes in South Sudan and the humanitarian crisis and
the resurgence of Ebola virus disease in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Côte d’Ivoire believes that the
strengthening of bilateral and regional cooperation will
make it possible to effectively fight those threats to
peace and security.
In that regard, my delegation endorses the
conclusions of the ninth high-level meeting of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic
19-08496

26/03/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Republic of the Congo and the Region, which
recommends closer cooperation among the States of
the Great Lakes region to put an end to the activities of
armed groups destabilizing the region. In that respect,
we commend the exemplary cooperation among
Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda
in the repatriation of foreign former combatants, as
well as the cooperation among all the countries that are
signatories to the framework agreement with regard to
crimes against humanity.
For the countries of the region, regional
organizations and the international community,
the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region remains the frame of reference for
addressing, in a concerted manner, the structural
causes of instability and putting an end to the cycles
of violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region. My country therefore calls
upon the entire international community to increase its
support to the States of the Great Lakes region with
a view to ensuring the full implementation of that
Agreement, which is essential to restoring peace and
stability in the region.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire would like to warmly
thank Mr. Said Djinnit, the outgoing Special Envoy and
his team, for their outstanding work in restoring peace
and stability in the Great Lakes region.
Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): Indonesia would like to
thank Special Envoy Said Djinnit for his comprehensive
briefing. Let me also take this opportunity to commend
Mr. Djinnit’s tireless efforts in and resolute commitment
to creating peace in the Great Lakes region. We wish
him well and every success in his future endeavours.
I will focus my comments on three pertinent points.
First, the root causes of the conflict should be
addressed. The Great Lakes region has been marred
by conflicts, distrust and humanitarian difficulties
for years. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/229)
notes that insecurity in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the Central African Republic and Burundi have
had a negative impact on peace and stability in the Great
Lakes region, which remain fragile, in particular with
regard to threats by armed groups, illicit exploitation
and trade of natural resources and the outbreak of Ebola
virus disease in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

S/PV. 8491

The lack of development is also one of the leading
causes of instability in the region. Nevertheless, we
recently saw peaceful general elections and a peaceful
transfer of power in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the signing of a global peace agreement in
the Central African Republic. That forward momentum
is indeed an improvement in the political situation of
the Great Lakes region. I echo the Secretary-General
in recognizing the importance of a comprehensive
approach to addressing the root causes of conflict in
the region. Trust is important and partnership is key.
Secondly, relief for the humanitarian situation
must be prioritized. At the end of last year, about
11.2 million people in the Great Lakes region were
forcibly displaced and more than 22.7 million people
needed food assistance. However, in 2018, the funding
of humanitarian responses in the region was at less
than 50 per cent of requirements and in one country
was as low as 33 per cent of requirements. That cannot
go on much longer. We cannot hope for a peaceful
Great Lakes region while failing to provide the means
of assistance. That is like expecting a tree to grow
while there is a drought and no rain. The international
community should honour its commitment to assist the
countries of the region and improve its humanitarian
assistance to them in a timely fashion, including
through the work of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Peacebuilding Fund.
Thirdly, the work of regional organizations and
United Nations missions in the region should be
supported by the Security Council. We recognize the role
played by the regional and subregional organizations,
such as the African Union, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern Africa
Development Community, who, together with the United
Nations, are the guarantors of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, which was signed by 13
countries of the region.
Indonesia welcomes the cooperation among the
countries of the Great Lakes region in responding to
the threat from armed groups and encourages those
countries to promote disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. Nevertheless, assistance is needed to
enable them to do it.
United Nations peacekeepers, through engagement
with local communities, are able to disarm and
demobilize members of armed groups, as evidenced

19-0849615/21

S/PV.8491

The situation in the Great Lakes region

by Indonesian peacekeepers on the ground in the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
who have received weapons from armed groups in
recent weeks. United Nations peacekeeping missions,
such as MONUSCO, the United Nations Mission in
the Republic of South Sudan and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic, play crucial roles in
the region. We call on the members of the Council
to continue their support for the United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the Great Lakes region.
Addressing the complex peace and security
challenge in the region is not easy, but let us strive to
reach that goal together to ensure that peace will not
merely be a pipe dream but a reality for all.
Mr. Trullols Yabra (Dominican Republic) (spoke
in Spanish): At the outset, we thank Mr. Said Djinnit,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great
Lakes region, for his briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/229). We also commend
his efforts and initiatives for peace and stability in the
Great Lakes region during his tenure.
The Dominican Republic commends the positive
processes that have taken place in the Great Lakes
region, in particular the peaceful holding of presidential,
legislative and provincial elections in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; the peace agreement between
the Government of the Central African Republic and
14 armed groups, which was facilitated by the African
Union Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation; the
signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in South Sudan; and the outcome of the
East African Community summit, held in Arusha on
1 February, which recognizes the urgency of ensuring
a peaceful and inclusive political process towards
the holding of elections in 2020 in Burundi, in full
compliance with the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi that was signed in 2000.
We also note the progress made in the strengthening
of the region’s commitments, such as advances in
economic reintegration and judicial cooperation, the
repatriation of unarmed combatants and bilateral
collaboration among the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda to address cross-border
security. We encourage the full implementation of
those agreements, the holding of future peaceful and
transparent elections and continued regional cooperation
16/21

26/03/2019

to complete the repatriation of the remaining members
of armed groups.
We emphasize the role played by the African
Union, the Economic Community of Central African
States, the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the representatives of the SecretaryGeneral in the region, among others, for their efforts
and cooperation in the quest for a peaceful and stable
coexistence in the region.
Despite those positive developments, the
Dominican Republic is concerned about the fragile
security situation, especially in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where armed
groups, such as the Allied Democratic Forces, have
intensified their attacks against civilians, the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo and
MONUSCO, resulting in the death of hundreds of
civilians, including women and children.
Such activities create insecurity and have a negative
impact on peace and stability across borders and
throughout the region. We therefore urge the affected
countries to combine their efforts to dismantle armed
groups; control illegal trafficking in natural resources,
which is the source of financing for armed groups,
and trafficking of illegal arms and ammunition; and
invest in development plans for the population, thereby
providing more opportunities for young people affected
by armed conflict and help them develop their skills
and meet the demands for labour by providing relevant
educational opportunities.
That climate of insecurity, among other factors,
adds to the worrying humanitarian situation in the Great
Lakes region, in particular the high number of displaced
persons in Burundi, the Central African Republic, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sudan.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report, as of
31 December 2018, approximately 11.2 million people
had been forcibly displaced, including 7.2 million
internally displaced persons and more than 4 million
refugees and asylum-seekers.
Of equal concern is the growing Ebola outbreak
and its high risk of regional spread in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that regard,
we applaud the response mechanisms that have been
launched to eradicate the virus by Burundi, Rwanda,
South Sudan and Uganda, among others, and call for
19-08496

26/03/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

increased funding for humanitarian assistance for those
in need.
The Dominican Republic condemns the violations
of human rights committed in countries of the region
as result of political processes, including the violent
repression of demonstrations; the use of force by police
and security forces; the prolonged detention of political
prisoners; murders and kidnappings; the destruction of
goods; the raping of civilians, including women and
children; and the climate of impunity. We therefore call
on the international, regional and national communities
to redouble their efforts to provide practical and
cooperative responses to bring the perpetrators
to justice.
To conclude, in addition to the situations I have
mentioned, the Great Lakes region faces other major
challenges, such as overcoming mistrust among some
States that are signatories to agreements and achieving
the compliance of Governments with the minimum
quota of 30 per cent of women’s participation in 2020,
among others. In order to overcome existing challenges,
a common analysis of the problems and opportunities is
needed, focused on achieving joint regional solutions
through dialogue and cooperation and complying with
national, regional and international commitments
undertaken in support of peace, security and the
socioeconomic development of the Great Lakes region
and its peoples.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like to begin by expressing our appreciation
to Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region, for his valuable
and last briefing. I wish to thank him for his tireless
efforts since his tenure began to engage in dialogue and
cooperation with the Governments of the Great Lakes
region in order to respond to the challenges it is facing.
I also wish to congratulate Mr. Huang Xia on his
appointment as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for the Great Lakes Region. I hope that he will be able
to build upon the achievements of the previous period.
I wish to address three points today: first, the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region;
secondly, the security situation in the Great Lakes
region; and thirdly, the humanitarian situation.
First, with regard to the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, we welcome the progress

S/PV. 8491

made since the framework agreement was signed six
years ago. It summarizes the challenges facing the region
and provides solutions, The framework agreement is
considered the major factor guaranteeing stability in
the Great Lakes region. In that regard, we call on all its
signatories to fully honour the commitments contained
in the agreement and to implement its provisions in
order to address various challenges faced by the region.
Furthermore, we appreciate the role of the Regional
Oversight Mechanism, which held its ninth meeting
in Kampala in October 2018. We hail the outcome of
that meeting, particularly concerning cooperation
among the States of the region to neutralize destructive
forces and strengthen relevant mechanisms, in concert
with the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region (ICGLR), in particular the Joint Follow-up
Mechanism on the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF).
We call on those States to strengthen cooperation in
order to make even further progress, notwithstanding
the challenges faced by them in the areas of security
and illegal trafficking in natural resources.
The State of Kuwait supports the vital and
important role that the Special Envoy and his Office
play in enhancing the mechanisms that contribute to
the implementation of the framework agreement. We
also support his basic role in the promotion of capacitybuilding, as well as his good offices in convening
consultations among the States of the region, his
preventive diplomacy and his role in strengthening
cooperation among the States of the region and
regional and subregional organizations, such as the
African Union, ICGLR and the Southern African
Development Community.
Regarding the political situation, we welcome the
recent positive political progress in the region, such
as the first peaceful transfer of power in the history
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We look
forward to the formation of the new Government as
soon as possible in order to build upon those recent
positive achievements. There is no doubt that security
and political stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo are important catalysts for the economic
development of the country and of the Great Lakes
region and, as indicated in the Framework agreement,
could result in further support from the Security
Council and the international community.
Secondly, the security situation remains a concern
for the international community because of the continued

19-0849617/21

S/PV.8491

The situation in the Great Lakes region

deterioration of the situation in the Great Lakes region.
Armed groups are more active in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The number of
attacks by the ADF has increased in Beni, claiming the
lives of 245 civilians in 2018, including many women
and children. We condemn those attacks and urge the
national forces to confront them and to develop plans to
put an end to such attacks in future.
We commend the cooperation among the States
of the region, as noted by Mr. Djinnit in his briefing,
particularly among the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, for the repatriation
and reintegration of former Forces Démocratiques
de Libération du Rwanda combatants. We also
commend the support provided as part of the follow-up
mechanism, which represents a positive contribution to
strengthening regional stability.
We agree on the importance of repatriating former
Mouvement du 23 mars combatants, as indicated by
the Secretary-General in his latest report (S/2019/229)
and in accordance with international law. Regarding
other positive developments in the region, I welcome
the agreement signed between the Government of
the Central African Republic and 14 armed groups in
Bangui on 6 February. We hope that that agreement
will make it possible to achieve stability in the country
and strengthen stability in the entire region. We also
welcome the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in South Sudan.
Thirdly, we are concerned at the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation as well as at the lack of
security and stability in the Great Lakes region, which
has resulted in 7 million displaced people and more
than 4 million refugees. The burden is growing for the
countries of the region, and it is becoming difficult to
find solutions to the situation. We call upon the States
in the region to make greater efforts to address the
humanitarian situation. We also commend the role of
the United Nations, through the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
responding to the humanitarian crisis.
We must recall the difficulties that the region has
been experiencing as a result of the spread of Ebola,
particularly in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, especially since the epidemic
could spread to neighbouring countries despite its
tireless efforts.
18/21

26/03/2019

To conclude, it is important to address the
challenges that the region faces in a comprehensive
manner. Such an approach should confront security,
political, humanitarian and development challenges,
and the United Nations Great Lakes Regional Strategic
Framework would also help the Great Lakes region
in this respect. The Office of the Special Envoy deals
with all these areas, with the aim of harmonizing
development efforts with the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework signed by the countries of
the region.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.
I wish to start by warmly thanking Mr. Said
Djinnit, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region, for his very informative briefing,
as usual. I would like once again, on behalf of France,
to convey our deep gratitude to him for his exemplary
commitment, which is worthy of the highest praise. I
would also like to wish his successor, Mr. Huang Xia,
every success and assure him of our full support.
The time is ripe, at the end of his mandate, to take
stock realistically of the progress made and of what
remains to be done in order to find a way towards
lasting peace. Six years after the signing of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, in
Addis Ababa, strong political will is being mustered at
the heart of the region, in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, born of the expectations of the Congolese
people. This should serve as an example, because to use
an expression that is fully reflective of the efforts made
by Mr. Djinnit, destinies there are interlinked — those
of the DRC and its neighbours, of the Great Lakes
region and our own.
Our dear friend Said endeavoured to generate
political momentum through shuttle diplomacy
among the capitals of the region, with support from
ad hoc regional mechanisms and the relevant regional
institutions. He has contributed to underscoring the
relevance of the multilateral framework to overcoming
existing challenges, which, in this region in particular,
cannot be addressed in isolation.
Since Brazzaville, in October 2017, the Regional
Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework has been the focus of attention
at the highest levels of capitals of the region. Since
19-08496

26/03/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

Kampala, in October 2018, partners have had the ability
to share their assessments on the state of the region and
its development.
As I said last October, the Addis Ababa Framework
agreement remains a key instrument for building
confidence among the countries of the region. This
inclusive agreement seeks to harmonize the efforts of
all stakeholders concerned: the countries of the region,
the relevant regional institutions and external partners.
It sets out a long-term vision encompassing all possible
pathways towards human and economic development in
this very promising region.
However, in order to pool efforts and work
together with the same goal, it is important to have the
appropriate forums and tools. True to that aspiration,
France reiterates its commitment to pursuing a highquality dialogue among all stakeholders in the Great
Lakes region, in line with the spirit of the Framework
agreement. It trusts in the ability of the future Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General to ensure that this
dialogue is an ongoing one and is as effective as possible.
The Framework should serve as a catalyst towards
action. However, it is not yet functioning at a level
that would allow it to make full use of its considerable
potential. France shares the concerns of the SecretaryGeneral regarding persisting tensions between certain
signatories. These tensions are exacerbated by the
threat posed by armed groups and by the harm caused
primarily to communities living in the affected areas
as a result of the ongoing illegal exploitation and
trafficking of natural resources. However, as has been
noted, the recent repatriation of certain members of
the Forces Démocratiques de Libération du Rwanda
and the Mouvement du 23 mars shows that surrenders
are possible when they are accompanied by mutual
guarantees of social and economic reintegration.
Moreover, new threats have emerged in the region
that require joint responses. Here I am referring to
the Ebola epidemic, the radicalization of youth and
environmental damage related to the illicit exploitation
of natural resources. Appropriate means to collectively
respond to these challenges are not always available,
although some progress has been made. Here we would
refer in particular to the lack of regional legal and
technical capacity to support the customs authorities,
the police and judicial cooperation in combating
trafficking and impunity.

S/PV. 8491

The relationship between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and its regional environment is at the
heart of the Framework agreement process. Political
alternation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the wish expressed by President Tshilombo Tshisekedi
during his regional tour to pursue closer relations
with his neighbours is a sign of normalizing relations
between the countries of the Great Lakes region, which
is favourable to development. France welcomes this
resolve and calls on all countries in the region to come
together in this spirit around a revitalized regional road
map that could lead to fresh modalities for interaction
between neighbours and make it possible to collectively
address the remaining challenges.
The solution to regional tensions requires not
only a sustained political dialogue among the leaders
of the region but also an improvement in the shared
management of natural resources. The concerted
development of the mining sector would be especially
beneficial for all concerned, enabling the region to
clean up its export channels and cut off revenues for
the armed groups in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that regard, France welcomes the
action that the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region has taken, particularly with regard to
strengthening the traceability of mineral supply chains,
and calls on States that have not yet done so to adopt
its legislative and regulatory provisions on certificates
of origin for minerals. France would like to support the
region in that area and will therefore host the Global
Conference of the Extractive Industries Transparency
Initiative in June.
France reaffirms the importance it attaches to the
Great Lakes region and its solidarity with the countries
concerned, and will continue to honour the commitment
it made in 2013. We share the common goal of forging
long-term regional stability, and we are ready to work
with all stakeholders in the region to achieve that goal
and overcome the challenges involved.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Gata Mavita Wa Lufuta (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative
to convene this meeting focused on the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for

19-0849619/21

S/PV.8491

The situation in the Great Lakes region

the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region.
I also want to thank all the members of the Security
Council for the special attention and interest that they
have always shown in considering the situation in my
country whenever they are called on to do so.
We appreciate the Secretary-General’s report on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region (S/2019/229), presented just now by
Mr. Said Djinnit, Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for the Great Lakes Region. Its analysis of some
of the issues that it raises demands some observation
and comment on our part. I would therefore like to
refer briefly to some points regarding the security,
political, humanitarian and human rights situations,
and to conclude by discussing the implementation of
the Framework.
Peace and security continue to be essential to
maintaining stability in the Great Lakes region. They
require the eradication of armed groups, unfailing
compliance with the agreements reached and political
will on the part of the leadership to work for harmony
and understanding in the region. In that regard, the
Secretary-General’s report emphasizes the activities
of armed groups in the eastern parts of my country. It
highlights the virulence of the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF), which is attacking not just civilians but also
members of our armed forces and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). The report also
mentions that the ADF has continued to strengthen its
ranks by recruiting in the countries of the Great Lakes
region and beyond. In that regard, I should point out
that the Group of Experts on the Democratic Republic
of the Congo noted in its most recent midterm report
(S/2018/1133) the alarming fact that the ADF has an
international recruitment network, and that its recruits
come from several countries in the region. The Group of
Experts also emphasizes another important fact, which
is the ADF’s Islamicization of its recruitment efforts,
whereby, according to paragraph 10 of the report, “The
recruiters focused mostly on Muslims.”
That situation warrants the attention of the Security
Council and should prompt us to anticipate these armed
groups radicalization before it occurs. According to
our information, in October 2017 the ADF reportedly
declared allegiance to the jihadist Islamic State, from
which it is alleged to have received funding for activities
aimed at turning the eastern Democratic Republic
20/21

26/03/2019

of the Congo into the epicentre of the spread of the
Islamic State’s influence in Central, East and Southern
Africa. In any case, the group’s conduct, whereby it has
systematically obstructed the community response to
the Ebola epidemic, is clearly designed to undermine
every effort to stabilize the region. As we said when
the Council met on 18 March (see S/PV.8486), my
delegation would like to see a strategic review of the
Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo and MONUSCO in order to enable this negative
force to be speedily neutralized so as to ensure lasting
security in that part of the country.
Paragraph 11 of the Secretary-General’s report,
which mentions the report of the Group of Experts, also
refers to the presence of an armed group known as P5
that is reportedly active in South Kivu and associated
with Rwandan opposition groups and received arms
and ammunition from a neighbouring country. My
country, which respects its commitments under the
Framework, condemns that situation, which could
draw us into another armed conflict. We hope that the
Group of Experts can shed light on it and on the arms
and ammunition supply chain so that we can establish
which countries have been violating the arms embargo.
We once again reiterate our call to the international
community for combining regional efforts for the
effective implementation of the Framework. That is the
purpose of the visits to the countries of the region by
President Félix Antoine Tshilombo Tshisekedi of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, who is committed to
good-neighbourly relations. As he said on 15 February
when he addressed our diplomatic corps,
“The Democratic Republic of Congo, located
in the heart of the African continent with nine
neighbouring countries, will give priority to the
consolidation of regional peace. I will focus on a
foreign policy based on good neighbourliness and
constructive dialogue with our nine neighbours
in order to assume our share of responsibility for
regional stability, including within the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region”.
The points about the elections made in the
section of the Secretary-General’s report on political
developments are not just out of date but were also the
subject of the Council’s deliberations on 11 January
(see S/PV.8443). I hope the Council will accept that we
do not wish to return to the issue again.
19-08496

26/03/2019

The situation in the Great Lakes region

With regard to the humanitarian situation, the
Government’s efforts should be supported in order
to meet the needs of the populations in distress. My
delegation therefore takes this opportunity to reiterate
its call regarding this to all our partners.
As we said in our statement last week (see
S/PV.8486), the issue of human rights violations and
restrictions on democratic space is at the heart of the
work of President Tshisekedi, who made a commitment
to working to promote the rule of law when he came to
power. To that end, he has committed to humanizing the
security services, combating abuses and eliminating
detention centres that do not comply with the law. He
has begun to open up public media access to all to
encourage freedom of expression and assembly and
freedom to demonstrate. He has released political
prisoners and taken robust anti-corruption measures.
He has now set up a national mechanism to combat all
forms of human trafficking in our country.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo remains
committed to the Framework, which it considers a proof
of the international community’s determination to find
a definitive solution to the instability that has affected
the country for several years and for which it continues
to pay a heavy price, including several million dead.
That is why it has always striven to implement all
the commitments made under the agreement and will
continue to shoulder its share of responsibility so that
peace and harmony are restored to the region.
In that regard, my Government remains committed
to implementing the decisions of the ninth High-level
Meeting of the Regional Oversight Mechanism of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region, which
call for strengthening the Joint Follow-up Mechanism on
ADF and the Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism,
on the one hand, and continuing regional cooperation
with a view to the complete and rapid neutralization of
all destabilizing forces, on the other hand. However, as
noted by the Secretary-General in paragraph 67 of the
report, the Democratic Republic of the Congo regrets
the lack of involvement of other States in the smooth
functioning of the Joint Follow-up Mechanism on ADF
and therefore urges the guarantors of the Framework to
remind all parties to meet their commitments.

S/PV. 8491

Despite the clear progress made since the adoption
of the Framework agreement, it should be acknowledged
that in recent years we seem to be approaching an
impasse. My delegation would therefore like to ask
the countries of the region and the guarantors of
the Framework to take the opportunity to hold the
tenth high-level meeting of the Regional Oversight
Mechanism of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in October to review our joint resolve to bring peace to
the region by combating the threat of armed groups that
undermine the development of our States. The Great
Lakes region must indeed aspire to a better life, as
economic development can be achieved only with the
peace and harmony of its populations.
Before concluding, my delegation is of the view
that the region should take the opportunity provided
by the new era in my country to build trust among the
leaders of the region, who must look to the future and
work in such a way as to create relations that will lead
our States towards regional cooperation. That is very
necessary to achieve peace, security and sustainable
development in the Great Lakes region.
I cannot conclude my statement without expressing
my Government’s thanks to Mr. Said Djinnit, whose
term as Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes region of Africa ends at the end of this
month, for his valuable contribution during his term of
office to the pursuit of solutions to restore lasting peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the entire
Great Lakes region.
In the same vein, my Government congratulates
Mr. Huang Xia on his appointment by the SecretaryGeneral to succeed Mr. Said Djinnit as Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes region as
of April. My Government already wishes him a fruitful
term of office and promises him its full cooperation to
enable him to carry out his work successfully.
Finally, I reiterate the gratitude of the Congolese
people and their Government to the members of the
Security Council for their dedication and commitment
to our country’s cause.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

19-0849621/21
