130

General Assembly- Thirty-fifth Session

into account, inter alia, the work of the ad hoe working
group established by the Committee on World Food
Security, as stated in paragraph 4(.J of the report of the
Council; 103
16. Welcomes the request of the World Food Council that the International Monetary Fund should consider, within the context of its financing facilities, the
feasibility of providing additional balance-of-payments
support to assist low-income, food-deficit countries to
meet increases in their food-import bills and welcomes
the decision by the Interim Committee of the Board of
Governors of the Fund to urge prompt consideration of
this matter by the Executive Board of the Fund;
17. Recommends that the international community
should take the necessary steps for the immediate implementation of resolution I 05 (V) of I June 1979 on international food trade of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development; 104
18. Recognizes the desirability of studying measures
to promote increased and more regionally balanced
food production and trade within the wider framework
of trade and its impact on the food situation of developing countries;
19. Notes with deep concern that only limited
progress has been achieved towards the solution of the
long-standing problems of international trade in agricultural products which adversely affect exports, particularly of developing countries, and whose solution could
make an important contribution to improving over-all
food production in the world;
20. Recommends that the World Food Council, in
accordance with its mandate, should give continuing attention to the impact of food trade on levels of food production in the world, in particular with reference to the
economies of the developing countries, using to the
maximum extent possible the necessary inputs which the
different organs and organizations of the United
Nations system should provide;
21. Fully supports the call of the World Food Council, in paragraph 21 of its report, l()J for the replenishment of the resources of the International Fund for Agricultural Development at a level sufficient to provide a
realistic attainment of its operations, in accordance with
the recommendations of its Governing Council.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980
35/69.

Situation of food and agriculture in Africa

The General Assembly,
Noting with concern that, over the last two decades,
the situation of food and agriculture in Africa has undergone a drastic deterioration, resulting in a decline of
food production per capita and a reduction of average
dietary standards below essential requirements,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the
Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New
International Ec0nomic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
04
'
See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development, Fifth Session, vol. I, Report and Annexes (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.79.11.D.14), part one, sect. A.

Recalling also the relevant decisions and the recommendations of the World Food Conference, 11''
Gravely concerned at the critical food shortages
currently affecting many countries in the African region,
Recalling, in particular, Economic and Social Council
resolution 1980/58 of 24 July 1980 relating to the report
of the World Food Council on the work of its sixth ministerial session, 100
Taking into account the deep concern reflected in the
decisions on the food situation and agriculture outlook
in Africa adopted by the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations at its
twentieth session, 10 '
Recognizing that the responsibility for the development of food and agricultural production lies primarily
with the developing countries themselves and that there
is an increasing effort and growing commitment by the
developing countries to accelerate the development of
their food and agricultural sectors,
Stressing that the current shortages demonstrate the
continued vulnerability of many countries in the region
to food crises owing to, inter alia, crop failures, drought,
soil erosion, low reserves and the high level of postharvest losses,
Recognizing the role of food-sector strategies, which
emerged from the World Food Council, as a means for
interested developing countries to adopt an integrated
approach for increasing food production, improving
consumption and attracting the necessary additional international resources,
Regretting that food aid has not been adequate to
cope with the serious food shortages in many African
countries,
Deeply concerned at the unabated encroachment of
the desert in many countries of Africa, which has continued to accentuate the food problem on that continent,
Recognizing the useful contribution that the effective
execution of the Lagos Plan of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia Strategy for the Economic
Development of Africa I(" adopted on 29 April 1980 by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its second extraordinary session devoted to economic matters, held at Lagos
on 28 and 29 April 1980, can make to the improvement
of the food situation, in particular, and to rapid over-all
development of Africa,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the Lagos Plan
of Action for the Implementation of the Monrovia
Strategy for the Economic Development of Africa and,
in particular, of the provisions related to food and agriculture; 1110
2. Urges all the countries of Africa to implement, in
accordance with their national development programmes and priorities, measures to increase substantially their national food and agricultural production;
3. Calls upon the international community to continue to support efforts undertaken by African countries
at the national, subregional and regional levels to in"" See Report of the World Food Conference. Rome, 5-16 November
1974 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.11.A.3). chap. II.

'"'' Official Records c,f" the General Assembly, Thirty~fifth Session,
Supplement No. 19 (A 1 35/19).
'"' See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Report of the Conference of FA 0, Twentieth Session, Rom,•.
10-28 November 1979 (C 79/REP and Corr.2). para. 33
"" See A/S-11 /14, ,mnex I.
,.,., Ibid., chap. I

V.

131

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

crease food production through. inter alia, the provision, on a priority basis, of additional financial and
technical assistance to Africa by the International Fund
for Agricultural Development. the African Development Bank and the United Nations Development Programme and an increase in lending by the World Bank
to the agricultural sector in Africa:
4. Appeals to the international community to
provide urgently additional food aid to African countries to meet the current emergency needs in the region.
particularly as called for by the Economic and Social
Council in paragraph 7 of its resolution 1980 /58:
5. Calls upon current and prospective donor countries to achieve without delay the minimum target of the
Food Aid Convention of I 980, 1111 of 10 million tons of
cereal aid annually. as well as the minimum target of
500,000 tons of grains for the International Emergency
Food Reserve, as agreed upon in the relevant decisions
of the General Assembly:
6. Urges Governments and the international organizations concerned to provide the necessary technical,
financial and food assistance to food security projects in
the region, especially in the countries of the Sahe] and
the Sudano-Sahelian countries, in the framework of
their own activities, including strengthening the Food
Security Assistance Scheme of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations through the
participation of current and prospective donors:
7. Urgently appeals to the international community
to offer its immediate assistance for the effective suppression of the present upsurge of the African migratory locust, which, if not immediately controlled, may
engulf a large part of the continent:
8. Urges the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations to continue to play its leading role in
the co-ordination of the locust control efforts in the
region;
9. Recommends that the Programme for the Control
of African Animal Trypanosomiasis and Related Development, endorsed by the Conference of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations at its
twentieth session in its resolution 8 /79 of 28 November
1979, should be implemented on an urgent basis under
the over-all co-ordination of that organization and with
the active financial and technical support of the international community:
10. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the organs, organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, to co-operate with the Organization of
African Unity in undertaking a study on the establishment of regional food trade and distribution organizations in Africa and to submit a report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-sixth session through the
Economic and Social Council:
11. Urges all relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system to intensify their
activities in Africa to assist Governments, inter alia, in
the areas of direct government participation in food production, agricultural processing. integrated research and
extension services;
12. Also urges the international community to assist
countries in the African region to achieve. between 1980
and 1985, the following goals:
(a) A significant improvement in their food situation and the laying of the foundations for the attain-

ment of self-sufficiency in cereals, livestock and fish
products:
(b) Significant progress towards attaining a 50 per
cent reduction in post-harvest losses, through, inter a/ia,
the construction of storage facilities;
(c) An improved physical infrastructure to facilitate
food distribution at the national, subregional and
regional levels:
(d) Greater and effective agronomic research, with
special emphasis on improved seeds and an adequate
supply of fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals
suitable for African conditions:
13. Further urges all relevant organs, organizations
and bodies of the United Nations system to expand their
training programmes in the building up of national capabilities for the preparation, execution, monitoring and
evaluation of agricultural development projects;
14. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the Organization of African Unity and organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, to
submit a preliminary report on the progress made in the
implementation of the present resolution to the General
Assembly at its thirty-sixth session.

"" See Official Records of the General Assemhlv. Thirty~fUth Session. Supplement No. /9 (A/Yi,1 \9). part one. para. 32. For the text o\'
the Convention, see TD,i\V HE•\ I .6 'I '·

''' See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Report nf the Conference of FA 0. Twentieth Session. Rome,
10-.'S Novemher /979 (C 79 REP and Corr.2), para. 43.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December 1980

35/70.

World Food Day

The General Assembly,
Considering that food is a requisite for human survival
and well-being and a fundamental human necessity,
I. Welcomes the observance of World Food Day, to
be held for the first time on 16 October 1981 and annually thereafter, as unanimously decided by the Conference of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nat ions at its twentieth session:"'
2. Urges Governments and national, regional and
international organizations to contribute to the effective commemoration of World Food Day to the greatest
possible extent.

83rd plenary meeting
5 December I 980

35/71.

Problem of remnants of war

The General Assembly.
Recalling its resolutions 2995 (XXVJI), 2996 (XXVJI)
and 2997 (XXVII) of 15 December 1972, pertaining to
co-operation between States in the field of the environment, the international responsibility of States in protecting the environment and the establishment of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Environment
Programme,
Recalling also its resolution 3435 (XXX) of 9 December 1975.
Recalling further its resolution 31 / 111 of 16 December
1976. in which it noted the interim report of the Executive Director of the United Nations Environment
Programme on the study of the problem of material
remnants of war, particularly mines, and their effect on
