UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1999/8
23 February 1999
ENGLISH
ORIGINAL: ENGLISH AND
RUSSIAN

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3981st meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 February 1999 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
in Tajikistan and along the Tajik-Afghan border", the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council has considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Tajikistan of 8 February 1999 (S/1999/124),
submitted pursuant to paragraph 11 of its resolution 1206 (1998) of
12 November 1998.
"The Security Council welcomes the regular contacts between the
President of the Republic of Tajikistan and the leader of the United Tajik
Opposition (UTO) and the work of the Commission on National Reconciliation
aimed at achieving further progress in the peace process. It regrets that
that progress has remained slow during the last three months and underlines
the necessity for the parties to speed up the full and sequential
implementation of the General Agreement on the Establishment of Peace and
National Accord in Tajikistan (S/1997/510), especially the Protocol on
military issues (S/1997/209, annex II). The Council calls upon the parties
to intensify their efforts to create conditions for the holding in 1999 of
a constitutional referendum and presidential elections, as well as the
timely holding of parliamentary elections.
"The Security Council notes with appreciation the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and of all the personnel of the
United Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) and encourages
them to continue assisting the parties in the implementation of the General
Agreement. It underlines the importance of UNMOT playing a full and active
role in the implementation of the General Agreement and requests the
Secretary-General to continue to consider means of achieving this taking
into account the security situation.
"The Security Council welcomes the continued contribution made by the
Collective Peacekeeping Forces of the Commonwealth of Independent States
(the CIS Peacekeeping Forces) in assisting the parties in the
implementation of the General Agreement in coordination with all concerned.

99-04812 (E)

230299

/...

S/PRST/1999/8
English
Page 2

"The Security Council welcomes also the contribution of the Contact
Group of Guarantor States and International Organizations to the peace
process and, in this context, considers that the holding of a meeting of
this Group at the level of Foreign Ministers in support of the peace
process could indeed be useful, if properly prepared.
"The Security Council welcomes further the activities of various
international organizations and humanitarian workers related to the
implementation of the General Agreement and addressing the humanitarian,
rehabilitation and development needs of Tajikistan. It calls upon Member
States and others concerned to respond promptly and generously to the
consolidated appeal for Tajikistan for 1999 launched in Geneva in
December 1998.
"The Security Council reiterates its concern that the security
situation in some parts of Tajikistan remains precarious. It reiterates
the importance of a full investigation into the murder in July 1998 of four
members of UNMOT and takes note with appreciation of the efforts of the
Government of Tajikistan in this regard. The Council calls upon the UTO to
contribute more effectively to the investigation in order to bring those
responsible to justice. It acknowledges the efforts of the Government of
Tajikistan to enhance the protection of international personnel and calls
upon the parties to cooperate further in ensuring the security and freedom
of movement of the personnel of the United Nations, the CIS Peacekeeping
Forces and other international personnel. The Council reminds both parties
that the ability of the international community to mobilize and to continue
assistance for Tajikistan is linked to the security of the personnel of
UNMOT and international organizations, and of humanitarian workers."

-----
