S/PV.9423

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9423rd meeting

Tuesday, 26 September 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Hoxha. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. França Danese
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Osei-Mensah
Mr. Ishikane
Mrs. Frazier
Mr. Afonso
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and its
implications for international peace and security (S/2023/678)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-27814 (E)
*2327814*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan and its implications for
international peace and security (S/2023/678)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Afghanistan, India, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Pakistan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Roza
Otunbayeva, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan; Ms. Sima Sami Bahous,
Executive Director of UN-Women; and Ms. Karima
Bennoune, civil society representative.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2023/678, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.
I now give the floor to Ms. Otunbayeva.
Ms. Otunbayeva: When former Secretary-General
Kofi Annan was given the Nobel Peace Prize in
December 2001, he began his address with the words
“Today in Afghanistan, a girl will be born.” Who is
she now? Is she a university student forced into exile
in order to continue her education? Is she a qualified
professional who a few months ago had a career, but
is now confined to her home? Or is she like the young
woman that a United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) team met in south-western
Afghanistan recently: the daughter of a widowed
mother, a girl who had never gone to school because
of the conflict and whose main concern every day is
finding enough water for her family? Those brief
examples describe the dilemmas and complexities in
Afghanistan today. There are no easy answers.
2/26

26/09/2023

Afghan communities, to take the latter example,
are being ravaged by the effects of three years of
drought. In a country where nearly 80 per cent of the
population depends on agriculture, climate change
and the lack of water are having devastating effects on
people’s lives. Afghans in water-scarce areas say that
if they do not have water, everything else is secondary.
A de facto provincial governor referred to what he has
termed “upside-down migration”, whereby families
who have everything but water migrate to where they
have nothing but water.
With regard to human rights, since my previous
briefing (see S/PV.9354), UNAMA has issued three
human rights reports: first, on the impact of improvised
explosive devices on civilians; secondly, on violations
of the de facto authorities’ own declared amnesty
regarding former government officials and former
members of the armed forces; and thirdly, on the
treatment of detainees. Those reports have documented
human rights violations by the de facto authorities in
contravention of international law. In many cases, they
are violations of the Taliban leader’s own instructions,
for example, on the prohibition of torture and illtreatment. Such violations create fear and distrust that
undermine the claims to domestic legitimacy by the
de facto authorities. I acknowledge the cooperative
responses of the de facto authorities through the de
facto Ministry for Foreign Affairs to our reports before
they were published. Their written responses can be
found annexed to each of the reports.
UNAMA’s human rights efforts are focused on
engaging with the de facto authorities and enabling
them to establish an inclusive, responsive system of
governance, including policing, that respects human
rights norms and standards. It is time to support
strengthened engagement with the relevant components
of the de facto authorities through appropriate means to
increase their knowledge and further compliance of law
enforcement actions with international norms.
In that regard, we welcome the recent visit of a
group of distinguished Islamic scholars from States
members of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The delegation of ulama focused on girls’ education,
women’s rights and the need for inclusive governance,
stressing that those are integral to Islamic governance
around the world. We urge that such visits continue.
They are part of a vital conversation between the de
facto authorities and the international community,
helpfully mediated by the Islamic world.
23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

At the subnational level, UNAMA has documented
many instances of consultations between the de facto
authorities and local communities. Those consultations
are both through institutions and ad hoc. Very recently,
provincial ulama councils composed of religious
clerics and tribal elders have been created in all 34 of
Afghanistan’s provinces. Those Councils are intended
to provide accountability and listen to local grievances,
but they also report directly to the Taliban leader. It is
too early to judge those institutions — whether they
are instruments of accountability and consultation or
of control. We are concerned that the recently created
Provincial Ulama Council for the predominantly
Shia provinces of Bamyan and Daikundi has no
Shia members.
At the end of this month there will be a Moscow
format meeting in Kazan, Russia, which will focus on
inclusive Government. The de facto authorities will send
a delegation headed by the de facto Foreign Minister.
Despite insistence by the de facto authorities that their
institutions are inclusive, there appears to be a growing
legitimacy gap with the people. The lack of certainty
regarding rights, accountability, representation and
recourse to justice remains a significant obstacle to
internal legitimacy. And there cannot be international
legitimacy without domestic legitimacy.
On a positive note, there is growing evidence that
the de facto authorities have significantly reduced
the cultivation of poppy in Afghanistan. The United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime will report
on that in greater detail in October. The world can
benefit from that decision, which has affected the
livelihoods of thousands of Afghan farmers. UNAMA
has established in Kabul a working group of countries
that are coordinating their efforts to provide specific
assistance to those farmers, as well as to the millions
of Afghans who have become addicts as a result of the
demand for those drugs in faraway countries. Today in
Istanbul donors are meeting on Afghanistan. We will
reiterate our requests to provide enhanced assistance to
those communities.
In the meantime, we are greatly concerned by
the humanitarian funding gap. As of one week ago,
the Afghanistan humanitarian response plan had
received $872 million, approximately 28 per cent of the
$3.2 billion requested. Many programmes have already
closed owing to insufficient funding just as winter is fast
approaching and lives are most at risk. That means that
15.2 million Afghans now facing acute food insecurity

S/PV.9423

could be pushed towards famine in the coming months.
I urge donors to heed our humanitarian appeal with as
much generosity as possible before winter comes.
More sustainable and cost-effective means of
providing assistance are also required. We urge donors
to consider funding basic human needs assistance in
line with the United Nations Strategic Framework
for Afghanistan with a view to sustaining essential
services, strengthening livelihoods and promoting
community resilience to benefit the most vulnerable,
including women, displaced people and returnees.
Since 2022, the Council has mandated UNAMA
to carry out an engagement strategy that seeks to
moderate the policies of the de facto authorities and
bring Afghanistan into convergence with international
norms. On the ground, the de facto authorities with
whom we are in constant contact demonstrate an
openness to continue that engagement, even as we
continue to disagree profoundly — and to express those
disagreements in our meetings — on issues such as
the rights of women and girls and the need for more
inclusive governance. But I am increasingly concerned
about what can be described only as a lack of positive
direction in our engagement. If that drift continues,
we will neither be able to address the concerns
of the international community, nor the de facto
Administration, nor above all the significant needs of
the Afghan people.
It is well known that our engagement strategy has
been significantly undermined by the more than 50
decrees the Taliban have issued aimed at eliminating
women from public life and education. The two speakers
after me, UN-Women Executive Director Sima Bahous
and Ms. Karima Bennoune, will speak in far greater
detail on the devastating effects that those edicts have
on the lives of Afghanistan’s women.
UNAMA, in conjunction with UN-Women and
the International Organization for Migration, has just
published its fourth quarterly report on the situation
of Afghan women based on more than 500 interviews.
Among other findings, 46 per cent of women stated
that the Taliban should not be recognized under any
circumstances. That further undermines the de facto
authorities’ claim to domestic legitimacy.
The policies that drive the exclusion of women
are unacceptable to the international community. We
all recognize that, especially myself, as a woman from
the region, who has to deal each day with the ongoing

23-278143/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

effects of the ban on Afghan women, including those
banned from working from our premises. The question,
however, is whether to continue engaging with the
de facto authorities despite those policies or to cease
engaging because of them. UNAMA’s view is that we
must continue to engage and to maintain a dialogue.
Dialogue is not recognition. Engagement is not
acceptance of those policies. On the contrary, dialogue
and engagement are how we are attempting to change
those policies.
The goal of our engagement continues to be to
promote governance practices that reflect international
norms, as well as Afghanistan’s cultural and religious
heritage. That engagement could benefit from being
more structured and purposeful while remaining
principled. A reframed engagement strategy must
first acknowledge that the de facto authority bears
responsibility for the well-being of the Afghan
people in all dimensions but especially concerning
women. A reframed engagement strategy must also
have mechanisms to address the de facto authorities’
long-standing concerns. And it should include an
intra-Afghan dialogue of the sort that was interrupted
when the Taliban took power in August 2021. Such an
engagement would also require a more coordinated
position of the international community. We look
forward to the report of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for Afghanistan and his observations on
that and other issues.
The lack of trust on all sides is a serious impediment
to building confidence but the doors to dialogue are still
open. Afghanistan has been a country in conflict for
nearly half a century. This moment, despite its problems,
is an opportunity. We must ensure that the doors to
dialogue are not shut. After all, today in Afghanistan
hundreds of girls will be born. They should not be born
into poverty, exclusion, discrimination or hopelessness.
They should be able to contribute to the full potential
of a peaceful Afghanistan that is not isolated from the
world community.
The President: I thank Ms. Otunbayeva for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bahous.
Ms. Bahous: Since the Taliban took over Kabul
more than two years ago, the Security Council adopted
several resolutions condemning the many forms of
repression directed at Afghan women and girls. It has
also heard directly from 13 Afghan women, the majority
4/26

26/09/2023

of whom spoke to the Chamber from exile, where too
many are forced to be. Their message to the Council on
what Afghan women want, wherever they are, is what
women everywhere want — the right to live free and
equal lives with dignity and respect.
Over the past year, UN-Women has collaborated
with the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and the International Organization for
Migration to regularly consult Afghan women inside
the country and to try to put women at the centre of
international decision-making, as required by our
women and peace and security agenda. This past
quarter, women told us, once again, that access to
education remains their highest priority. More than
four out of five young women and girls who should
be studying are out of school. The lifetime impact of
that cannot be underestimated, not only for the women
and girls who are not in school, but also their families
and communities.
While many of the demands of women living inside
Afghanistan have remained unchanged, there are three
marked shifts that demand our urgent attention.
First, women’s influence on decision-making
has shrunk dramatically, and not just at the national
and provincial level. At the community, extendedfamily and household levels, women are seeing
their decision-making spaces and authority severely
curtailed, with space around household decision-making
shrinking the most. That is driven by increased poverty,
a decrease in women’s financial contributions, the
Taliban’s imposition of hyperpatriarchal gender norms
and women’s growing isolation. In our consultations,
only 22 per cent of women reported meeting with
women outside of their immediate family at least once a
week, and a majority reported worsened relations with
other members of their families and communities. That
jeopardizes women’s mental health and increases the
risk of gender-based violence.
Secondly, women tell us that, in addition to facing
an ever-growing list of restrictions on their lives, those
restrictions are being enforced more frequently and
more severely, including by male family members,
as the Taliban hold them accountable to enforce their
decrees. With those continued restrictions we see,
among other things, increases in child marriage and
child labour.
Thirdly, while a year ago, improving safety and
security, especially for working women, was the
23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

second most pressing priority, it is replaced today by
mental-health concerns. As the percentage of women
employed continues to drop, 90 per cent of young
women respondents report bad or very bad mental
health, and suicide and suicidal ideation is everywhere.
They tell us that they are prisoners living in darkness,
confined to their homes, without hope or future. As
Special Representative Otunbayeva has said, they
tell us that their elimination from public life is like a
continuous fear of violent death.
Women in Afghanistan continue to demand that
the international community provide spaces for them
to speak directly with the de facto authorities, that
international actors do not meet with the Taliban without
women in their own delegations and that international
actors continue to use all means at their disposal to
leverage and pressure for change, including the use
of sanctions, without exceptions for travel, and the
issue of non-recognition. Forty-six per cent of women
consulted think that recognition should not happen
under any circumstances, and 50 per cent think that
it should be granted only after the Taliban end rights
violations related to women’s education, employment
and participation in inclusive Government.
The last time the Security Council met on
Afghanistan (see S/PV.9354), it was reported that there
were more than 50 edicts and decrees restricting women’s
rights. More have been added since. The number of
families living in poverty has nearly doubled in two
years. More than two-thirds of people in Afghanistan
require humanitarian assistance to survive. Twenty
million face acute hunger, the majority of whom are
women and girls, and the cost of the food basket has
gone up. Household debt has increased sixfold.
The Taliban’s attacks on women’s rights
exacerbate the situation, pushing women out of jobs
and opportunities to generate income and out of the
education they need to be part of Afghanistan’s future.
It is estimated that women’s employment has dropped
by 25 per cent since the Taliban’s takeover, compared
to 7 per cent for men — and those estimates predate
the many bans enacted since the end of 2022, which
have barred tens of thousands of women from working
in non-governmental organizations and the United
Nations, and the forthcoming loss of more than 60,000
jobs that will come with the shutdown of beauty salons.
Those decrees are costing Afghanistan approximately
$1 billion per year, a sum that will only increase.

S/PV.9423

We must chart a way forward together, guided by
women’s voices and the principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. We have ignored those voices too often
in the past. Afghan women were excluded from 80 per
cent of peace negotiations from 2005 to 2020. The
negotiations for the Doha agreement, in 2020, excluded
Afghan women and did not contain a single reference
to, or safeguard for, women’s rights. Those failures were
part of what brought us to where we are today. The past
is full of examples of neglecting or ignoring women;
the present is filled with the consequences. The future
must therefore be focused on listening to, investing in,
and supporting women, as well as including them.
Women in Afghanistan will lead the change they
need. They will find ways of speaking out, educating
themselves, generating income and helping others. They
have done that before, and they will do it again. Our
job is to hear and support them, including by finding
spaces for them to meet with the de facto authorities,
including women in our delegations when we meet with
the de facto authorities, and using all of the tools in our
toolbox to bring them out of the dark.
It also means putting money behind organizations
led by and assisting Afghan women and womenrun businesses. Seventy-seven per cent of women’s
organizations did not receive funding in 2022. That is
something we cannot accept. Just as Afghan women
act with courage and creativity, opening clandestine
schools and having girls wearing boys’ clothes to
access education, donors too can find innovative ways
to reach women and girls, including through online
platforms, radio, cash assistance and scholarships and
safe migration alternatives.
I leave the Council with three final recommendations.
First, we recommend that the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) convene a dedicated meeting on the role the
Committee can play in responding to violations of
women’s rights in Afghanistan, including hearing from
Afghan women and women’s rights experts directly,
updating the listing criteria and using all the tools at
the Committee’s disposal.
Secondly, we must consider the messages we send
when we frame the situation in Afghanistan purely or
exclusively as a humanitarian crisis, which it is not. It is
an economic crisis, a mental-health crisis a development
crisis and much more. And the thread that connects
those different facets is the underlying women’s-rights

23-278145/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

crisis. That must be the primary lens through which we
understand what is going on and what we must do.
Thirdly, we ask the Council to lend its full support
to an intergovernmental process to explicitly codify
gender apartheid in international law. The tools that
the international community has at its disposal were
not created to respond to mass, State-sponsored gender
oppression. This systematic and planned assault on
women’s rights is foundational to the Taliban’s vision
of State and society, and it must be named, defined
and proscribed in our global norms so that we can
respond appropriately.
On International Women’s Day this year, members
invited a brave Afghan activist, Zubaida Akbar, to their
deliberations (see S/PV.9277). She told the Council
what Afghan women told me when I was on mission
to Afghanistan in January, and what the Afghan
women I met here at the General Assembly across all
my engagements this past week have echoed — that if
members do not defend women’s rights here, they have
no credibility to do so anywhere else. Zubaida Akbar
was right. The world is watching. In some places it is
watching to condemn, but in others it is watching to
emulate, as other countries and parties to conflict seek
to mimic the violations that the Taliban have inflicted
on women. The multilateral system is being tested. We
must not be found wanting.
The President: I thank Ms. Bahous for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bennoune.
Ms. Bennoune: I thank members for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council.
My name is Karima Bennoune. I am an international
legal expert and have worked with Afghan women
human rights defenders for nearly three decades.
The Council has heard from many of them about the
catastrophic harm women are suffering from under
the Taliban. Today I will focus on what the Security
Council and the international community should do
in response.
As members are aware, since August 2021 the
Taliban have stripped Afghan women of most of their
human rights through at least 65 decrees. They have
arbitrarily detained and tortured women defenders
who bravely resist the apartheid restrictions. Their
rule represents the antithesis of the Charter of the
United Nations and is a threat to peace and security.
A recently reported increase in suicides among women
6/26

26/09/2023

is a horrible but predictable consequence. Day after
day, women from across Afghanistan tell me about the
devastating impact of Taliban rule. One Uzbek woman
from Takhar, who previously worked in civil society,
said she recently tried to commit suicide. “I am afraid
that they will ban women from breathing without a
man’s permission”, she explained. A Hazara woman
described living under constant threat of widespread
targeted anti-Hazara atrocities by the Taliban. A woman
protester in Kabul said, “What we are experiencing
every day is gradual death. This is what it feels like to
live under gender apartheid”.
Many Afghan women also tell me how concerned
they are about increasing attempts by some international
actors to normalize the Taliban despite their repressive
policies. As a result, some Afghan women defenders
recently went on a hunger strike, demanding
international recognition that gender apartheid is being
practised in their country. Too often, the international
community claims to be combating extremism but fails
to support the people peacefully resisting it on the front
lines. The Council has repeatedly called on the Taliban
to end their grave abuses. But there is more that it must
do to hold them accountable for their decimation of
women’s rights.
I am here today to ask the Council to make it clear
through action that the international community will
not tolerate the system of gender apartheid that the
Taliban have imposed. In June, the Special Rapporteur
on the situation of human rights in Afghanistan and
the Working Group on Discrimination against Women
and Girls called on the international community to
galvanize international legal condemnation and action
to end gender apartheid, which they described as an
institutionalized system of discrimination, segregation,
humiliation and exclusion of women and girls. The
Secretary-General, the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, the Executive Director of UN-Women and
the representatives of countries from many regions,
including members of the Council, have also correctly
labelled the situation as gender apartheid. In the Human
Rights Council, South Africa not only recognized that
Taliban rule constitutes gender apartheid but called for
an international response to it, similar to that which
helped to end racial apartheid.
I am here today to call on the international
community to heed those words, go beyond the
condemnation of this worst example of systematic
oppression of women in the world and take urgent
23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

action to end it. What has been tried since the Taliban
returned to power is not working. Along with many
Afghan women defenders, I believe that the gender
apartheid approach is one of the most promising options
for a more effective way forward. It can be pursued
both through gender-inclusive interpretation of existing
apartheid law today and by codifying gender apartheid
in international law going forward.
In December 2022, after consultation with
diverse Afghan women defenders, I published a study
entitled “The International Obligation to Counter
Gender Apartheid in Afghanistan”. So what are the
consequences of that framing? Adapted from the
international law on racial apartheid, gender apartheid
emphasizes that discrimination has been made the
system of governance itself, such that the aim of
public policy is to discriminate. It can be accurately
captured by adapting the definition of apartheid in the
Rome Statute by simply adding “gender” — in other
words, inhumane acts committed in the context of an
institutionalized regime of systematic oppression and
domination by one gender group over any other gender
group and committed with the intention of maintaining
that regime.
The Taliban are not simply failing to uphold
women’s rights — the oppression of women is central
to their system of governance and a core part of their
philosophy. The apartheid framework recognizes that
the ordinary human rights approach, centring the
State as the actor to implement human rights, cannot
work here. Positive change will be possible only with
a consistent, principled international response led by
the Council, mandated by its 10 resolutions on women
and peace and security and supported by States from
all regions.
The vital concepts of gender apartheid and gender
persecution are distinct and complementary. Both
are needed to hold the Taliban accountable. Gender
apartheid is the institutionalized framework within
which gender persecution takes place in Afghanistan.
The Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
is investigating the situation and may bring charges
against some alleged perpetrators of international
crimes, and that would be an important development.
However, individual accountability, while essential, is
not in itself sufficient to address the scale of the crisis.
A powerful aspect of the gender apartheid approach is
that it not only implicates the perpetrators of apartheid,
but as was the case with racial apartheid in South

S/PV.9423

Africa, it means that no Member State can be complicit
in or normalize the Taliban’s illegal actions, and that
States must take effective action to end the situation. It
therefore makes it clear that there can be no recognition
of the Taliban and certainly no place for them at the
United Nations, at least as long as their system of
gender apartheid persists.
The goal is not to isolate Afghanistan or cut off
desperately needed humanitarian assistance. Principled
and non-discriminatory aid delivery is a matter of
life and death. However, humanitarian action and the
protection of human rights are and must be mutually
reinforcing. This year we are marking the seventyfifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, which reaffirms the Charter’s faith in
the equal rights of men and women. Afghan women
are among the most courageous defenders of that
foundational principle and deserve the Council’s
strongest support. I therefore recommend, first, that
the Security Council and other relevant United Nations
bodies should consider adopting resolutions labelling
the treatment of Afghan women by the Taliban as both
gender persecution and an institutionalized framework
of gender apartheid. Such resolutions should require
States and the United Nations to take effective steps to
end those grave violations of international law.
Secondly, there is an important opportunity to
strengthen the relevant international law through the
proposed treaty on crimes against humanity currently
under consideration. Council members and other States
should ensure that the treaty is gender-competent and
includes a reference to gender apartheid.
Thirdly, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, whose role is vital, should fully
implement all aspects of its mandate on women’s rights.
In addition, the forthcoming independent assessment
and its implementation should prioritize the protection
of women’s rights and the meaningful participation of
Afghan women.
As an Afghan woman defender once said to me,
optimism is key to survival. The stalwart women of
Afghanistan who have continued to protest will not give
up and are risking their lives for the Charter’s promise
of equality. The Security Council must show as much
courage and commitment as they do.
The President: I thank Ms. Bennoune for
her briefing.

23-278147/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I would like to start by
thanking Special Representative Otunbayeva and
UN-Women Executive Director Sima Sami Bahous
for providing an update on the situation. I also thank
Ms. Karima Bennoune for her remarks.
More than two years have passed since the Taliban
takeover in August 2021. It is truly regrettable that I
have to say once again in this Chamber that we have
seen little progress on the issues of concern, despite
the repeated calls by the Security Council and the
international community. The humanitarian situation
in Afghanistan is becoming increasingly dire, and the
economy is stagnant. The restrictions on human rights,
especially on those of women and girls, have not been
lifted. We acknowledge that the Taliban have claimed
achievements, such as improvements in the security
situation and progress in the area of counter-narcotics.
However, those achievements will be fragile unless the
Taliban addresses the Afghan people’s suffering.
The Security Council must continue to urge
the Taliban to reverse their repressive human rights
policies and prioritize their people. In particular, the
restrictions on women and girls must be reversed, and
their full, equal, meaningful and safe participation
must be realized, as called for in resolution 2681 (2023).
At the same time, the international community should
not isolate the Taliban, as it did in the 1990s, when the
country became a hotbed of terrorism, but rather should
engage with them. We should be united in our approach
to the Taliban.
There has been no change in the fact that the
continued presence of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) is critically
important for the future of Afghanistan. We deeply
appreciate that UNAMA has addressed a wide range
of matters by seriously engaging with the relevant
Afghan political actors and stakeholders. UNAMA
also functions as a gateway to the outside world
for the Taliban. Japan, as one of the co-penholders,
remains supportive of UNAMA’s activities. For our
part, Japan continues to pursue patient, pragmatic and
principled engagement with the Taliban in order to
encourage them to change the course of their policies
in the direction desired by the Afghan people. Since
we resumed operations at our Embassy in Kabul in
September 2022, we have continuously urged the
8/26

26/09/2023

Taliban directly to abolish their repressive policies and
build a constructive relationship with the international
community. We believe that building trust with the
Taliban is important in that process.
We are also using our presence on the ground to
try to assist the population. In late August, Japan and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations signed a cooperation document for a project to
enhance agricultural production through communityled irrigation. The project expands on the efforts
made by the Japanese physician Tetsu Nakamura and
his aid group, Peace Japan Medical Services, to bring
back agriculture to farmlands abandoned over the past
20 years. Through that project, we hope to not only
alleviate serious food shortages in the country, which
we have all discussed as an acute problem, as described
by the Special Representative, but also help the Afghan
people rebuild their livelihoods and once again stand
on their own feet. By November, an independent
assessment will be provided in accordance with
resolution 2679 (2023). We hope to receive forwardlooking recommendations on how relevant political,
humanitarian and development actors can address the
multifaceted challenges faced by the Afghan people in
an integrated and coherent way.
In conclusion, I stress that Japan will continue to
support the building of a peaceful, stable and prosperous
Afghanistan, and we are committed to the work of the
Security Council to bring about a better future for the
Afghan people.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I also
thank our briefers, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Roza Otunbayeva, Executive
Director Sima Sami Bahous and Ms. Karima Bennoune,
for their valuable remarks today.
We have now passed the two-year mark of the
Taliban being in power in Afghanistan. The latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2023/678) provides
us with a clearer idea of the current landscape. Conflict
has subsided, and some gains have been made in
counter-terrorism in Afghanistan. The opiate trade has
been reduced. At the same time, millions are facing
serious food insecurity. Humanitarian needs are among
the highest in the world, and women and girls are being
erased from society. This is therefore not a moment
for complacency in the Security Council. When we
adopted resolution 2679 (2023) last March, mandating
an independent assessment, our primary aim was to
23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

address the existing gap for a coherent international
strategy on the part of the de facto authorities. While
the assessment may not provide a silver bullet, it should
aim to provide a list of tangible options on which we can
build an integrated response. Today I will focus on the
United Arab Emirates expectations of the assessment
due in November.
First, we need a clear way forward on a political
process and a coherent policy of engagement with the de
facto authorities. That should include a reckoning with
their de facto control over the territory of Afghanistan
that does not simply lead to the legitimization of their
power by default. It is a complex balancing act, but
many millions of lives depend on our ability to walk that
tightrope. Our unity as the international community
remains our strongest lever. The Afghan people are not
responsible for the behaviour of the Taliban. It is our
responsibility to ensure that they do not become victims
twice over — first victims of extremist policies and
then victims of our own inaction or disunity. That does
not mean legitimizing or ignoring the Taliban’s blatant
disregard for human rights, especially the rights of
women and girls. But it does mean engaging with them
on key areas that require international involvement in
order to reverse their persecution of women.
The Secretary-General’s efforts to convene
Afghanistan envoys almost six months ago was a
step in the right direction, but we must see something
that is consistent, meets regularly and has a clear
timeline and deliverables. The next meeting of envoys
should be scheduled without delay. We also need an
approach that involves clear benchmarks for increasing
the cooperation to emerge from such meetings, one
that will lead to the de facto authorities upholding
Afghanistan’s obligations under international law and
their respect for human rights and the reversal of the
restrictions on women and girls. We need to understand
the leverage that we have to incentivize the de facto
authorities to reach those benchmarks, as well as the
consequences for them if they do not. In the context of
the assessment, we must therefore re-examine how we
envision the process, that is, whether we build a United
Nations-convened pathway, pursue a new one or unify
the many important regional initiatives and meetings
that are currently under way, including those led by
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, in order
to work holistically in reinforcing — and not at odds
with — one another. Regardless of what approach we
take, women must be full participants in that process,

S/PV.9423

and confidence-building measures and ties to timelines
and benchmarks should be part and parcel of all
future frameworks.
Secondly, we need to kick-start the Afghan
economy. The economic crisis is compounding what
is already the world’s worst women’s rights crisis.
Rampant poverty may have forced up to 80,000 girls
into marriage. Humanitarian aid on such a scale is not
a viable long-term strategy. We have already seen that
less than one third of this year’s humanitarian appeal
has not been funded. The latest report of the SecretaryGeneral offers promising indications that revenue is
being generated internally. Nevertheless, reviving
the Afghan economy necessitates finding ways to
reintegrate Afghanistan into the international banking
system and providing capital to revitalize its private
sector, especially small and medium-sized enterprises,
while placing a priority on those run and owned by
Afghan women. Ideally, we should be able to consider
definitive options in the context of the assessment, and
those should tie in with the benchmarks and timelines
of the civil political process. As I heard from women
civil society leaders this morning, that aid should
be monitored so that it actually reaches women and
minorities and is not used as a lever of patronage by the
de facto authorities. And we would genuinely welcome
further data from United Nations agencies on that point.
Thirdly, the independent assessment must have a
clear recommendation for how we mitigate security
challenges in a holistic way in Afghanistan, including
in counter-terrorism, as well as in countering organized
crime and narcotics. The significant decrease in conflictrelated violence and the counter-terrorism gains need
to be acknowledged and built upon. The decline in
the opiate trade has also been a positive development
for the region following the de facto authorities’ ban
on narcotics cultivation. These security challenges are
intertwined and must also remain a centre of our focus
to ensure that Afghanistan does not serve as a safe
harbour for threats against other nations.
Finally, Afghanistan is among the top 10
climate-vulnerable countries globally. It is also among
those that are the least equipped to adapt to climate
change and to mitigate its impacts. Now in its third
consecutive year of drought, 25 out of 34 Afghan
provinces experience either severe or catastrophic
drought conditions. Water scarcity has been manifesting
increasingly in border tensions as well. Protection from
the impacts of climate change needs to be among our

23-278149/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

26/09/2023

priorities for the Afghan population. We have had too
many recent reminders of what happens when we do not
boost resilience and adaptation measures, particularly
in fragile and conflict-affected settings.

sectors, human rights defenders, former government
officials and armed forces. Possible constitutional and
legal reforms should be geared towards strengthening
institutions and the participation of all actors.

The question we face today is therefore clear: are
we willing to invest in climate-proofing economies and
societies, massively scaling up early warning systems
and providing for diversified livelihoods, or are we
willing to live with the consequences of what we know
will be more frequent and more severe disasters in a
potentially failed State? That is a debate that we need
to be having now if we are to avoid devastation like the
tragedy we saw in Derna most recently. It is up to us
to make space for those discussions in this Chamber
and within the United Nations system. The opportunity
and the responsibility that we have today is to chart a
corrected course for Afghanistan and for the people of
Afghanistan. That responsibility cannot be understated.

The most recent report of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team (see S/2023/549) notes
that there is evidence that various terrorist groups,
including Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant-Khorasan Province, could have greater
margin for manoeuvre to finance and organize their
operations. Ecuador reaffirms that terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations constitutes one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security and
weakens the rule of law and democracy. We reiterate the
importance of implementing coordinated actions among
the competent bodies of the United Nations system,
regional organizations and neighbouring countries
to step up the fight against terrorism, illicit arms
trafficking, violent extremism and drug trafficking.

Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, the Executive Director
of UN-Women, Ms. Sima Sami Bahous and Ms. Karima
Bennoune, civil society representative, for their
briefings. I welcome the presence of the representatives
of Afghanistan, India, Iran and Pakistan.
The content of the Special Representative’s
briefing, specifically with regard to the lack of results
in restoring the rights and freedoms of women and girls,
the difficulties in getting humanitarian assistance to the
population most in need and persistent security risks, is
a cause for concern and vigilance for the Council.
The crisis in Afghanistan involves a number of
facets: a lack of institutions; the violation of human
rights, the deterioration of socioeconomic indicators;
the increase in the number of people who require
humanitarian assistance to survive; the recruitment
and use of children; and the obstacles that the Taliban
impose on the deployment of humanitarian aid. The
persistence with which the Taliban regimes continues
its violations against human rights and fundamental
freedoms is the most worrisome, specifically regarding
the situation of women and girls, given the deepening of
its policies on the refusal to allow work and education,
as well as their resistance to repealing the edicts
that institutionalize gender discrimination and that
practically constitute apartheid. We would sound the
alert with respect to the abuse and violations that have
occurred against political representatives from various
10/26

The current funding crisis is unprecedented. We
encourage donors not to falter when it comes to fulfilling
their commitments. In the case of Afghanistan, less
than 30 per cent has been raised up to the month of
September, which jeopardizes the continuity of the
programmes that have been easing the situation of
29 million of people in need.
My delegation takes note of the bilateral and
regional efforts and mechanisms for cooperation and
dialogue that exist with the Taliban regime; however,
we call for those efforts to have as their fundamental
objective the promotion of the effective implementation
of human rights policies and the reconstruction of an
inclusive, participatory society that is consistent with
international law. Faced with the lack of flexibility of
the Taliban regime, we call for global solidarity and
for concerted political action in the region and the
international community. The situation in Afghanistan
must continue to be a priority for the Council. For that
reason, we reaffirm our support for the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and our intention
to support any initiative aimed at giving the Afghan
population the opportunity to live in a State capable
of protecting their human rights and guaranteeing their
well-being and security.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
I join others in thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Otunbayeva, Executive
23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

Director Sima Bahous and Ms. Karima Bennoune for
their briefings.
Twenty-two years since Kofi Annan’s Nobel
Peace Prize speech, which the Special Representative
referenced, and over two years since the Taliban seizure
of power, our dominant concern remains the Taliban’s
systematic assault on the rights of women and girls.
There have been over 50 decrees curtailing women’s
ability to participate in public, political, economic and
social life and barring girls from secondary schools and
higher education. Those decrees have also affected the
ability of the United Nations to get aid to those who
need it most — this is at a time of dire need. Two thirds
of the population of Afghanistan require humanitarian
assistance. A total of 40 per cent are facing acute food
insecurity — a number that would be far higher without
families and communities in Afghanistan supporting
each other in whatever ways they can. Afghanistan
remains one of the poorest and most climate-vulnerable
countries in the world, its prospects further dimmed
by a significant brain drain as a result of migration,
persecution and uncertainty.
We note the progress the Taliban has made in
tackling the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant–
Khorasan Province, and we underscore the importance
of continued action against terrorist groups within
Afghanistan and their affiliates. The people of
Afghanistan remain our priority. What can we do
for them?
First and foremost, we need to take urgent action to
avert a humanitarian catastrophe as winter approaches.
The United Kingdom has contributed more than half a
billion dollars to address the humanitarian crisis since
April 2021, and we call on fellow Member States to
step up support where they can. But as we heard from
Special Representative Otunbayeva, the United Nations
revised humanitarian appeal for Afghanistan for 2023
is only 28 per cent funded. The United Kingdom is
unwavering in its commitment to providing aid to the
people of Afghanistan and supporting United Nations
efforts. But we are clear that male-only delivery chains
do not and cannot achieve that, and we support calls for
the closer monitoring of the delivery of aid.
Secondly, the international community should
remain united in its message to the Taliban. We have
set out our expectations in successive Security Council
resolutions on humanitarian access, cutting ties with
terrorists, respect for human rights and inclusive

S/PV.9423

governance. The Taliban should understand clearly
the costs of their policies. International recognition
should not be on the table. Sanctions relief should not
come. Afghanistan cannot be self-reliant when 50 per
cent of its people are excluded from society. Without
inclusive governance and society, peace and stability
will remain elusive.
Finally, we look forward to Ambassador
Sinirlioğlu’s independent assessment, which will
provide a valuable basis for a more coherent, strategic
international approach as we look to build on the
Secretary-General’s conference with special envoys in
Doha and other regional initiatives, in which the United
Kingdom will continue to play its part.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), for her assessments of the situation in the
country. The Russian Federation supports the activities
of UNAMA under her leadership within the framework
of the tasks mandated to the Mission. We also note
Kabul’s interest in developing contacts with her. We are
heartened by the fact that the United Nations remains
committed to maintaining a presence in Afghanistan
and delivering the necessary assistance to its people.
We listened attentively to the statements by Ms. Sima
Sami Bahous, Executive Director of UN-Women, and
the civil society representative, Ms. Karima Bennoune.
We are pleased that actors from the region have also
been included today’s discussion. We have taken note
of the report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in Afghanistan (S/2023/678), and we would like to make
the following points.
The Security Council has now been discussing
the situation in Afghanistan for many years. During
that time, the country endured the Taliban rule in the
1990s, followed by a 20-year war that led to its effective
collapse, culminating in the shameful flight of United
States and NATO troops and then, paradoxical as it
may be, the return to power of the Taliban movement
in August 2021. Against the backdrop of those changes,
what remain unchanged are the empty Western
promises to build a long-anticipated peace, in addition
to the magnitude of the problems and challenges that
the people of Afghanistan are once again facing alone.
In analysing the situation in the country over the
past 20 years or so, we cannot avoid the conclusion that

23-2781411/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

the main result of that inglorious military campaign has
been the return to power of those whom Washington
and its allies so fiercely fought all those years — and
with whom an agreement was signed in Doha behind
the backs of the Afghan people, whose interests they
claimed to be protecting. What were the real reasons
for such a long-standing presence of our Western
colleagues in Afghanistan? It appears that the country
was a training ground for trying out America’s regional
strategy, testing various types of weapons, laundering
billions of dollars and fine-tuning corrupt schemes
that various Western partners of the Afghan republican
authorities set up over the years. As a result of the socalled war on terror, Afghanistan became yet another
safe haven for extremists of all stripes and the homeland
of yet another wing of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL). On top of that, it has witnessed numerous
war crimes perpetrated by the United States and its
NATO allies. Of course, we can hardly expect our
United States colleagues or their satellites to summon
the courage to admit that openly. On the contrary, they
are trying hard, including through threats of sanction,
to erase the evidence of their atrocities from the pages
of history as if they had never been.
Against that backdrop, we can see the hypocrisy
of our our colleagues’ loud proclamations about their
alleged continuing concern about the plight of ordinary
Afghans, including women and children, whom they
themselves betrayed and abandoned to their fate without
ceremony, not to mention their false concerns about the
lack of preconditions for a genuine settlement and the
rebuilding of Afghanistan. If we look at actions rather
than words, the Western countries do not care about
the Afghan people, including their women and girls, or
about the unprecedented humanitarian and economic
crisis. All their efforts are focused on the war on Russia
in Ukraine and on pumping huge amounts of weapons
and money into Ukraine.
We share the Secretary-General’s assessment of the
complex internal political situation in Afghanistan. We
continue to be particularly concerned about the security
risks caused by the activity of the ISIL-Khorasan
terrorist group, which established itself firmly during
the years of Western intervention. We see that those
terrorists have continued to deliberately exacerbate the
situation by perpetrating terrorist attacks, instilling
an atmosphere of fear and despair and calling for
bringing the knives out against those Muslims whom
the Taliban view as heretical. All of that contributes to
12/26

26/09/2023

the radicalization of young people. The aim is clearly
to present themselves as a real alternative force and to
destabilize Afghanistan’s neighbouring States. In that
case, it is no secret — and this has been confirmed by the
militants themselves — that ISIL receives support from
abroad, including from foreign intelligence services.
That is hardly surprising, however. During the years
of republican governance, we heard a number of stories
of ISIL militants receiving NATO helicopters. In that
regard, we are concerned about the security conditions
for UNAMA staff and the humanitarian workers on
the ground. While we note the efforts of the de facto
authorities, it is clear that they will not be enough to fully
eradicate the hornet’s nest. Meanwhile, the prospect
of terrorist activity spilling over into neighbouring
countries in Central Asia remains very real.
The narcotics problem is also closely linked
to terrorism. We believe there is no alternative to
comprehensive international and regional assistance in
eradicating that threat, including through the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). It
is clear that in the context of widespread hunger and
poverty, it will be difficult for Afghanistan to tackle
those challenges alone. In that connection, we note
UNODC’s efforts in supporting Afghan farmers. We
see a need to continue to scale up those efforts and
ensure that they remain consistent.
We are paying close attention to the humanitarian
and socioeconomic situation in Afghanistan. We note the
efforts undertaken by the United Nations and regional
organizations to deliver humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan, and the selfless work of humanitarian
agencies and their personnel, who are willing to
remain on the ground to help Afghans regardless of the
circumstances, all of which is highly commendable.
At the same time, any efforts of the United Nations
to expand assistance beyond basic needs continue
to be blocked by Western donors, who categorically
reject any opportunity to provide the country with
any development assistance, including for rebuilding
schools and hospitals and constructing roads.
Against that backdrop, the Western representatives’
deliberate reduction of financing for the United
Nations humanitarian response plan for Afghanistan
under various politicized pretexts does not stand
up to criticism. We only have to look at the case of
humanitarian aid to Ukraine. The United Nations has
received $1.83 billion for Ukraine this year alone.
It is not just the humanitarian response plans for
23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

Afghanistan that are chronically underfunded, but so
are those for most other countries around the world.
There is no justification for such discrimination.
In some areas, humanitarian and development
issues are also related to water shortages, which have
forced people to flee their homes and migrate to other
provinces. We take note of the efforts of UNAMA
to assist Afghans, including with the support of the
United Nations Development Programme, the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and other entities. We also continue to monitor
developments with respect to the situation of the rights
of all Afghans, including the basic rights of women and
girls and the rights to education and employment. We
take note of the statements by the de facto authorities,
but hope for a prompt resolution of those problems. The
priority for us is still the establishment of a genuinely
inclusive Government, with the participation of all
ethno-political groups in the country. We anticipate
progress on that track as well.
More than any other people, the Afghan people
deserve the right to live in peace and stability.
However, it will be impossible to build a long-term,
sustainable peace without painstaking, pragmatic
cooperation with the de facto authorities on a broad
range of pressing issues — there is no alternative to
that. UNAMA’s effectiveness hinges on its adoption of
a comprehensive approach.
Russia has consistently advocated greater
cooperation with Afghanistan on a comprehensive
settlement. Together with our regional partners, we are
working to forge a common approach to the situation
in the country. That goal is also being advanced
by the Moscow format, a meeting of which is to be
held on 29 Sept in Kazan, Russian Federation. The
United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Turkey
and Indonesia have also been invited to that meeting,
as has a Taliban delegation. We note the potential of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization-Afghanistan
Contact Group. There are regular liaisons conducted
within the framework of the Collective Security
Treaty Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States. We also participate in the format of
Afghanistan’s neighbouring countries and the quartet
made up of China, Russia, Pakistan and Iran. Moreover,
we are leveraging bilateral contacts with the de facto
authorities to discuss expedited solutions to all the
objectives that have been set out. We will continue to
provide humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people

S/PV.9423

and step up cooperation at the socioeconomic level.
We are keen to develop relations with Kabul, including
for the purposes of rebuilding the infrastructure
Russian enterprises built in the country.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I thank Special
Representative Otunbayeva, Executive Director Bahous
and Ms. Bennoune for their briefings.
More than two years have passed since the
Taliban takeover of Afghanistan. Regrettably, the
initial reassurances they provided to the international
community have not been adhered to. Instead, we are
witnessing a situation in which human rights abuses
are flagrant, particularly those directed against the
human rights of women and girls. Hundreds of former
Government officials and former members of the armed
forces continue to be victims of a crackdown, despite
the Taliban’s announcement of a general amnesty in
August 2021.
As outlined by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, the trafficking in methamphetamine in
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries is surging,
despite the introduction of a drug ban by the Taliban last
year. We also continue to witness incidents of armed
confrontation at border crossings with neighbouring
countries. That is a serious security concern, with
implications for regional security and stability.
The Taliban’s egregious violations, as well as its
systematic discrimination against and segregation and
exclusion of women and girls in Afghanistan, continue
to escalate and may amount to gender persecution and a
crime against humanity. Since August 2021, more than
50 decrees have directly curtailed women’s rights to
education, employment and the freedom of movement
and expression. The recent closures of beauty salons
and the dismissal of women working in kindergartens
deprived women of some of their last sources of
employment and spaces for finding community support
outside their homes.
Girls are not only denied education in Afghanistan
but are also banned from accepting educational
opportunities abroad. The summary report of countrywide women’s consultations is clear: gender equality
and women’s rights are the top priority for Afghan
women. As mental health continues to deteriorate, with
suicides taking place daily, we must strive to ensure
their safety and security. The Taliban’s exclusion of
women from Afghan society and their restrictions of
civic spaces have prevented civil society organizations,

23-2781413/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

human rights defenders and the media from operating
freely. We must renew our efforts in support of Afghan
women and girls as they face unprecedented genderbased segregation. We reiterate our demand on the
Taliban to immediately and unconditionally reverse all
policies and practices that restrict the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of women and girls.
Meanwhile, Afghanistan’s economy has further
deteriorated, plunging the country deep into a
humanitarian crisis. Two thirds of the population
are in constant need of humanitarian assistance.
We commend and support all United Nations and
humanitarian staff who continue to assist the people
of Afghanistan. The multidimensional humanitarian
emergency throughout the country still endures. Yet
the provision of international aid has shown signs
of weakness, including due to budget shortages and
declines in assistance. That occurs at a time when
almost 40 per cent of Afghan children under 5 years
of age are facing acute malnutrition. The combination
of the societal marginalization of Afghan women and
the decrease of international humanitarian aid has
significantly diminished their options for making a
living and feeding their children.
Malta remains steadfast in its support for the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
and its personnel as they perform their duties under
difficult circumstances. We appreciate UNAMA’s
continued close cooperation with the European Union
on the ground. We reiterate our demand that the
Taliban engage with the Mission in good faith, respect
the context of the unanimously adopted resolution
2681 (2023) and be accountable to the international
community. We also look forward to the United Nations
Special Coordinator’s recommendations, to be included
in the independent assessment, on how the United
Nations can more effectively strengthen its actions in
the country.

26/09/2023

Afghanistan. We welcome the participation in this
meeting of the representatives of Afghanistan, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, India and Pakistan.
We take note of the recent progress achieved in
Afghanistan in improving macroeconomic performance,
promoting trade, and working to improve infrastructure
and regional cooperation. While acknowledging those
steps, we wish to express our deep concern about the
ongoing attacks on civilians, the violence against
children, the extrajudicial killings and the arbitrary
arrests in the country. We are also profoundly concerned
about the prevailing discrimination against women and
girls and the curtailment of the freedom of expression.
It is against that backdrop that the A3 would like to
highlight the following points.
First, at the political level, we note with dismay that
the current Government is composed entirely of men
and that some of them feature on the United Nations
sanctions list. Moreover, the lack of representation of
the diversity of the Afghan people — both ethnic and
social — in the political landscape is self-evident and
deplorable. The A3 cannot condone policies or actions
that are based on doctrines of discrimination against
women and girls. We call on the Afghan authorities to
take steps aimed at reversing those measures, and for a
full reversal of the ban on women aid workers, as well
as for equal access to education for boys and girls.

Mr. Afonso (Mozambique): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council (A3), including my
own country, Mozambique.

Secondly, we believe that addressing the
humanitarian challenges faced by the Afghan people
is a matter of urgency. The humanitarian situation in
Afghanistan is dire and deteriorating rapidly, with
millions of people in need of assistance. The available
data shows that one in three people are already facing
crisis levels of food insecurity across the country and
that more than 40 per cent of children under the age
of five are facing acute malnutrition. It is therefore
essential to provide life-saving aid, including food,
water, health care and shelter, particularly in remote
and hard-to-reach areas. In order to achieve that
humanitarian relief, we call on donors to renew their
support and increase their response activities, especially
before the approaching harsh winter season.

The A3 wishes to thank Ms. Roza Otunbayeva,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Sima Sami Bahous, Executive Director of the
United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the
Empowerment of Women, and Ms. Karima Bennoune
for their excellent briefings on the situation in

Thirdly, despite the reduction in incident levels
resulting from armed clashes and detonations of
improvised explosive devices, the security situation
in Afghanistan remains worrisome. In that context,
we condemn any acts of violence. We encourage the
Afghan authorities to continue their efforts to combat

14/26

23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

terrorism and ensure the safety of Afghan citizens. We
also encourage the countries of the region to increase
their joint efforts to stabilize the security situation in
Afghanistan so as to ensure peace dividends for the
entire region.
Fourthly, to achieve lasting political stability, the
A3 stresses the need for an inclusive political process in
Afghanistan that upholds human rights and democratic
values. It will be crucial to ensure that all the country’s
voices are heard and represented in the political process.
We call on the Afghan authorities to fully embrace
inclusivity and democratic principles, fostering a stable
and open political environment that can contribute to
long-term peace and development. The international
community must provide support to ensure the success
of that process.
The A3 would like to express its sincere
appreciation for the dedicated and selfless work of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), as it works tirelessly to engage with the
Afghan authorities and all relevant actors to improve
the overall situation in the country. We encourage the
continuation of awareness-raising activities on issues
related to governance, including human rights. We
commend its involvement in helping to control the
proliferation of arms. UNAMA’s commitment and
efforts in those areas are essential to fostering positive
and sustainable change in the country.
To conclude, the A3 reiterates its call on
Afghanistan’s authorities to prioritize the fundamental
rights and welfare of all Afghan citizens, especially
women and girls. We urge the international community
at large and the countries in the region in particular to
provide their support and contribute to the lasting peace,
stability and development of the people of Afghanistan.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Otunbayeva, Executive Director
Bahous and Ms. Bennoune for their very informative
briefings. I also thank the entire United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) team
for their work and commitment to a stable, prosperous,
inclusive and secure Afghanistan. I want to highlight
three pressing topics in my remarks today — the current
situation of women and girls, access for humanitarian
assistance and ongoing human rights abuses.
First, as we know, the Taliban have chosen to
impose numerous edicts to prevent women from
contributing fully to Afghan society. They have banned

S/PV.9423

women from universities, closed secondary schools
to girls and prevented Afghan women from working
with non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
the United Nations. Those restrictions are absolutely
indefensible. Muslim-majority countries have spoken
out against those decisions and the United States joins
them in doing so here today. We urge the Taliban to roll
back those restrictions and allow women and girls to
have access to education, which would enable their full,
equal and meaningful participation in society. Women
are also essential actors in the distribution of aid. It
is imperative that they be allowed to continue their
critical work with NGOs and the United Nations. We
are committed to providing assistance that prioritizes
non-discrimination and the meaningful inclusion of
women, with careful attention to ensuring the safety
and security of female staff and the inclusion of women
and girls as recipients of aid.
Secondly and more broadly, the Taliban have created
an increasingly difficult operating environment for
partners who are staying and delivering life-saving aid
to the Afghan people. Any interference in or diversion
of humanitarian aid is totally unacceptable. We continue
to expect the Taliban to allow unhindered humanitarian
access and a flow of aid consistent with humanitarian
principles. Now more than ever, the international
community must rally together and increase pledges and
support to the humanitarian response. The United States
is committed to providing assistance to those most in
need. Since August 2021 the United States has provided
nearly $2 billion in humanitarian assistance, including
nearly $969 million to the World Food Programme.
Reports of macroeconomic stability notwithstanding,
more than half of all Afghans live in poverty and about
two thirds are in need of assistance. For our part, we
will work with donors, multilateral development banks
and other partners to support sustainable interventions
that create livelihood opportunities, including for
Afghan women.
Thirdly, UNAMA’s report this month highlighted
at least 800 instances of killing, unjust detention,
physical abuse and ill treatment and disappearances
carried out against former Government officials
and members of Afghanistan’s national defence and
security forces between August 2021 and June 2023.
Those reported human rights abuses are unacceptable.
UNAMA’s comprehensive mandate is vital to reporting
on and monitoring human rights abuses, as well as to
promoting women’s rights and empowerment.

23-2781415/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

The members of the Security Council must continue
to work together to press the Taliban to reverse its
destructive course. Indeed, we must press the Taliban
to engage in serious dialogue with the Afghan people
to support their aspirations to put an end to human
rights abuses and to allow assistance to reach those in
need. We look forward to continuing to work together
to advance our shared objectives in Afghanistan,
including at the next United Nations-convened meeting
of special envoys.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Special
Representative Roza Otunbayeva and Executive
Director Sima Sami Bahous for their briefings. I also
commend civil society representative Ms. Karima
Bennoune for shedding light on the challenges and
hardships faced by millions of Afghans, and especially
women and girls, in their daily lives.
As we have reached the two-year mark of the
Taliban’s return to power, we can assess the global
response to Afghanistan’s challenges and also
chart a course to contribute to the well-being of the
Afghan people.
Brazil welcomes the efforts by the United Nations
to engage with the Taliban de facto authorities and
to align Afghanistan’s policies with international
standards, as detailed in the most recent report by the
Secretary-General (S/2023/678).
Brazil remains troubled by the extremely serious
humanitarian crisis in the country. It requires the
focused attention of the international community.
A staggering 29.2 million Afghans, making up over
70 per cent of the population, desperately need
assistance. Shrinking resources, economic constraints
and the lack of employment opportunities exacerbate
the distressing situation.
The human rights situation is also appalling,
in particular for Afghan women and girls. Many of
their essential rights and freedoms continue to be
systematically and deliberately violated. Such acts
run against everything we cherish and believe as far
as human dignity is concerned. Despite evidence
to the contrary, we must hope and continue to urge
the de facto authorities to steer the nation towards
inclusivity and full and indivisible respect for human
rights and especially with regard to women and girls.
Discriminatory measures and systematic violations of
the human rights of women and girls, including access
to education and work, will undermine any prospects of
16/26

26/09/2023

building a stable and prosperous society in Afghanistan.
That can never be achieved without the proper inclusion
and meaningful participation of women in public life
and girls getting their appropriate education.
Addressing the root causes of Afghanistan’s
multiple challenges is key to translating the country’s
enormous potential into reality. Recent economic
indicators offer a glimmer of hope for Afghanistan’s
macroeconomic landscape. The exchange rate has
been stable, inflation is under control, revenue is being
collected and legal exports are increasing. Therefore,
Afghanistan has somewhat robust macroeconomic
fundamentals on which to build. But one must not
compromise such fundamentals by following a political
path that further alienates significant segments of the
Afghan society and continues to isolate the country.
The international community should do its part and
engage in a principled manner. Carefully channelling
frozen assets back to Afghanistan’s Central Bank
should be a key component of any strategy aimed at a
constructive engagement with the de facto authorities.
Helping Afghans to address the intricate political,
economic and humanitarian challenges they face is
no simple task, but the international community, and
especially States that have had or still have a stronger
involvement in the country`s more recent history, have
the political and moral obligation to do so.
Mrs. Baeriswyl (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2023/678) and thank the
speakers for their comments, recommendations and
efforts. I also refer to the stakeout with the States that
signed what we call the statement of shared commitments
on women and peace and security. Indeed, we must
explore all avenues and legal instruments — from
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women to the International
Criminal Court — in order to hold responsible those
who systematically violate international law.
While the report shows some macroeconomic
progress, it also highlights the unprecedented
humanitarian and social crises, accompanied by serious
human rights violations, as well as the lack of response
to the environmental disaster represented by climate
change. Today, as Council members have heard many
times, more than two thirds of the Afghan population
are in need of assistance. Women remain systematically
excluded from education and paid work, as well as
23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

from political, economic and social life in general.
That only exacerbates the situation of entire families.
The violation of women’s rights, in addition to being
a crime and affecting their mental and psychological
state, weighs heavily on the economic and humanitarian
prospects of the entire country.
The fact that humanitarian work carried out by
women is largely suspended, first and foremost, costs
human lives, but the exclusion of women also jeopardizes
humanitarian action as a whole, discourages the
necessary funding and encourages economic diversion.
There can be no doubt: for Afghanistan to recover, it
needs women who can determine their own future and
actively participate in shaping public and political life.
That starts at school, where girls acquire the
necessary skills. As Ms. Basij-Rasikh so aptly put it at
our meeting in June,
“The secret to a stable Afghanistan, a peaceful and
prosperous Afghanistan, is no secret at all; it is
educated girls.” (S/PV.9354, p. 5).
We recall resolution 2681 (2023), which calls upon
the Taliban to swiftly reverse its policies and practices.
Allow me also to make a more general comment.
As High Commissioner Volker Türk said, human
rights in Afghanistan are on the verge of collapse.
Switzerland supports the important work of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
in that area — and I would like to thank the Special
Representative — in particular the collection of data
across the country and the production of relevant
reports, so that one day justice will be served. It is also
important to develop long-term solutions. That requires
close collaboration with civil society organizations.
When it comes to long-term approaches, we cannot
forget the environmental crisis of climate change
in Afghanistan. Its cumulative effects are having a
devastating impact on people’s livelihoods, security
and the economy in Afghanistan and the region. Food
insecurity is exacerbated by rising temperatures,
changes in precipitation and the increased frequency
of extreme weather events. More people are forced
to move within and outside the country, which is a
potential source of tension. It is therefore important
to mitigate the adverse effects of climate change now
and to strengthen people’s resilience and adaptive
capacity, while adopting a gender-sensitive approach.
In Switzerland’s view, the Council should give further

S/PV.9423

consideration to that issue and support UNAMA’s
important efforts in that regard.
As the Secretary-General stated in his report,
the Taliban will achieve economic self-reliance only
if they succeed in establishing a relationship of trust
with the international community. For Switzerland,
that trust requires inclusive governance and, above all,
respect for the human rights of the Afghan people in all
their diversity.
We therefore will endeavour in the Council to
ensure the implementation of the adopted resolutions
and a more coherent and holistic strategy based on an
evaluation that we look forward to. However, it is also
important to be engaged on the ground and in the region
to provide tangible support to the Afghan population.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I would like to thank Special Representative
Roza Otunbayeva, UN-Women Executive Director
Ms. Bahous and Ms. Karima Bennoune for
their statements.
The situation in Afghanistan continues to
deteriorate. The Taliban continue their policy of
systematic oppression of Afghan women, who continue
to be deprived of their right to education, their freedom
of movement and their right to engage in the activity
of their choice. We will never accept that policy of
segregation. France is and will remain in support of
Afghan women and girls.
France is committed to ensuring that Afghan
women make their voices heard. That is why, with
several of its partners, France organized a ministerial
meeting during the General Assembly’s high-level
week in order to denounce the policy of systematic
discrimination imposed on Afghan women by the
Taliban. We will ensure that this campaign continues.
The security situation also remains very worrisome.
Terrorist groups such as Da’esh and Al-Qaida have found
refuge in Afghanistan. We are also closely monitoring
developments in drug cultivation and trafficking.
Those challenges cannot be considered in isolation.
Respect for the rights of Afghan women, in particular
their education and full participation in economic life, is
a prerequisite for the country’s economic development,
which would serve as the best bulwark against the
spread of radicalization and terrorism.

23-2781417/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

France remains committed to helping the Afghan
people meet all their humanitarian needs. France
continues to provide aid directly to the Afghan people,
based on the principle of “for women, by women”.
France has contributed more than €140 million since
2021 and will continue its humanitarian aid in the areas
of health, education and food security. This year, France
will make an additional contribution of €1.5 million
to the World Food Programme to prevent the risk of
famine for women and girls. I repeat that this aid must
be channelled to all those who need it, in accordance
with humanitarian principles and international law.
France remains committed to ensuring that the
demands of the international community and the
resolutions of the Council are respected. Resolution
2593 (2021) set five expectations in terms of the fight
against terrorism, humanitarian aid and respect for
human rights. The Taliban continue to trample on
those expectations and to violate the resolutions of the
Council, including resolution 2681 (2023), unanimously
adopted less than six months ago.

26/09/2023

and exports. Those positive developments should be
acknowledged and encouraged.
In the meantime, Afghanistan is still facing severe
challenges in areas such as its humanitarian situation,
terrorist threats, livelihoods and the protection of the
rights and interests of women and children. We expect
the country’s authorities to build political inclusivity
and govern with moderation, develop good-neighbourly
cooperation, protect the rights and interests of ethnic
minorities and women and children and make positive
efforts in the interests of its people.
At the same time, the international community
should sustain its attention and support to Afghanistan,
provide its people humanitarian assistance and help
with its economic development.
In that context, four issues warrant close attention.

Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to first thank Special Representative Otunbayeva
and Executive Director Bahous for their briefings. I
also listened carefully to the statement delivered by the
civil society representative.

First, there has been a significant reduction
in donor countries’ humanitarian assistance for
Afghanistan. The United Nations Development
Programme estimated that Afghanistan’s gross
domestic product shrank by 3.6 per cent last year,
largely due to a sharp drop in the humanitarian funding
it received. According to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2023/678), as many as two thirds of its population
will need humanitarian assistance next year, while the
United Nations Afghanistan humanitarian response
plan, as it stands now, is only 27 per cent funded. The
latest data from the World Food Programme indicates
that about 41 million Afghans are food insecure,
with more and more women and children living in
hunger. Those figures clearly demonstrate that cutting
back — by a big margin — humanitarian assistance
to Afghanistan for political or ideological reasons and
linking humanitarian assistance with other issues will
only stand in the way of Afghanistan’s stability and
development. Winter is coming. We call on traditional
developed country donors to prioritize the need for
survival of the Afghans, refrain from instrumentalizing
humanitarian assistance to exert pressure and not to let
the Afghans fall victim to political considerations.

Afghanistan is at a critical phase of peaceful
reconstruction. Over the past two years, its interim
Government has actively implemented measures to
stabilize the situation, developed the country’s economy
and improved people’s livelihoods. As a result, the
country’s security situation has been stable on the
whole, with a significantly lower incidence of violence
and a steady increase of tax revenues and imports

Secondly, I would like to touch upon Afghanistan’s
frozen assets overseas. In August 2021, the United
States illegally froze $7 billion of the Afghan Central
Bank’s assets. A year ago, the United States announced
the transfer of $3.5 billion out of the frozen assets to
the so-called “Afghan Fund”, set up in a foreign bank,
claiming that the Fund would be used to improve
livelihoods and stabilize the economy. However, two

France will also continue to support the mandate
of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human
rights in Afghanistan, Richard Bennett, who is doing
a remarkable job. We also support the process of
independent review of the situation in Afghanistan
by the United Nations, led by Special Coordinator
Feridun Sinirlioğlu.
Finally, we will continue to support the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and all the
United Nations agencies and their partners working
tirelessly on the ground for the benefit of the Afghan
people. We thank them all.

18/26

23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

years have passed and not one penny of the Fund has
been returned to the people of Afghanistan. According
to the Secretary-General’s latest report, the Fund has
accrued $128 million in interest. The Fund’s board held
three meetings to discuss — unbelievably — how to
pay for the Fund’s operations with the interest. This is
a new form of plundering. It is absurd beyond words.
The money belongs to the people of Afghanistan.
No matter what money laundering techniques are used,
it will not become the lawful earnings of others. We
once again urge the United States side to return the
assets immediately, in full and unconditionally, and not
to find more excuses to further delay the process.
Thirdly, I would like to speak about unilateral
coercive measures. Compared with the freezing of
assets, which is only the tip of the iceberg, unilateral
coercive measures are the real, massive iceberg below
the surface. Under the unilateral coercive measures, the
banking system of Afghanistan has collapsed. Cash flow
is nearly depleted, and the process of economic recovery
is stalled. There is a serious shortage of medicine
and medical devices, imported water-purification
equipment, construction materials, machine parts,
among other supplies. The day-to-day life of the Afghan
people has been severely impacted. At the same time,
the obstacles that unilateral coercive measures pose to
humanitarian assistance are still prominent. Although
resolution 2615 (2021), clearly states that the provision
of humanitarian assistance to Afghanistan does not
constitute a violation of the Council’s sanctions, many
humanitarian institutions still feel constrained when
delivering aid to Afghanistan out of fear of long-arm
jurisdiction. We once again call on the relevant country
to lift its unilateral sanctions against Afghanistan as
soon as possible.
Fourthly, we must address engagement with the
authority in Afghanistan. That the Afghan interim
Government is in power is a fait accompli. The
international community should adopt a long-term
view and engage with it in a practical manner. In
the past, in order to facilitate dialogue on peace and
stability in the country, the Security Council decided
to grant exemptions to the travel ban for some Taliban
personnel, which has yielded positive results. However,
some countries view dialogue and engagement
with Afghanistan as a reward and insist on ending
the exemption and using that as a tool to penalize
the Afghan authorities and exert pressure on them,
imposing restrictions on their dialogue and engagement

S/PV.9423

with the international community. Evidence shows
that closing the door of dialogue will only exacerbate
antagonism and division. The Security Council should
resume the package of exemption arrangements as soon
as possible and make it easier for Afghanistan to engage
with the international community. At the same time,
the sanctions mechanism established under resolution
1988 (2011) is no longer relevant in the light of the
current developments and should therefore be adjusted
or lifted expeditiously.
Since its establishment, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) has
carried out considerable work to maintain stability,
promote economic and social development, facilitate
the engagement of the Afghan authorities with the
international community and improve the country’s
humanitarian situation. China commends those efforts.
Resolution 2626 (2022) granted a broad mandate
to UNAMA and clearly defined its priorities. We hope
that UNAMA will act in line with that resolution and
prioritize the use of its resources to help alleviate the
humanitarian situation, while promoting economic and
social development, advocating a prompt unfreezing
of the country’s overseas assets and reporting to the
Security Council in a timely manner. Meanwhile,
UNAMA should continue to facilitate the international
community’s engagement and dialogue with the
Afghan authorities and play a constructive role in the
peaceful reconstruction of Afghanistan. With security
in place, UNAMA staff should conduct more fieldwork.
It should make timely adjustments concerning staff
vacancies, use its resources more efficiently, improve
its staffing structure and recruit more professional staff
from countries in the region.
We are pleased to note that Afghanistan’s
neighbours and the countries of the region have been
at the forefront of economic and trade cooperation and
improving connectivity with Afghanistan; connectivity
projects and economic and trade cooperation are
moving ahead swiftly. We hope that the international
community will support the efforts of countries in
the region; continue to leverage platforms such as
the coordination and cooperation mechanisms among
Afghanistan’s neighbours — the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group — and help
the country to unleash its development potential and
maintain security and stability.

23-2781419/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

Since 2021, China has provided 4 trillion renminbi
worth of food, medicine and vaccine supplies, among
other emergency supplies, as well as 1 billion renminbi
worth of humanitarian assistance. As a next step,
China will further deliver on its pledges and support
Afghanistan by providing humanitarian assistance
and development aid. China will make more tangible
contributions, within its capacity, in order to support
the Afghan people in overcoming their difficulties and
building a better future.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
Two years after the Taliban takeover, the overall
situation remains dire in every aspect and respect,
with the Taliban’s draconian restrictions on freedom
and liberties becoming worse, particularly for
Afghan women and girls. Under such circumstances,
the international community continues to struggle
to find a balance between providing desperately
needed aid to millions and engaging with the de facto
authorities but not rewarding them and their hard-line,
retrograde policies.
Despite the best efforts, as we heard, the
humanitarian response in Afghanistan simply
cannot keep pace with the country’s worsening
conditions. There is no better example to illustrate
the destructive and abusive approach of the Taliban
towards humanitarian assistance than the absurd
restrictions they have imposed on United Nations
Afghan female personnel, which constrains the work
of the Organization. Unfortunately and regrettably, the
Taliban have made a choice. Instead of engaging to find
long-term sustainable solutions, increase humanitarian
assistance, ensure and strengthen economic stability
and resume development aid, they prefer to impose their
medieval, retrograde, draconian rules, knowing what it
means for the country, even if it means leaving people
without food, plunging them into hunger and starvation.
We remain alarmed by reports of ongoing
extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests and detention,
and torture and ill-treatment of former Government
officials and members of the former Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces. Once again, the Taliban
are showing that they are unwilling to honour and uphold
the commitment made in their general amnesty and
their obligations under international human rights law.
Continuous accusations and detentions of journalists,
writers and critics of Taliban rule have further reduced
20/26

26/09/2023

the freedom of expression, shutting down those few
courageous voices of truth and reason still left in the
country. That is simply unacceptable.
The Taliban are trying to present themselves
as promoters of economic health and guarantors of
security. It would be wonderful were it not only a
façade. To date, there is no indication that the general
population is profiting from economic gains. We are still
witnessing massive poverty, suffering and destitution,
with close to two thirds of the population relying on
life-saving aid to survive. The continued presence and
activities of terrorist elements remain a serious concern.
Once a haven for terrorists, Afghanistan is turning into
fertile ground for radicalization, especially among the
betrayed youth.
I will conclude with a core issue that everyone
mentioned — the unacceptable situation of women
and girls in Afghanistan. The de facto authorities in
Afghanistan continue to violate every rule and principle
that form the foundation of the international human
rights system, as all our briefers and many colleagues
highlighted. The Taliban continue to betray the Afghan
people, who seek and deserve respect, dignity and
justice. They continue to slide backwards, while the
country and its people need the opposite. That is as
regrettable as it is intolerable.
We must continue to speak out firmly and strongly,
just as 11 members of the Council, signatories of the
Statement of Shared Commitments for the principles of
Women, Peace and Security, did in a joint statement
issued before today’s meeting. We cannot contemplate
unparalleled, despicable and unacceptable gender
discrimination policies. We need to call them by their
name: yes, it is gender apartheid. The word is strong,
but it is the right word. It reflects the horrible reality.
And we concur with Ms. Bennoune — we cannot only
repeat our statements and condemnation here and
elsewhere; we must do more.
It is our collective responsibility to explore
avenues for accountability and hold those responsible
for gender persecution to account. We must not let
those violations go unpunished. We must use all the
tools at our disposal to ensure that the perpetrators of
gender-based discrimination face the full weight of
justice for violations of international conventions such
as the Convention on the Political Rights of Women
and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

of Discrimination against Women — conventions to
which Afghanistan is a party.
We must not look away just because it is difficult.
And we must not be discouraged just because the
Taliban remain deaf and defiant. The Taliban want
recognition. They repeat it all the time. They must
earn it by changing their policies. While we wait for
the independent evaluation that is soon due, we will
continue to stand with the Afghan people and their
aspirations for equal rights and a future in prosperity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Afghanistan.
Mr. Faiq (Afghanistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s important discussion on
Afghanistan’s dire situation, and I commend your
leadership of the Security Council this month.
I am also thankful to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, the
Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Sima Sami
Bahous, and Ms. Karima Bennoune for their briefings.
They underscored the grim, dire and deeply concerning
situation in Afghanistan, which warrants urgent
attention and action to overcome the current crisis.
We appreciate the remarks of Security Council
members and the joint statement issued ahead of the
meeting by members of the Council, reaffirming their
commitments to continue supporting the fundamental
human rights of the people of Afghanistan, particularly
women and girls, as well as efforts to bring about real
peace in a stable, secure and united Afghanistan. We
also want to thank all Member States, donors, United
Nations entities, non-governmental organizations and
all other actors that provide vital humanitarian support
in perhaps what is the most difficult period in the
history of our nation.
Tragically, two years after the Taliban seized
control, the situation in Afghanistan has not improved.
It has only deteriorated across the humanitarian,
human rights, social, security and political spheres.
Economic and humanitarian crises have deepened,
97 per cent of the population are now living in poverty
and two thirds of them are struggling for basic survival.
Hunger has affected 15 million people, unemployment
has increased and migration continues despite the
grave risks. Under Taliban rule, social conditions in
Afghanistan continue to regress significantly. The

S/PV.9423

rights and freedoms of women and marginalized
communities have been severely curtailed. Women and
girls face strict limitations on their mobility, access
to education and participation in public life. Cultural
and artistic expression are being suppressed, stifling
Afghanistan’s rich cultural heritage. The people live in
constant fear of retribution for any perceived violations
of the Taliban’s strict interpretation of Islamic law.
Our hard-won rights and freedoms, particularly
for women and girls, are gravely threatened, with
reports of gender-based violence, forced marriages
and sexual abuse, all perpetrated with impunity.
Afghan women and girls are enduring gender apartheid
and being stripped of their fundamental rights and
economic opportunities, rendering them vulnerable.
The closures of girls’ schools and the restrictions on
women’s employment are not only obstacles to gender
equality but pose a serious challenge to Afghanistan’s
development and the future of the nation.
Since the onset of the crisis, and increasingly over
the past year, the people of Afghanistan have looked
to the international community to form the consensus
we need to help overcome the crisis in our country.
The holding of the United Nations meeting in Doha in
May, the appointment of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for Afghanistan and the recent highlevel meeting in support of women and girls last week
during the general debate of the General Assembly are
welcome developments that the people of Afghanistan
recognize and value. That said, the focus and measures
involved need to be sustained and strengthened as we
advance in order to overcome the crisis in Afghanistan.
The people of Afghanistan welcome the statement
endorsed by 13 Foreign Ministers that strongly
condemned the Taliban’s gender-based persecution and
called for an immediate halt to human rights violations.
It also emphasized the importance of an inclusive
political process involving all Afghans, including
women and ethnic and religious minorities. As we
have stressed time and again, that issue remains vital
to achieving a comprehensive settlement that leads to
the legitimate and inclusive governance that can ensure
national unity and political stability. And that should
be a priority for the international community in its
efforts concerning Afghanistan. We echo the call for
convening a special session of the General Assembly
to address gender apartheid in Afghanistan, which
was reiterated by the Afghan women representatives
during last week’s discussions. We also applaud the

23-2781421/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

statements and commitments in support of the people
of Afghanistan, including women and girls, and the
calls on the Taliban to respect the fundamental human
rights of the Afghan people and to espouse inclusivity
made by several speakers during the general debate,
statements that reflect a new degree of concern within
the region and beyond about the current state of affairs.
We must remember that a nation’s strength lies
in empowering all its citizens, regardless of gender.
However, the Taliban’s rigid ideology refuses to embrace
the benefits of modern science and technology. Its
focus has been rather on intensifying the establishment
of madrasas and religious schools, deliberately
radicalizing young Afghans and compromising their
future and that of our nation. Since the Taliban’s
takeover of Afghanistan, 15,000 madrasas have been
established and 100,000 madrasa teachers recruited
just recently. It is our duty to liberate Afghanistan from
the shackles of gender apartheid, radicalization and
extremism to enable our women, girls and young people
to contribute to our society’s growth and prosperity.
The Taliban’s grave human rights abuses, brutal
punishment and suppression of the media and civil
society have made crimes against humanity and
violations of international law commonplace. The
reports from the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Amnesty International and
the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights
in Afghanistan paint a grim picture. The UNAMA
report issued on 22 August documents more than
800 cases of extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests,
detentions, torture and enforced disappearances
involving individuals associated in one form or another
with the former Afghan Government and its security
forces. In a report released on 20 September, UNAMA
records more than 1,600 incidents of human rights
violations by the Taliban during arrests and detentions,
including acts of torture and other inhumane treatment
by the Taliban’s Ministry of the Interior and General
Directorate of Intelligence.
The ban on political parties has solidified the
Taliban’s autocratic power, extinguishing political
diversity and inclusive decision-making. That isolation
is fuelling turmoil and undermining the prospects for
peace. Despite two years of global engagement, the
Taliban have continued to obstinately reject demands,
justifying their actions with distorted religious and
cultural interpretations. Their exclusionary policies
rejecting democracy, human rights and the rule of law
22/26

26/09/2023

are exacerbating the crisis. Despite the claims that the
return of former officials through the Commission
for Return and Communication with Former Afghan
Officers and Political Figures is being encouraged,
credible reports suggest that members of the former
security forces who trusted the call and returned from
neighbouring countries have been killed. Even the
former leaders who chose to stay are now subject to
strict restrictions and house arrest.
The security situation in Taliban-controlled
Afghanistan is deeply concerning. The Taliban’s
connections to terrorist groups and their sheltering
of more than 20 such groups, including Al-Qaida
and Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, have transformed
Afghanistan into a hub of terrorism, endangering
Afghan lives. Their extremist ideology and history of
violence have created a pervasive atmosphere of fear and
insecurity, eroding trust in regional and international
security efforts. Afghan civilians have endured the
scourge of terrorism for too long. The Taliban, who have
been the primary source of instability and insecurity
in Afghanistan for the past two decades through their
targeting of innocent civilians and destruction of public
institutions and infrastructure, are now claiming credit
for ensuring security and stability in the country.
However, their promises of increased revenue collection
have not resulted in tangible improvements for ordinary
Afghans. Furthermore, transparency and accountability
in the allocation of budgets are still lacking. Similarly,
the Taliban’s assertions of counter-terrorism and
counter-narcotics efforts ring hollow, as their leaders
are deeply involved in narcotics production and
smuggling. While dissent within the Taliban focuses
on the distribution of power and resources, the Afghan
people continue to suffer under their despotic rule.
Despite those challenges, the people of Afghanistan
remain resolute, with diverse groups working tirelessly
to defend their rights and national values. Civil society,
women, young people and political movements have
mobilized to form a united national agenda. On
16 September, our Mission hosted a Zoom meeting
with 85 representatives of the Afghan diaspora,
independent Afghan political figures, human rights
and women’s rights activists and leaders of progressive
and democratic parties and associations, both inside
and outside Afghanistan. I would like to convey their
essential messages and demands.
First, they urge international partners and the
Council to maintain pressure on the Taliban, demanding
23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

the reversal of anti-women policies, including education
and work bans. They also call on the United Nations to
recognize and classify the plight of Afghan women and
girls as gender apartheid.
Second, they emphasize the importance of ongoing
humanitarian assistance to the people of Afghanistan,
subject to the rigorous monitoring and supervision
of aid delivery. That may involve strengthening
targeted humanitarian aid and supporting small-scale
projects aimed at saving livelihoods and developing
entrepreneurship, particularly for women, which
remain crucial. That includes serious consideration for
merit-based inclusivity and diversity in the employment
opportunities for locally hired staff of the United
Nations and other international organizations.
Third, they have called for robust support to ensure
the full, equal, and meaningful participation of Afghan
women and girls in social, economic and political
domains, including decision-making roles.
Fourth, they urgently seek the priority attention of
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees with respect to the protection and
resettlement of Afghan refugees who fled Taliban
persecution to neighbouring regions, especially women
and children facing detention and inhumane treatment.
Those refugees, including women’s rights defenders,
former officials and security personnel, are in jeopardy,
necessitating the swift provision of resettlement support.
Fifth, they support the imposition of sanctions on
Taliban leaders for violating women’s rights, and they
oppose normalizing engagement with them until they
respect the rights and will of the people of Afghanistan.
Sixth, dialogue with the Taliban alone has proven
futile. The international community must play a more
prominent role in helping Afghanistan achieve a
legitimate Government based on the people’s will.
Seventh and lastly, the need for a coherent and
united international approach is essential. It requires
inclusive dialogue and principled engagement, backed
by the international community and facilitated by
the United Nations, in order to establish a political
road map towards an inclusive and representative
governance system that is aligned with the will of the
people of Afghanistan.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that the situation in
Afghanistan calls for urgent and concerted efforts by
the international community. By prioritizing security,

S/PV.9423

human rights, legitimate and democratic governance
and regional cooperation, it is possible to forge a
path towards a more stable, inclusive and prosperous
Afghanistan. Through principled engagement and a
legitimate political structure that is aligned with the
people’s aspirations, we can help shape a better future
for the Afghan people and prevent the country from
once again becoming a breeding ground for extremism
and terrorism. It is crucial for the international
community to act swiftly and decisively in order to
prevent further suffering and to lay the foundations for
real and sustainable peace in Afghanistan.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
Albania for convening this meeting. I also thank
Ms. Otunbayeva and Ms. Bahous for their briefings,
and Ms. Bennoune for her viewpoints.
We also take note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Afghanistan (S/2023/678),
which highlights the ongoing and escalating
humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan in 2023. It
reveals that an alarming two thirds of the population,
approximately 29.2 million people, require urgent
assistance, marking a concerning increase from
28.3 million earlier in the year. Adding to the severity
of the situation, inadequate humanitarian funding
has exacerbated those unprecedented levels of need.
The humanitarian response plan, requiring a total of
$3.23 billion, remains severely underfunded, with
only 27 per cent of the necessary funds secured as of
12 September.
We firmly believe in the importance of impartial
and unconditional humanitarian aid. It is also crucial
to lift unilateral sanctions in order to support and
facilitate Afghanistan’s economic recovery. The
international community has a moral obligation to
fulfil its humanitarian commitments and pledges
by demonstrating solidarity and compassion for the
Afghan people. We emphasize the need for collective
cooperation to assist Afghanistan in rebuilding its
economy and creating conditions that are conducive to
the well-being of its citizens, while also facilitating the
safe return of Afghan refugees.
As a neighbouring country that is deeply impacted
by the influx of millions of Afghan refugees, we are
alarmed by the potential consequences of the current
situation for regional security and stability. The

23-2781423/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

persistent presence of Da’esh and Al-Qaida affiliates,
coupled with the scourge of drug trafficking, poses
a substantial threat to Afghanistan, its neighbouring
countries and the broader international community.
Tragically, on 13 August we witnessed yet another
devastating terrorist attack, targeting innocent civilians
and pilgrims visiting the Shah-e-Cheragh shrine in
Shiraz. That cowardly act resulted in the martyrdom of
two innocent Iranians and the injury of several others.
Da’esh claimed responsibility for the second such attack
in 10 months.
While preliminary indications suggest a reduction
in opium poppy cultivation in Afghanistan following
a de facto ban on narcotics cultivation imposed by the
authorities in April 2022, our concerns with regard to
drug trafficking persist.
Regrettably, there has been no progress by the
de facto authorities in achieving genuine ethnic and
political inclusion. Instead, they continue to impose
increasingly stringent restrictions on Afghan women
and girls, severely curtailing their access to education.
We reiterate our call for the establishment of an
inclusive Government, recognizing it as a crucial step
towards the safety and dignified return of millions of
Afghan refugees to their homeland.
We are also deeply concerned about the measures
taken by the de facto authorities that seek to undermine
the cultural, linguistic and historical ties of Afghans to
the Farsi language. Those measures not only threaten
Afghanistan’s stability and security but also violate
the basic human rights of all Afghan citizens. They
should be promptly reversed to protect the rights of the
Afghan people.
Iran remains steadfast in its commitment to close
collaboration with neighbouring countries, relevant
partners and the United Nations in order to promote
enduring peace, security and stability in Afghanistan.
Iran played a crucial role in the delivery of humanitarian
aid to Afghanistan by establishing a novel distribution
route that utilized the Chabahar port in Iran. For
example, a substantial shipment of 10,000 metric tons of
wheat successfully reached Herat on 4 July for further
distribution to people in need across Afghanistan.
Despite the Taliban’s failure to meet their commitments,
we must maintain our constructive engagement with
the de facto authorities. That approach is instrumental
in seeking the best possible outcomes for the people of
Afghanistan and the broader international community.
24/26

26/09/2023

Iran believes that collaboration among Afghanistan
and the countries of the region will resolve the
challenges the country faces. To that end, Iran actively
supports regional initiatives aimed at fostering dialogue
with Afghanistan, such as neighbouring ministerial
meetings and the Moscow format, the next round of
which is scheduled to be held in Kazan, Russia, on
29 September. We look forward to the outcome of that
meeting, which will focus on the key subject of inclusive
Government. We hope that the de facto authorities will
fulfil their international obligations, particularly in
upholding Afghanistan’s commitments under its border
treaties with its neighbours.
Finally, we reaffirm our support for ongoing United
Nations efforts, particularly those of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan, which play a pivotal
role in the pursuit of peace and stability in Afghanistan
and represent a matter of paramount importance given
the current circumstances.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I express my gratitude for
the convening of this meeting and extend my thanks
to Ms. Roza Otunbayeva, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, Ms. Sima
Sami Bahous, Executive Director of UN-Women, and
the civil society briefer for their insightful remarks
regarding the Afghanistan situation.
As Afghanistan’s contiguous neighbour and a
friend to its people, India has direct stakes in ensuring
the return of peace and stability to the country. In the
interests of using the time as efficiently as possible,
I would like to highlight just three key observations
regarding the situation in the country, drawing on
our historical and civilizational connections with the
Afghan people.
First, our collective approach has been articulated in
resolution 2593 (2021). In that regard, our common and
immediate priorities include providing humanitarian
assistance for the Afghan people, ensuring the formation
of an inclusive and representative Government
structure, combating terrorism and drug trafficking and
preserving the rights of women, children and minorities.
Secondly, given the distressing humanitarian
situation in the country, we need to prioritize
humanitarian assistance for the people. India has
delivered assistance to Afghanistan in the form of food
23-27814

26/09/2023

The situation in Afghanistan

grains, medicines, vaccines, disaster-relief aid, winter
clothing and education materials. We have continued
to award scholarships to Afghan students. India has
also partnered with the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime in its humanitarian efforts, and our
assistance will continue for the benefit of the people
of Afghanistan.
Thirdly, we have collaborated with several United
Nations agencies on the ground and will continue to do
so for the people’s welfare. Meanwhile, we note that
as requested by resolution 2679 (2023), the SecretaryGeneral will soon be providing his integrated
and independent assessment and forward-looking
recommendations to address the challenges facing
Afghanistan. We look forward to that report.
I would like to conclude by stating that we reaffirm
our unwavering commitment to keeping Afghanistan
close to our hearts. Going forward, India will continue
to raise its voice in support of the Afghan people.
We believe that the pursuit of peace and stability in
Afghanistan is an urgent and shared imperative that
demands our collective dedication.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and the Albanian delegation on
your successful presidency of the Security Council
this month, and I am grateful to you for convening this
important debate on the situation in Afghanistan. I
would like to thank Special Representative Otunbayeva
for her valuable insights, Ms. Karima Bennoune for
her briefing and the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2023/678) apprising the Council of the latest
developments in Afghanistan. We also listened to an
Afghan citizen who represents no one but himself.
As the Prime Minister of Pakistan stated in his
address to the General Assembly, peace in Afghanistan
is a strategic imperative for Pakistan (see A/78/PV.10).
Two years after the power transition in Kabul, Pakistan
is encouraged by some positive developments in
Afghanistan, while we remain concerned about some
other issues. On the positive side, the interim Afghan
Government has remained stable with no major internal
threats to its authority. The law-and-order situation
in Afghanistan has improved significantly. The
interim Government has taken action against Da’esh.
Corruption has declined drastically. The interim
Government has also been able to organize and manage

S/PV.9423

the economy, particularly trade and revenue collection,
despite external and internal constraints. Trade between
Afghanistan and its neighbours has increased, as has
transit trade through Afghanistan. However, serious
problems remain.
First, the humanitarian situation remains dire, as
the Secretary-General notes in his report. More than
two thirds of Afghanistan’s people are destitute and
require immediate humanitarian assistance. We hope
that the Secretary-General’s humanitarian appeal for
$4.2 billion will be fully funded.
Secondly, the restrictions on women and girls
remain in force, although some space has been created
through pragmatic avenues. Pakistan will continue to
make every effort to find a durable solution through
consultations on that important issue.
Thirdly, the Afghan economy remains hobbled,
largely because its banking system is not operational.
The massive smuggling of dollars from Pakistan
to Afghanistan has had a devastating impact on
Pakistan’s economy and currency. As a result of our
recent crackdown on the illegal money smuggling,
the Pakistani rupee has stabilized and strengthened
in the market. The Afghan banking system must be
revived. To that end, Afghanistan’s national assets held
abroad should be released and returned and financial
support for development projects restored. We also
look forward to the early implementation of the shovelready regional connectivity projects between Pakistan,
Afghanistan and Central Asia, as well as Pakistan,
China and Afghanistan.
Fourthly, while opium cultivation has been
reduced by 80 per cent, it will be essential to provide
replacement crops and subsidies to sustain farmers’
livelihoods. The growing prevalence of more profitable
methamphetamine must also end.
The presence of terrorist groups remains the major
security threat both within and from Afghanistan. There
has been some success in the interim Government’s
fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Da’esh. Pakistan will continue to offer its support and
cooperation to neutralize that terrorist group. The
immediate and major threat to Pakistan is posed by the
Tehrik-e Taliban Pakistan (TTP), which is responsible
for a series of cross-border terrorist attacks on our
military posts and on civilian targets within Pakistan.
We have lost hundreds of our brave soldiers and
civilians in those attacks over the past year alone. The

23-2781425/26

S/PV.9423

The situation in Afghanistan

border attacks have become more lethal owing to the
TTP terrorists’ acquisition and use of advanced military
equipment, apparently from the stocks left behind by
foreign forces. And the majority of the suicide bombers
in attacks claimed by the TTP within Pakistan have
turned out to be Afghans.
Pakistan’s Special Envoy has held further talks
in Kabul following the recent attack in Chitral. We
have been assured that action has been taken against
the TTP elements involved and that further steps will
be taken to prevent TTP terrorism against Pakistan.
We will welcome those steps once they are credibly
implemented. Until the TTP and other terrorist groups
are contained and neutralized, they will continue to
pose an ever-present threat to Afghanistan’s neighbours
and possibly the international community as well.
If the TTP is not actively contained, it could emerge
as an umbrella organization for the various terrorist
groups and factions in Afghanistan once Da’esh is
eliminated. That concern is heightened by the support
and sponsorship the TTP has received from some wellknown spoilers in our region.
There are more than 4 million Afghans in Pakistan.
Nearly 1.4 million Afghan refugees are registered, while
more than 2.2 million remain undocumented. Another
600,000 have made their way into Pakistan over the past
two years. In the wake of the terrorist attacks, Pakistan
has an obligation to ensure that none of the illegal
Afghans belong to terrorist groups. The international
community and the Afghan interim Government should
cooperate with Pakistan in securing the repatriation of
all illegal Afghans and, eventually, all Afghan refugees,
to their homes in Afghanistan.
Despite the challenges, Pakistan continues to
believe that engagement and cooperation constitute
the only feasible path towards promoting a peaceful
and prosperous Afghanistan. We are glad that the
Afghan interim Government is engaged with all of
Afghanistan’s neighbours and others with legitimate
stakes in Afghanistan. Pakistan looks forward to the
independent assessment on Afghanistan to be provided
by Ambassador Sinirlioğlu. We hope that the assessment
will enable the Security Council and the international
community to have a comprehensive, long-term and
realistic perspective on the situation in Afghanistan.
That would enable the Security Council to adopt a

26/26

26/09/2023

specific road map for normalization within and with
Afghanistan. It should respond to the concerns of the
international community — namely, respect for human
rights, particularly the rights of women and girls;
inclusive governance; and an end to terrorism. At the
same time, the international community should respond
to the priorities of the Afghan interim Government and
the priorities of the Afghan people. Those encompass
adequate financial support, an end to travel restrictions,
the termination of sanctions, political recognition and
United Nations representation. Pakistan will work in
all relevant formats to promote and implement such a
pathway to peace and prosperity for Afghanistan and
our entire region.
The President: The representative of Afghanistan
has asked for the floor to make a further statement. I
trust that it will be short and concise. I now give him
the floor.
Mr. Faiq (Afghanistan): I just wanted to respond
to the remarks made by the citizen and representative
of Pakistan, that I am representing Afghanistan in the
Council and voicing the anguish and the misery of the
people of Afghanistan, who have suffered as a result of
the interference of countries that today practice a double
standard. On the one hand, they present themselves
as victims of terrorism, and on the other hand, they
lobby, normalize and support another terrorist group
in Afghanistan.
The President: The representative of Pakistan has
asked for the floor to make a further statement. I trust
that, in this case as well, it will be short and concise. I
now give him the floor.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I do not wish to dignify
the statement just made by this gentleman, who claims
to represent Afghanistan. I think that his credentials
are questionable — he has no Government, he has no
representative, he has no credentials, and it is, I think,
an anomaly that the Security Council is obliged to
invite him to speak to the Council and to breed the kind
of hatred and disinformation that he presents before the
Council. As such, I believe that the General Assembly
should take notice of this situation; it is a huge political
anomaly that must be addressed.
The meeting rose at 12.35 p.m.

23-27814
