VII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Committee

resources by taking effective measures which guarantee
the rights of the peoples to own and dispose of those
natural resources and to establish and maintain control
of their future development;
7. W e/comes the positive attitude of the administering Power with respect to the receiving of United
Nations visiting missions in the Territories under its
administration and requests the Chairman of the Special Committee to continue his consultations with a vicw
to the dispatch of such missions, as appropriate;
8. Requests the administering Power to continue
to enlist the assistance of the specialized agencies and
other organizations within the United Nations system
in accelerating progress in all sectors of the national
life of those Territories;
9. Requests the Special Committee to continue to
seek the best ways and means for the implementation
of the Declaration with respect to Bermuda, Cayman
Islands, Montserrat and Turks and Caicos lslands, including the possible dispatch of visiting missions in
consultation with the administering Power, and to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the implementation of the present resolution.
85th plenary meeting
1 December 1976

31/53.

Question of Timor

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the inalienable right of all peoples to
self-determination and independence in accordance with
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Recalling its resolution 3485 (XXX) of 12 December 1975 and Security Council resolutions 384 (1975)
of 22 December 1975 and 389 ( 1976) of 22 April
1976,

Having examined the chapter of the report of the
Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to the Territory, 43
Bearing in mind that part of the Political Declaration adopted by the Fifth Conference of Heads of State
or Govemment of Non-Aligned Countries, held at
Colombo from 16 to 19 August 1976, relating to the
question of East Timor, 44
Having heard the statement of the representative of
Portugal, 45
Having also heard the statement of the representative
of the Frente Revolucionária de Timor Leste Independente,46
Mindful that all States should, in conformity with
Article 2, paragraph 4, of the Charter of the United
.Nations, refrain in their intemational relations from
the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity
43 /bid., chap. XII.
44A/31/197, annex I, para. 36.
45 Officia/ Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Fourth Committee, 13th meeting, paras. 1-5.
46 /bid., paras. 7-23.

125

or national independence of any State, or in any other
manncr inconsistent with thc purposes of the United
Nations,
Deeply concerned at the critica! situation resulting
from the military intervention of the armed forces of
Indonesia in East Timor,
l. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of
East Timor to self-determination and independence and
the legitimacy of their struggle to achieve that right;
2. Reaffirms its resolution 3485 (XXX) and Security Council resolutions 384 (1975) and 389 (1976);
3. Affirms the principles stated in that part of the
Political Declaration adopted by the Fifth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries relating to the question of East Timor;
4. Strongly deplores the persistent refusal of the
Government of Indonesia to comply with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 3485 (XXX) and
Security Council resolutions 384 (1975) and 389
(1976);
5. Rejects the claim that East Timor has been integrated into Indonesia, inasmuch as the people of the
Territory have not been able to exercise freely their
right to self-determination and independence;
6. Calls upan the Government of Indonesia to withdraw all its forces from the Territory;
7. Draws the attention of the Security Council, in
conformity with Article 11, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, to the critica! situation in the
Territory of East Timor and recommends that it should
take ali effectivc steps for the immediate implementation of its resolutions 384 (1975) and 389 (1976)
with a view to securing the full exercise by the people
of East Timor of their right to self-determination and
independence;
8. Requests the Special Committee on the Situation
with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples to keep the situation in the Territory under
active consideration, to follow the implementation of
the present resolution, to dispatch to the Territory as
soon as possible a visiting mission with a view to the
full and speedy implementation of the Declaration and
to report to the General Assembly at its thirty-second
session.
9. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session an itcm entitled "Question of
East Timor".
85 th plenary meeting
1 December 1976
31/54.

Question of the British Virgin Islands

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the British Virgin
Islands,
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and
all other resolutions and decisions of the United Nations relating to the Territory,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report
of thc Special Committec on the Situation with regard
