S/2011/351

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
13 June 2011
Original: English and French

Letter dated 10 June 2011 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
(UNOCI) and to Security Council resolution 1981 (2011), by which the Council
authorized the extension, up to 30 June 2011, of the temporary redeployment from
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) to UNOCI of three infantry
companies, one aviation unit comprising two military utility helicopters and three
armed helicopters with crews. In that same resolution, the Council requested me to
provide it with an updated analysis and recommendations on the inter-mission
cooperation arrangements by 15 June 2011.
In that regard, the Office of Military Affairs of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations conducted a military capability study in Côte d’Ivoire
from 21 to 29 April 2011 and in Liberia from 3 to 6 May 2011. In addition, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations-led interdepartmental assessment mission,
which visited Côte d’Ivoire from 1 to 14 May 2011, conducted a threat assessment
that is pertinent to the issue of the military utility and armed helicopters referred to
above.
The military capability study concluded that the two military utility helicopters
would be required in Liberia in light of the upcoming Liberian national referendum
and elections, which are scheduled to take place in August and the autumn of 2011,
respectively. The military utility helicopters will therefore be returned to UNMIL
before 30 June 2011. At the same time, given the extremely fragile security situation
in Côte d’Ivoire and the high risk of renewed conflict or violence that would require
adequate troop transportation capacity for the rapid deployment of the UNOCI force
reserve, the Secretariat is exploring various options to deploy a replacement unit to
UNOCI, at least for the duration of the legislative elections. This capacity would
enable the force both to operate and react in a timely manner to incidents throughout
the country and consolidate troop positions in the most sensitive areas, particularly
in Abidjan and the west.
I therefore intend to ask Member States for a replacement unit comprising two
military utility helicopters under the already authorized UNOCI troop
reinforcements and would be grateful if members of the Security Council could
support this approach. At the same time, taking into account the recent challenges in
securing military utility helicopters from Member States, it would be prudent to
keep open the option whereby, if the situation in Liberia permits, military utility

11-37318 (E) 160611 160611

*1137318*

S/2011/351

helicopters from UNMIL could again be redeployed to UNOCI to meet specific
needs, based on coordination between the two missions.
Both the military capability study and the threat assessment determined that
temporary deployment of the three armed helicopters to Côte d’Ivoire is still
required beyond 30 June 2011. As already conveyed in my letter to the Security
Council dated 11 May 2011, the security situation in the country, especially in
Abidjan and the west, remains extremely precarious. The Forces républicains de
Côte d’Ivoire, which assumed responsibility for restoring security, remain a motley
bunch and are wrestling with discipline-related challenges as well as command and
control issues. There is still a high risk of renewed armed conflict and continued
attacks against the civilian population, including with heavy weapons. These could
be initiated by pro-Gbagbo militias, mercenaries and ex-Forces de défense et de
sécurité (FDS) personnel routed from Abidjan, who are attempting to regroup in
pro-Gbagbo strongholds in the west; the Young Patriots who still have access to
arms; elements of the “invisible commandos” who have gone into hiding since their
leader was killed; as well as the many ex-Republican Guard soldiers who have
melted into the civilian population in Abidjan still carrying weapons. At the time of
the assessment mission, heavy weapons were still being used in the Yopougon
district of Abidjan. These heavy weapons, as well as those in the hands of the
unaccounted-for ex-Republican Guard soldiers, have yet to be retrieved. In addition,
cross-border movement of mercenaries, militias and arms has become a direct
security threat to both Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, and increased the risk of a
spillover of violence into Liberia.
The three armed helicopters provide high deterrent value and response
capacity against the many spoilers in Côte d’Ivoire, both to prevent their regrouping
in strongholds in western Côte d’Ivoire and to deter cross-border movement of
militias and mercenaries. The armed helicopters give UNOCI the mobility required
to ensure adequate monitoring of the borders and the surrounding areas, as well as a
timely response to anticipated cross-border incidents and other militia and
mercenary activities in the west. In that regard, I wish to take this opportunity to
thank Ukraine for its critical contribution.
UNMIL and UNOCI agreed that the three armed helicopters should be retained
in UNOCI for now, on the understanding that these assets will be tasked to operate
mainly in western Côte d’Ivoire, particularly along border areas for special
reconnaissance and deterrence operations. Specifically, the two missions have
agreed on a schedule under which the armed helicopters would conduct three special
border reconnaissance operations per week during the month of June, with new
schedules to be decided on for each subsequent month. The information gathered
from these operations will be used by both missions. In addition, the armed
helicopters will be used to provide deterrence from the air in support of specific
ground operations, where necessary, and in this regard, the helicopters would
undertake missions in support of specific UNMIL operations, if required. The
Secretariat has also requested UNOCI to explore the possibility of stationing the
armed helicopters at an airfield in western Côte d’Ivoire. UNOCI will provide
regular updates which could be shared with members of the Security Council if they
so request. During the last 10 days of the month of May, UNOCI conducted a total
of eight air reconnaissance missions along the Côte d’Ivoire-Liberia border, three of
which were undertaken by the armed helicopters and five by other mission air
assets. On 21 May, senior military officers from UNMIL visited UNOCI to follow

2

11-37318

S/2011/351

up on earlier videoconference discussions between the two missions and the
Secretariat on ways of further strengthening coordinated actions to address crossborder issues. Attached is a summary of the main actions agreed upon between the
two missions in this regard.
In light of the above, I recommend that the Security Council authorize a
further extension of the temporary redeployment of the three armed helicopters from
UNMIL to UNOCI on the understanding that the Secretariat will conduct a further
review at the end of September. Meanwhile, based on regular updates on the usage
of the three armed helicopters to be submitted by UNOCI, the Secretariat will keep
the matter under constant review.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

11-37318

3

S/2011/351

Annex
Summary of main actions agreed upon between UNMIL
and UNOCI
Mapping: Collaboration to develop an agreed map of the border and an agreed list
of all official and unofficial crossing sites.
Deployment: Information-sharing regarding dispositions along the border of
military, police and Government agencies. UNOCI redeployments of a company
each to Toulépleu and Tabou are ongoing. The area in between these two locations
will be covered by long-range patrols. One company will also be deployed on a
temporary basis to Tai, as soon as support arrangements permit. UNOCI considers
that deploying troops on a permanent basis in Tai is not feasible, given the logistical
constraints. UNMIL has deployed additional troops to the border area during the
conflict and prepared for the deployment of an additional team of military observers
to Fish Town, River Gee County. UNMIL civilian police, including formed police
units, and Liberian authorities, including the Liberian National Police, the
Emergency Response Unit and the Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization, have
strengthened their presence in the border area with a focus on hot spots and
important border crossings.
Patrols: UNMIL and UNOCI patrol programmes along the Côte d’Ivoire-Liberia
border should be shared and coordinated. Communications between patrols should
be strengthened with a view to enabling warnings to be passed, deconflicting patrol
activity, sharing patrol reports and establishing greater cooperation between units on
the ground. As extensive foot patrolling on both sides of the border is at times
hampered by access constraints, UNMIL covers remote and inaccessible areas
through air-inserted foot patrols. At present, UNOCI does not conduct air-inserted
foot patrols along the border but is exploring the possibility of doing so in the near
future.
Information: All operational information will be shared. Joint situational
assessments and information collection requirements are to be shared with the other
mission.
Meetings: The conduct of concurrent patrols by UNMIL and UNOCI along the
Liberian-Ivorian border (“Operation Mayo”) should be reinvigorated, and their
frequency and level of participation increased.
Liaison: Existing liaison arrangements to enhance information-sharing and
coordination will be strengthened. Further exchange of liaison officers between
units from battalion level and upwards must be considered, including for the
purpose of ensuring effective information-sharing arrangements between military
observers and field offices from both missions. Regular videoconferences will be
conducted between UNOCI and UNMIL.
Coordination of air assets: The MI-24s will conduct frequent patrols along the
border based on joint tasking that meets the requirements of both missions.
River patrols: The possibility of conducting patrols by boat on the Cavalla River
will be scoped, although the logistical challenge should not be underestimated.

4

11-37318

S/2011/351

In undertaking the above activities, UNMIL and UNOCI should be able to
strengthen cooperation arrangements with the respective national authorities, as
appropriate.

11-37318

5
