114

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

Considering that since its first session in 1949 the
International Law Commission has included the question of State responsibility in its agenda and that so far
it has received six reports from its first Special Rapporteur and four reports from its second Special
Rapporteur, in addition to various studies prepared
by the Secretariat of the United Nations,
Noting with appreciation ,that the United Nations
Office at Geneva organized, during the twenty-fourth
session of the International Law Commission, an eighth
session of the Seminar on International Law,

I
1. Takes note of the report of the International

Law Commission on the work of its twenty-fourth
session;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the International
Law Commission for the work it accomplished at that
session;
3. Recommends that the International Law Commission should:
(a) Continue its work on State responsibility, taking
into account the v,iews and considerations referred to
in General Assembiy resolutions 1765 (XVII) of
20 November 1962, 1902 (XVIII) of 18 November
1963 and 2400 (XXIII) of 11 December 1968, with
a view to the preparation of a first set of draft articles
on ,the topic;
( b) Proceed with further consideration on succession
of Sta,tes in respect of treaties in the light of comments
received from Member States on the present draft;
(c) Continue its work on succession of States in
respect of matters other than treaties, taking into
account the views and considerations referred to in
the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly;
(d) Continue its study of the most-favoured-nation
clause;
(e) Continue its consideration of the question of
treaties concluded between States and ,international
organizations or between two or more international
organizations;
4. Approves the programme and organization of
work of the twenty-fifth session of the International
Law Commission, to be held in 1973, including the
decision to place on the provisional agenda of that
session an item entitled "Review of the Commission's
long-term programme of work: 'Survey of International
Law' prepared by the Secretary-General";
5. Notes that the International Law Commission
intends, in the discussion of its long-term programme
of work, to decide upon the priority to be given to
the topic of the law of the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses, as requested by the General
Assembly in resolution 2780 (XXVI);
6. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, as
soon as possible, the study on the legal problems
relating to the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses requested by the General Assembly in
resolution 2669 (XXV) nf 8 December 1970, and to
present to the International Law Commission at its
twenty-fifth session an advance report on such study;
7. Expresses the wish that, in conjunction with
future sessions of the International Law Commission,
other seminars might be organized, which should continue to ensure the participation of an increasing number
of jurists of developing countries;

8. Requests the Secretary-General to forward to
the International Law Commission the records of the
discussion on the report of the Commission at the
twenty-seventh session of the General Assembly;

H
l. Invites States and also the specialized agencies
and interested intergovernmental organizations to submit, as soon as possible, their written comments and
observations on the draft articles prepared by the
International Law Commission concerning the prevention and punishment of crimes against diplomatic
agents and other internationally protected persons;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to circulate the
comments and observations referred to in paragraph 1
above in order to facilitate consideration of the draft
articles by the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth
session in the light of those comments and observations;
3. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-eighth session an item entitled "Draft convention on the prevention and punishment of crimes
against diplomatic agents and other internationally
protected persons" with a view to the final elaboration
of such a convention by the General Assembly;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session all
relevant documentation which may be required for the
discussion of that item.
2091st plenary meeting
28 Novemba 1972
2927 (XXVII). Twenty-fifth anniversary of the
International Law <:ommission

The General Assembly,
Recalling that on 21 November 1947 the General
Assembly adopted resolution 174 (11) by which it
established the International Law Commission and
approved the Statute of the Commission,
Noting that the twenty-fifth anniversary of the opening of the first session of the International Law Commission will be marked on 12 April 1974,
1. Commends the International Law Commission
and all the distinguished lawyers who have participated
in its work for the outstanding contribution made to
the codification and progressive development of international law;
2. Recommends that the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the International Law Commission should be observed in an appropriate manner by the General
Assembly during its twenty-eighth session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the
present resolution to the attention of international
organizations concerned with questions of international
law.
2 091 st plenary meeting
28 November 1972
2928 (XXVII). Report of tlw Unit.-,l Nations
<:ommission on International Trml.- Law

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law on the work
of its fifth session, 5
6 Ibid., Supplement No.

17 (A '8717).
