United Nations

A/54/PV.76

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fourth session

76th plenary meeting
Thursday, 9 December 1999, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Mbanefo
(Nigeria), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.20 p.m.
Reports of the Sixth Committee
The Acting President: This afternoon the General
Assembly will consider the reports of the Sixth Committee
on agenda items 152, 153 and 155 to 161.
Members will recall that the Assembly considered the
report of the Sixth Committee on agenda item 154 at its
55th plenary meeting on 17 November 1999.
I request the Rapporteur of the Sixth Committee,
Mr. Joško Klisović of Croatia, to introduce in one
intervention the reports of the Sixth Committee before the
General Assembly.
Mr. Klisović (Croatia): On 17 November 1999, I had
the honour to present to the General Assembly the report of
the Sixth Committee on agenda item 154, “United Nations
Decade of International Law”, which the General Assembly
adopted at the plenary meeting dedicated to the closing of
the Decade.
I have the honour today to present to the General
Assembly the reports of the Sixth Committee on the
remaining nine agenda items allocated to it, namely items
152, 153 and 155 to 161.

00-26107 (E)

Concerning agenda item 152, “Convention on
jurisdictional immunities of States and their property”, the
relevant report of the Sixth Committee is contained in
document A/54/607, and the draft resolution
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption
appears in paragraph 11 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would, inter alia, decide that the open-ended
working group of the Sixth Committee established by
resolution 53/98 of 8 December 1998 will continue its
work at the fifty-fifth session of the Assembly. It would
also invite States to submit their comments on the report
of the Working Group of the International Law
Commission and would urge those States that have not
already done so to submit their comments in accordance
with resolution 49/61 of 9 December 1994.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and I hope that the Assembly will do the
same.
I now draw the Assembly’s attention to agenda item
153, “United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation
of International Law”. The relevant report of the Sixth
Committee is contained in document A/54/608. The draft
resolution which the Sixth Committee recommends to the
General Assembly for adoption is reproduced in
paragraph 8 of the report.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original speeches only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178. Corrections will
be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would, inter alia, approve the guidelines and
recommendations contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, which provide for the award of a number of
international law fellowships and travel grants, both in 2000
and in 2001.
The General Assembly would further request the
Secretary-General to continue to provide the necessary
resources to the budget for the Programme of Assistance
for the next and future bienniums. Additionally, the General
Assembly would decide to appoint 25 Member States as
members of the Advisory Committee on the Programme of
Assistance, for a period of four years beginning on 1
January 2000.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
under item 153 without a vote, and I hope that the
Assembly will be in a position to do the same.
I now turn to agenda item 155, “Report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-first
session”. The relevant report of the Sixth Committee is
contained in document A/54/610, and the draft resolutions
recommended to the General Assembly for adoption are to
be found in paragraph 11.
By draft resolution I, entitled “Report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-first
session”, the General Assembly would decide, without
prejudice to any future decision, that the next session of the
Commission will be held at the United Nations Office at
Geneva from 1 May to 9 June and from 10 July to 18
August 2000. It would recommend that the International
Law Commission continue its work on the topics in its
current programme.
The draft resolution would also reiterate its invitation
to Governments to submit comments and observations on
the draft articles on the prevention of transboundary
damage from hazardous activities under the topic of
international liability for injurious consequences arising out
of acts not prohibited by international law, and on national
legislation, decisions of domestic courts and State practice
relevant to diplomatic protection. It would also invite
Governments to respond to the questionnaire on unilateral
acts of States circulated by the Secretariat.
The draft resolution would furthermore take note of
paragraph 608 of the report of the Commission with regard
to the procedure to be followed with respect to the topic
“International liability for injurious consequences arising

2

76th plenary meeting
9 December 1999
out of acts not prohibited by international law” and would
request the Commission to resume consideration of the
liability aspects of the topic as soon as the second reading
of the draft articles on prevention is finalized. It would
also take note of the consideration by the Commission of
its long-term programme of work and would encourage
the Commission to proceed with the selection of new
topics and to present possible outlines for new topics in
accordance with the wishes and preoccupations of States.
Operative paragraph 10, regarding the split session,
was adopted by a vote of 111 in favour and 1 against,
with 4 abstentions. The draft resolution as a whole was
adopted without a vote. It is hoped that the Assembly,
too, will adopt this resolution without a vote.
By draft resolution II, entitled “Nationality of natural
persons in relation to the succession of States”, the
General Assembly would express its appreciation to the
International Law Commission for its valuable work on
the topic and to the Special Rapporteur and the Chairman
of the Working Group for their contribution to that work.
It would also decide to include the item in the provisional
agenda of its fifty-fifth session, with a view to the
consideration of the draft articles and their adoption as a
declaration at that session. It would furthermore invite
Governments to submit subsequently comments and
observations on the question of a convention on
nationality of natural persons in relation to the succession
of States, with a view to the General Assembly
considering the elaboration of such a convention at a
future session.
It is hoped that the General Assembly, like the Sixth
Committee, will adopt the draft resolution without a vote.
I now turn to agenda item 156, entitled “Report of
the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its thirty-second session”. The Sixth
Committee’s report on this item is contained in document
A/54/611, and the draft resolution recommended for
adoption is found in paragraph 8 thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would commend the Commission for the
progress made in its work and reaffirm the mandate of
the Commission to coordinate legal activities in this field.
It would also reaffirm the importance of the work of the
Commission concerned with training and technical
assistance and would stress the importance of bringing
into effect the conventions emanating from the work of
the Commission.

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. The Assembly may wish to do so, too.
Let me now turn to agenda item 157, entitled “Report
of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”. The
report of the Sixth Committee is in document A/53/612,
and the draft resolution recommended is in paragraph 8
thereof.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the Assembly
would, inter alia, request the host country to continue to
take all measures necessary to prevent any interference with
the functioning of missions and express its appreciation for
the efforts made by the host country. The Assembly would
request the host country to consider removing the travel
controls previously imposed on staff of certain missions and
staff members of the Secretariat of certain nationalities. It
would also request the host country to continue to take
steps to resolve the problem relating to the parking of
diplomatic vehicles.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. It is hoped that the Assembly will be in a
position to do likewise.
I now turn to the report of the Sixth Committee
presented under agenda item 158, entitled “Establishment
of the International Criminal Court”. The report is
contained in document A/54/613, and the draft resolution
recommended is in paragraph 8.
Under the terms of the draft resolution, the General
Assembly would call upon all States to consider signing
and ratifying the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court. The Assembly would also request the SecretaryGeneral to convene the Preparatory Commission, in
accordance with resolution F adopted by the Rome
Conference, from 13 to 31 March, 12 to 30 June and 27
November to 8 December 2000, to carry out the mandate
of that resolution. The Assembly would further request the
Secretary-General to invite, as observers to the Preparatory
Commission, representatives of organizations and other
entities that have received a standing invitation from the
General Assembly, pursuant to its relevant resolutions, as
well as representatives of interested regional
intergovernmental organizations and other interested
international bodies. In addition, the Assembly would note
that non-governmental organizations may participate in the
work of the Preparatory Commission by attending its
plenary and its other open meetings, in accordance with the
rules of procedure of the Commission.

76th plenary meeting
9 December 1999
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote, and it is hoped that the Assembly will be
in a position to do the same.
I now invite the Assembly’s attention to agenda item
159, entitled “Report of the Special Committee on the
Charter of the United Nations and on the Strengthening of
the Role of the Organization”. The report is contained in
document A/54/614, and the three draft resolutions which
the Sixth Committee recommends for adoption are
reproduced in paragraph 15 thereof.
By draft resolution I, entitled “Report of the Special
Committee on the Charter of the United Nations and on
the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization”, the
General Assembly would, inter alia, request the Special
Committee to continue its consideration of all proposals
concerning the question of the maintenance of
international peace and security in all its aspects in order
to strengthen the role of the United Nations. It would also
request the Special Committee to continue to consider, on
a priority basis, the question of the implementation of the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations related to
assistance to third States affected by the application of
sanctions imposed under Chapter VII of the Charter. The
Assembly would further request the Special Committee to
continue its work on the question of the peaceful
settlement of disputes between States, to continue to
consider proposals concerning the Trusteeship Council
and to continue to consider, on a priority basis, ways and
means to improve its working methods and enhance its
efficiency. It would also commend the Secretary-General
for his continued efforts to reduce the backlog in the
publication of the Repertory of Practice of United Nations
Organs and endorse his efforts to eliminate the backlog
in the publication of the Repertoire of the Practice of the
Security Council.
By draft resolution II, entitled “Implementation of
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations related
to assistance to third States affected by the application of
sanctions”, the General Assembly would, inter alia, renew
its invitation to the Security Council to consider the
establishment of further mechanisms or procedures for
consultations as early as possible under Article 50 of the
Charter with third States affected by the application of
sanctions under Chapter VII. It would welcome the report
of the Secretary-General containing a summary of the
deliberations and main findings of the ad hoc expert
group meeting on developing a methodology for assessing
the consequences incurred by third States as a result of
preventive or enforcement measures, and would request

3

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
the Secretary-General to present to the Assembly his views
on the deliberations and main findings, including the
recommendations, of the ad hoc expert group. The
Assembly would further decide to transmit the report of the
Secretary-General to the Economic and Social Council at its
substantive session in 2000.
By draft resolution III, entitled “Strengthening of the
International Court of Justice”, the General Assembly
would, inter alia, express its appreciation to the
International Court of Justice for the measures adopted to
operate an increased workload with maximum efficiency,
invite the Court to keep its working methods under review,
and invite States that appear before the Court to consider
favourably the guidance offered by the Court in the annex
to the report of the Secretary-General containing the
comments and observations of the Court.
The Sixth Committee adopted these three draft
resolutions without a vote. The Assembly may wish to do
the same.
I turn now to agenda item 160, entitled “Measures to
eliminate international terrorism”. The report of the Sixth
Committee is contained in document A/54/615. The two
draft resolutions recommended to the General Assembly for
adoption are reproduced in paragraph 13 of the report.
Under the terms of draft resolution I, entitled
“International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism”, the General Assembly would
adopt the said Convention. It would also request the
Secretary-General to open the Convention for signature at
United Nations Headquarters in New York and would urge
all States to sign and ratify, accept, approve or accede to
the Convention.
By draft resolution II, entitled “Measures to eliminate
international terrorism”, the Assembly would strongly
condemn all acts, methods and practices of terrorism as
criminal and unjustifiable, wherever and by whomsoever
they are committed. Furthermore, the Assembly would
decide that the Ad Hoc Committee established by General
Assembly resolution 51/210 of 17 December 1996 would
continue to elaborate a draft international convention for the
suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism with a view to
completing that instrument. The Ad Hoc Committee would
also address means of further developing a comprehensive
legal framework of conventions dealing with international
terrorism; this would include considering the elaboration of
a comprehensive convention on international terrorism. The
Ad Hoc Committee would further address the question of

4

76th plenary meeting
9 December 1999
convening a high-level conference under the auspices of
the United Nations to formulate a joint organized
response of the international community to terrorism.
The Assembly would decide also that the Ad Hoc
Committee would meet from 14 to 18 February 2000,
devoting appropriate time to the consideration of the
outstanding issues relating to the elaboration of a draft
international convention for the suppression of acts of
nuclear terrorism, and that it would address the question
of convening a high-level conference. The Assembly
would also decide to continue the work within a working
group of the Sixth Committee, from 25 September to 8
October 2000, including beginning consideration with a
view to the elaboration of a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism within a comprehensive legal
framework of conventions dealing with international
terrorism. The Assembly would further decide that the Ad
Hoc Committee would be convened in 2001 to continue
its work.
The Sixth Committee adopted that draft resolution
by a vote of 116 in favour to none against, with 3
abstentions.
I turn finally to the report of the Sixth Committee on
agenda item 161, entitled “Review of the Statute of the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal”. That report is
contained in document A/54/616, and the draft decision
recommended to the General Assembly is set out in
paragraph 10 of that report. By the terms of the draft
decision, the General Assembly, desiring to review the
provisions of the statute, taking note of the proposals
made by the delegations of France, Ireland and the United
Kingdom, and mindful of the comments made on them by
States, would decide to include this item in the
provisional agenda of its fifty-fifth session.
The draft decision was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. It is hoped the Assembly too
will adopt the draft decision.
That concludes my introduction of the reports of the
Sixth Committee. On behalf of the Committee, I wish to
express our gratitude to the President of the General
Assembly for the guidance and assistance he accorded to
the Sixth Committee throughout its work during this
session. I also wish to thank the Chairman of the Sixth
Committee, Mr. Phakiso Mochochoko, as well as the
other members of the Bureau — His Excellency
Ambassador Andrés Franco, Ms. Victoria Hallum and

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Mr. Hiroshi Kawamura — for the valuable advice, support
and friendship they gave me.
Finally, I wish also to express my gratitude to the
Secretary of the Sixth Committee, Mr. Václav Mikulka, and
to the other members of the Secretariat staff — in particular
Ms. Sachiko Kuwabara-Yamamoto and Mr. Manuel RamaMontaldo — for the invaluable assistance they accorded me
throughout the session and in the preparation of the various
reports of the Sixth Committee.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the
General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the
Sixth Committee that are before it today.

76th plenary meeting
9 December 1999
the International Law Commission on the work of its
fifty-first session”, will be taken up as the last item this
afternoon to permit time for the issuance of the report of
the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of draft resolution I under this item.
Agenda item 152
Convention on jurisdictional immunities of States and
their property
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/54/607)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.

It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore be
limited to explanations of vote or position.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Sixth Committee have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records. May I remind members that under
paragraph 7 of decision 34/401 the Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered in
a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting, unless that delegation’s vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.”
May I also remind delegations that, also in accordance
with General Assembly decision 34/401, explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Sixth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Committee, unless the Secretariat is
notified otherwise in advance. This means that where a vote
was taken, we will do the same. Also, I should hope that
we may proceed to adopt without a vote those
recommendations that were adopted without a vote in the
Sixth Committee.
I should like to inform members that the report of the
Sixth Committee on agenda item 155, entitled “Report of

The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/101).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 152?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 153
United Nations Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider
Appreciation of International Law
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/54/608)
The Acting President: The Assembly will next
consider the report of the Sixth Committee on agenda
item 153.
I call on the representative of the Solomon Islands
for an explanation of vote or position.
Mr. Fruchtbaum (Solomon Islands): Solomon
Islands will join the consensus on this draft resolution.
Nevertheless, we sought a programme designed to reach
as many people as possible through electronic and print
media, schools and adult education. Unfortunately, the
funding available is very limited, and the programme is
set through the year 2001. My delegation believes that the

5

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
funding available to the programme will always be very
limited as long as its objectives are very limited. While the
provision of some international law fellowships and travel
grants and assistance to the international law seminars and
funds for several law courses are indeed commendable and
welcome, it is pitifully little in the face of what needs to be
done. If the Member States are truly interested in achieving
the widest appreciation of international law, an undertaking
my delegation believes is vital for the future of humankind,
the United Nations knows how to mobilize its resources and
how to generate more.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 54/102).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 153?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 156
Report of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law on the work of its thirtysecond session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/54/611)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

76th plenary meeting
9 December 1999
Agenda item 157 (continued)
Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/54/612)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/104).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 157?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 158
Establishment of the International Criminal Court
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/54/613)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 8 of its report.
The draft resolution was adopted by the Sixth
Committee without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/105).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 158?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 54/103).
It was so decided.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 156?
It was so decided.

6

Agenda item 159
Report of the Special Committee on the Charter of the
United Nations and on the Strengthening of the Role
of the Organization

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/54/614)

76th plenary meeting
9 December 1999
Agenda item 160

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the three draft resolutions recommended by
the Sixth Committee in paragraph 15 of its report.

Measures to eliminate international terrorism

We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Report of
the Special Committee on the Charter of the United Nations
and on the Strengthening of the Role of the Organization”.

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Cuba, who wishes to speak in
explanation of position before action is taken.

The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?

Ms. Álvarez Núñez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): The
Cuban delegation will support draft resolution II in
document A/54/615 in order to reaffirm once again the
role of the General Assembly, as the truly universal organ
of this Organization, in the adoption of measures to deal
with acts of international terrorism.

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/106).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Implementation of the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations related to assistance to third States affected
by the application of sanctions”.
The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/107).
The Acting President: Draft resolution III is entitled
“Strengthening of the International Court of Justice”.
The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution III
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 54/108).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration
of agenda item 159?
It was so decided.

Report of the Sixth Committee (A/54/615)

As always, Cuba condemns all acts, methods and
practices of international terrorism in all their forms and
manifestations, wherever and by whomever they are
committed. This includes terrorism encouraged, financed
or tolerated by States themselves. Likewise, Cuba
supports all efforts of the United Nations system in the
struggle against acts of terrorism. This includes support
for the holding of an international conference under the
auspices of this Organization in the search for an
international legal framework and for cooperation to deal
with terrorist activities.
Nonetheless, international terrorism is seldom
thoroughly considered, either from the standpoint of its
causes or from that of its deepest and most alarming
interconnections within societies. In this respect, we
believe it necessary to define terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations and to establish the necessary
distinction between acts of terrorism and the right of
peoples to struggle for their self-determination and against
domination or foreign occupation.
The Cuban delegation, in supporting draft
resolution II in document A/54/615, reaffirms once again
the relevance and validity of all the resolutions adopted
by this Assembly on the subject of international terrorism.
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Iraq, to speak on a point of order.
Mr. Al-Kadhe (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation is taking the floor regarding the draft
resolution on measures to eliminate international terrorism
because we have several comments on the draft

7

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
international convention for the suppression of the financing
of terrorism.
First and foremost, the draft convention does not
contain a definition of terrorism and how it is financed, nor
does it contain the question of State-sponsored terrorism.
This essentially opens the way for abuses. Nonetheless,
because of Iraq’s firm opposition to terrorism, a position
based on international law and the Charter of the United
Nations, Iraq will be associating itself with the consensus
on this draft resolution.
The Government of the Republic of Iraq has
reservations regarding article 11, paragraph 5, of the draft
international convention for the suppression of the financing
of terrorism, because many States are bound by regional
agreements, established on the basis of specific regional
needs, regarding the extradition of criminals.
I would like Iraq’s statement and reservations to be
reflected in the records of this meeting.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 13 of its report.
The General Assembly will first turn to draft
resolution I, entitled “International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism”.
The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/109).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is entitled
“Measures to eliminate international terrorism”. A recorded
vote has been requested.

76th plenary meeting
9 December 1999
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji,
Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria,
Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic
of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Tajikistan, Thailand, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Zambia
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Lebanon, Syrian Arab Republic
Draft resolution II was adopted by 149 votes to
none, with 2 abstentions (resolution 54/110).
[Subsequently the delegation of the Philippines
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,

8

The Acting President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to explain their votes or
positions.
Mr. Tarabrin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation welcomes the adoption
of the International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism and considers it an important
contribution to the strengthening of the international legal
foundation for the struggle against terrorism.

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
We are somewhat concerned, however, by the fact that
the wording of the Convention may enshrine the
opportunity for refusal, in certain specific circumstances, to
extradite or to afford mutual legal assistance for some
offences it covers. The Russian Federation expressed a
similar concern at the adoption in 1997 of the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings, a
concern which it confirmed in a statement made at the
signing of that instrument.
We should like once again to inform the General
Assembly of our principled position. The Russian
Federation’s view is based on the need to apply the
provisions of article 15 so as to ensure the impossibility of
evading responsibility for offences that are covered by the
Convention, without prejudice to the effectiveness of
international cooperation on extradition and legal assistance.
Mr. Diab (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation
fully and sincerely shares the general feeling of delegations
that today’s adoption of the International Convention for the
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism in resolution
54/109 is a very important event and a significant
achievement. The delegation of Lebanon joined in the
consensus on the resolution because we believe that the
international community must be encouraged in this effort
and in the affirmation of our solidarity with it, in the hope
of eliminating terrorism in all its forms. My country’s
delegation wishes, however, to express the following
reservations concerning some of the provisions of the
International Convention for the Suppression of the
Financing of Terrorism.
First, we have reservations about the fact that the
Convention does not define terrorism, which opens the door
to different interpretations in accordance with States’
political purposes and desires. That could have a pernicious
effect on the cooperation required under the Convention.

76th plenary meeting
9 December 1999
situation of armed conflict would suggest the potential for
varying political interpretations when no terrorist act has
taken place, especially given the differences between
various legal systems.
Fourthly, my delegation also wishes to express its
reservations on paragraphs 1 and 2 of article 1; articles 5
and 8; paragraph 2 of article 12; and articles 13 and 18,
the wording of which is inconsistent with the laws of
banking secrecy in Lebanon.
In conclusion, Lebanon emphasizes that it will work
with the international community, in the framework of its
existing national rules, to combat terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 160.
Agenda item 161
Review of the Statute of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/54/616)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on the draft decision recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 10 of its report.
The Sixth Committee adopted the draft decision,
entitled “Review of the Statute of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal”, without a vote.
May I consider that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
The draft decision was adopted.

Secondly, we have reservations about the fact that
there are no detailed rules established to guarantee the
safety of third parties, especially under paragraph 1 of
article 2 of the Convention.
Thirdly, we have reservations concerning paragraph 1
(b) of article 2, which includes offences to be covered
under the Convention that are beyond the scope of
terroristic offences as defined in one of the treaties listed in
the annex. The determination of a type of action, or the
context in which it may take place, and the use of that
determination to define terrorism against a Government or
individuals not taking an active part in the hostilities in a

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 161?
It was so decided.

9

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session

76th plenary meeting
9 December 1999

Agenda item 155

resolution I without a vote. May I consider that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

Report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-first session
Report of the Sixth Committee (A/54/610)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/658)

Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/111).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution II, entitled “Nationality of
natural persons in relation to the succession of States”.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolutions I and II recommended by the
Sixth Committee in paragraph 11 of its report.

The Sixth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?

Draft resolution I is entitled “Report of the
International Law Commission on the work of its fifty-first
session”. The report of the Fifth Committee on the
programme budget implications of draft resolution I is
contained in document A/54/658.

Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/112).

I have been informed that no separate vote has been
requested on operative paragraph 10 of draft resolution I.
The Assembly will therefore take a decision on draft
resolution I. The Sixth Committee adopted draft

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda
item 155?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the Sixth
Committee before it.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

10
