A/RES/57/59

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
30 December 2002

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 66 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the First Committee (A/57/510)]

57/59.

Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: the need for a new
agenda

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/77 Y of 4 December 1998, 54/54 G of 1 December
1999 and 55/33 C of 20 November 2000,
Convinced that the existence of nuclear weapons is a threat to the survival of
humanity,
Declaring that the participation of the international community as a whole is
central to the maintenance and enhancement of international peace and stability, and
that international security is a collective concern requiring collective engagement,
Declaring also that internationally negotiated treaties in the field of
disarmament have made a fundamental contribution to international peace and
security, and that unilateral and bilateral nuclear disarmament measures complement
the treaty-based multilateral approach towards nuclear disarmament,
Noting the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the
Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, issued at The Hague on 8 July
1996, 1
Declaring that any presumption of the indefinite possession of nuclear
weapons by the nuclear-weapon States is incompatible with the integrity and
sustainability of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and with the broader goal of
the maintenance of international peace and security,
Declaring also that it is essential that the fundamental principles of
transparency, verification and irreversibility should apply to all nuclear disarmament
measures,
Convinced that the further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons
constitutes an integral part of the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament process,

_______________
1

A/51/218, annex; see also Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion, I.C.J.
Reports 1996, p. 226.

02 54181

A/RES/57/59

Declaring that each article of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 2 is binding on the respective States parties at all times and in all
circumstances and that it is imperative that all States parties be held fully
accountable with respect to the strict compliance with their obligations under the
Treaty, and that the undertakings therein on nuclear disarmament have been given
and that their implementation remains the imperative,
Expressing its deep concern that, to date, there have been few advances in the
implementation of the thirteen steps agreed to at the 2000 Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 3
Stressing the importance of regular reporting in promoting confidence in the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Expressing its deep concern at the continued failure of the Conference on
Disarmament to deal with nuclear disarmament and to resume negotiations on a
non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable treaty
banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices,
Expressing grave concern that the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 4
has not yet entered into force,
Expressing deep concern that the total number of nuclear weapons deployed
and stockpiled still amounts to thousands, and at the continuing possibility that
nuclear weapons could be used,
Acknowledging that reductions in the numbers of deployed strategic nuclear
warheads envisaged by the Treaty on Strategic Offensive Reductions (“the Moscow
Treaty”) 5 represent a positive step in the process of nuclear de-escalation between
the United States of America and the Russian Federation, while stressing that
reductions in deployments and in operational status cannot substitute for irreversible
cuts in, and the total elimination of, nuclear weapons,
Noting that, despite these bilateral achievements, there is no sign of efforts
involving all of the five nuclear-weapon States in the process leading to the total
elimination of nuclear weapons,
Expressing its deep concern that emerging approaches to the broader role of
nuclear weapons as part of security strategies could lead to the development of new
types, and rationalizations for the use, of nuclear weapons,
Expressing concern that the development of missile defences could impact
negatively on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and lead to a new arms
race on earth and in outer space,
Stressing that no steps should be taken which would lead to the weaponization
of outer space,

_______________
2

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 729, No. 10485.
See 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
Final Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth
to twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15.
4
See resolution 50/245.
5
See CD/1674.
3

2

A/RES/57/59

Expressing its deep concern at the continued retention of the nuclear-weapons
option by those three States that have not yet acceded to the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons and operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities, in
particular given the effects of regional volatility on international security, and in this
context, the continued regional tensions and deteriorating security situation in South
Asia and the Middle East,
Welcoming Cuba’s accession to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons 2 and its ratification of the Treaty of Tlatelolco,6
Welcoming also the conclusion of negotiations among the Central Asian States
on a treaty on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in that region, and
underlining the importance of its entry into force as soon as possible,
Welcoming further the progress in the further development of nuclear-weaponfree zones in some regions and, in particular, the consolidation of that in the
southern hemisphere and adjacent areas,
Recalling the United Nations Millennium Declaration, 7 in which the heads of
State and Government resolved to strive for the elimination of weapons of mass
destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and to keep all options open for
achieving this aim, including the possibility of convening an international
conference to identify ways of eliminating nuclear dangers,
Taking into consideration the unequivocal undertaking by the nuclear-weapon
States, in the Final Document of the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to accomplish the total
elimination of their nuclear arsenals leading to nuclear disarmament, to which all
the States parties to the Treaty are committed under article VI of the Treaty,8
1.
Reaffirms that any possibility that nuclear weapons could be used
represents a continued risk for humanity;
2.
Calls upon all States to refrain from any action that could lead to a new
nuclear arms race or that could impact negatively on nuclear disarmament and nonproliferation;
3.
Also calls upon all States to observe international treaties in the field of
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation and to duly fulfil all obligations flowing
from those treaties;
4.
Calls upon all States parties to pursue, with determination and with
continued vigour, the full and effective implementation of the substantial
agreements reached at the 2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the outcome of which provides the
requisite blueprint to achieve nuclear disarmament;
5.
Calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to respect fully their existing
commitments with regard to security assurances, pending the conclusion of
multilaterally negotiated legally binding security assurances to all non-nuclearweapon States parties, and agrees to prioritize this issue with a view to making
_______________
6

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 634, No. 9068.
See resolution 55/2.
8
2000 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, Final
Document, vol. I (NPT/CONF.2000/28 (Parts I and II)), part I, section entitled “Article VI and eighth to
twelfth preambular paragraphs”, para. 15:6.
7

3

A/RES/57/59

recommendations to the 2005 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons;
6.
Also calls upon the nuclear-weapon States to increase their transparency
and accountability with regard to their nuclear weapons arsenals and their
implementation of disarmament measures;
7.
Reaffirms the necessity for the Preparatory Committee for the 2005
Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons to consider regular reports to be submitted by all States parties on the
implementation of article VI of the Treaty2 as outlined in paragraph 15:12 of the
2000 Final Document, 3 and on paragraph 4 (c) of decision 2 of the 1995 Review and
Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty;9
8.
Calls upon nuclear-weapon States to implement the Treaty on the NonProliferation of Nuclear Weapons commitments to apply the principle of
irreversibility by destroying their nuclear warheads in the context of strategic
nuclear reductions and avoid keeping them in a state that lends itself to their
possible redeployment;
9.
Agrees on the importance and urgency of signatures and ratifications to
achieve the early entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty; 4
10. Calls for the upholding and maintenance of the moratorium on nuclearweapon-test explosions or any other nuclear explosions pending the entry into force
of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty;
11. Underlines the urgency of the entry into force of the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty in the context of the progress in implementing the
international system to monitor nuclear weapons tests under the Treaty;
12. Agrees that the further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons should
be accorded priority and that nuclear-weapon States must live up to their
commitments in this regard;
13. Agrees also that reductions of non-strategic nuclear weapons should be
carried out in a transparent and irreversible manner and that the reduction and
elimination of non-strategic nuclear weapons should be included in the overall arms
reductions negotiations. In this context, urgent action should be taken to achieve:
(a) Further reduction of non-strategic nuclear weapons, based on unilateral
initiatives and as an integral part of the nuclear arms reduction and disarmament
process;
(b) Further confidence-building and transparency measures to reduce the
threats posed by non-strategic nuclear weapons;
(c) Concrete agreed measures to reduce further the operational status of
nuclear weapons systems;
(d) The formalizing of existing informal bilateral arrangements regarding
non-strategic nuclear reductions, such as the Bush-Gorbachev declarations of 1991,
into legally binding agreements;

_______________
9

See 1995 Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, Final Document, Part I (NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I) and Corr.2), annex.

4

A/RES/57/59

14. Calls upon nuclear-weapon States to undertake the necessary steps
towards the seamless integration of all five nuclear-weapon States into a process
leading to the total elimination of nuclear weapons;
15. Agrees that the Conference on Disarmament should establish without
delay an ad hoc committee to deal with nuclear disarmament;
16. Agrees also that the Conference on Disarmament should resume
negotiations on a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively
verifiable treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or
other nuclear explosive devices, taking into consideration both nuclear disarmament
and nuclear non-proliferation objectives;
17. Agrees further that the Conference on Disarmament should complete the
examination and updating of the mandate on the prevention of an arms race in outer
space in all its aspects, as contained in its decision of 13 February 1992, 10 and
re-establish an ad hoc committee as early as possible;
18. Calls upon those three States that are not yet parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and operate unsafeguarded nuclear facilities
to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States, promptly and without
condition, and to bring into force the required comprehensive safeguards
agreements, together with additional protocols, consistent with the Model Protocol
Additional to the Agreement(s) between State(s) and the International Atomic
Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards approved by the Board of
Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency on 15 May 1997, 11 for
ensuring nuclear non-proliferation, and to reverse clearly and urgently any policies
to pursue any nuclear weapons development or deployment and refrain from any
action that could undermine regional and international peace and security and the
efforts of the international community towards nuclear disarmament and the
prevention of nuclear weapons proliferation;
19. Calls upon those States that have not yet done so to conclude full-scope
safeguards agreements with the International Atomic Energy Agency and to
conclude additional protocols to their safeguards agreements on the basis of the
Model Protocol;
20. Reaffirms the conviction that the establishment of internationally
recognized nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at
among the States of the region concerned enhances global and regional peace and
security, strengthens the nuclear non-proliferation regime and contributes towards
realizing the objective of nuclear disarmament, and supports proposals for the
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones where they do not yet exist, such as in
the Middle East and South Asia;
21. Calls for the completion and implementation of the Trilateral Initiative
between the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Russian Federation and the
United States of America and for consideration to be given to the possible inclusion
of other nuclear-weapon States;
22. Calls upon all nuclear-weapon States to make arrangements for the
placing, as soon as practicable, of their fissile material no longer required for

_______________
10
11

CD/1125.
International Atomic Energy Agency, INFCIRC/540 (Corrected).

5

A/RES/57/59

military purposes under International Atomic Energy Agency or other relevant
international verification and to make arrangements for the disposition of such
material for peaceful purposes in order to ensure that such material remains
permanently outside military programmes;
23. Affirms that a nuclear-weapon-free world will ultimately require the
underpinning of a universal and multilaterally negotiated legally binding instrument
or a framework encompassing a mutually reinforcing set of instruments;
24. Acknowledges the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation
of resolution 55/33 C, 12 and requests him, within existing resources, to prepare a
report on the implementation of the present resolution;
25. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-eighth session
the item entitled “Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: the need for a new
agenda”, and to review the implementation of the present resolution at that session.
57th plenary meeting
22 November 2002

_______________
12

6

A/56/309.
