United Nations

S/PV.6172

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6172nd meeting
Tuesday, 28 July 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Rugunda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Uganda)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Somdah
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Skračić
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Dabbashi
Mr. Heller
Mr. Dolgov
Mr. Çorman
Mr. Quarrey
Mr. DeLaurentis
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic and the subregion
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (S/2009/359)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-42729 (E)

*0942729*

S/PV.6172

The meeting was called to order at 10.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Chad, the Central African Republic
and the subregion
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (S/2009/359)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Central African Republic and
Chad, in which they request to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council’s
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite
those representatives to participate in the consideration
of the item, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Poukré-Kono
(Central African Republic) and Mr. Allam-mi
(Chad) took seats at the Council table.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Victor Da Silva
Angelo, Special Representative and head of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Angelo to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/359, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad.

2

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Victor Da Silva Angelo, to whom I now
give the floor.
Mr. Angelo: Let me thank the Security Council
for the opportunity to present the report (S/2009/359) of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
the Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT),
which is dated 14 July 2009. It covers major political,
security and humanitarian developments since the last
report (S/2009/199), of 14 April 2009. The report also
includes an annex containing a strategic work plan
towards the fulfilment of the benchmarks endorsed by
the Security Council in resolution 1861 (2009). I would
like to take this opportunity to give the Council an
update on the latest key developments. I shall turn first
to the political situation in Chad.
In the framework of the agreement of 13 August
2007, the Government and the democratic opposition
reached consensus, on 28 May, on the laws regulating
the status of the opposition and the political parties’
charter. They also agreed on the electoral code and the
Commission electorale nationale indépendante. These
agreements allowed for serious progress to made in the
internal political process. Last week, the members and
Chairman of the electoral commission were sworn in.
In the same vein, the Government launched a
general population census on 20 May, paving the way
for voter registration and constituency delimitation
ahead of national elections. Support from the
international community for the census also included
some logistical assistance from MINURCAT. The
results are due to be released shortly.
With regard to the security situation, on 4 May
Chadian armed opposition groups, under the coalition
of Union des forces de la résistance, launched an attack
on Chadian territory from the Sudan. The attack was
repelled by the Armée Nationale Tchadienne through
air strikes and a direct confrontation on 7 May close to
Am Dam, forcing the rebels to retreat. As a security
measure, MINURCAT relocated a number of aid
workers from Koukou Angarana to Goz Beida during
the armed conflict and significantly increased
patrolling in all sectors. In addition, MINURCAT
called on all parties to respect the humanitarian space
and international humanitarian law.
As to Chad-Sudan relations, notwithstanding the
Doha agreement signed on 3 May by the Governments
of Chad and the Sudan under the aegis of Qatar, the
09-42729

S/PV.6172

latest clashes that occurred in May once again strained
relations between the two countries. Despite the
statements of both countries on 24 and 25 May
expressing support for the Qatar efforts to end the
current situation, new tensions erupted recently. The
relationship between Chad and the Sudan has a critical
impact on the situation on both sides of the border.
There is an urgent need to de-escalate the situation and
resume diplomatic initiatives.
In this context, we are liaising closely with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and are in contact with the Dakar
process member States to try to identify the
confidence-building measures that are required for the
next meeting of the Contact Group, to take place in the
near future.
The rainy season is providing a window of
opportunity for renewed political engagement between
Chad and the Sudan. The parties should use this
opportunity to revive the process, including the
implementation of the border verification mechanism.
With regard to the Central African Republic, the
situation in the Vakaga region in the north-eastern part
of the country has been extremely insecure over the
past three months and continues to be of serious
concern, as armed groups and bandits continue to
operate in the area. On 6 and 21 June, armed men
attacked the town of Birao. At least 27 people were
killed in the clashes and at least 60 per cent of the
houses in that town were burned to the ground. As of
today, large segments of the population have not
returned to Birao.
MINURCAT, in close liaison with the United
Nations Peace-Building Support Office in the Central
African Republic (BONUCA), has maintained
continuous contacts with the Government of the
Central African Republic with a view to convincing the
national authorities to combine the military presence of
MINURCAT with the strengthened presence of State
officials and with the initiation of mediation efforts.
MINURCAT is at present fully deployed in the
mandated area of operations in the Central African
Republic, but the gravity of the situation goes beyond
our capacity to respond to all the security needs in the
area. On 1 July, the Government sent a mediation
delegation headed by the Minister for Territorial
Administration. The Minister was accompanied by a
BONUCA political officer and received logistical and

09-42729

security support from MINURCAT. The initial
mediation efforts were successful but need to be
sustained.
The Vakaga region is still in a precarious
situation. Humanitarian assistance is not being
delivered at this stage for reasons of insecurity. The
region requires the sustained attention of the
Government of the Central African Republic and of the
international community. This includes the areas of
Sam Oundja and Sikikede, which for the moment are
effectively without a security presence. They are home
to refugee and displaced populations.
MINURCAT also worked closely with the
Government of the Central African Republic and the
United Nations country team in Bangui to establish a
humanitarian corridor to assist 16,600 refugees from
the Central African Republic who are currently in
southern Chad. It was impossible for us to reach them
from the Chadian side due to the rains. With the
cooperation of the Government of the Central African
Republic, we were able to open a humanitarian
corridor and provide the necessary assistance to the
refugees.
As to the humanitarian situation, during the
period under review MINURCAT established a wellstructured dialogue with the humanitarian community.
This dialogue, which is facilitated by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, takes place on a
weekly basis. It has led to a better understanding of
each side’s roles and concerns.
Following the May clashes, a significant rise in
crime, banditry and insecurity took place, reducing
once more the humanitarian space in some areas of
eastern Chad. As a temporary measure, MINURCAT
increased the number of escorts to ensure the
continuation of humanitarian operations. Humanitarian
staff has been included in the security and evacuation
plans and training has taken place at the local level to
ensure a coordinated response, if necessary.
There has been an increase in the number of
small arms and unexploded ordnance. Our mine action
unit has, in coordination with Chad’s Centre nationale
de déminage and a number of non-governmental
organizations, undertaken an emergency clearance of
major roads, as well as areas of operation in the
immediate vicinity of previous and recent battle areas.
Having completed clearance of major axes, the mine
action unit will now deploy demining teams to priority

3

S/PV.6172

areas of operation, in particular those that have been
identified as areas of potential return for displaced
people.
With regard to the deployment of military force,
it now stands at 46 per cent of its mandated strength.
The slow deployment of the force has limited the
ability of MINURCAT to effectively execute the
military concept of operations and provide the required
safe and secure environment for humanitarians,
refugees, displaced people and vulnerable populations,
including in the returnee areas. As a temporary
measure, the force will offer escorts to the
humanitarian community until such time as there is
enough capacity to make patrolling the preferred
method of intervention.
In the meantime, the force implemented
Operation Pioneer from 13 to 17 July, significantly
increasing its presence in the field through foot patrols
and troops in remote villages of potential return of
displaced people. The force also increased patrolling in
the main axes and made extensive use of rotary assets
to reach areas otherwise inaccessible during the rainy
season. These preventive deployments projected the
force in expeditionary operations. The exercise was
conducted successfully, and I can assure the Council
that it will be repeated with increasing frequency as the
force receives more troops.
There is still a lack of rotary assets with enhanced
night-flight capability, and as of today we have only
four out of the planned 18 military helicopters.
Bangladesh will deploy three utility helicopters later in
the year, but we have so far received no pledges for the
remaining helicopters. Should this unacceptable
situation continue to prevail, it will be necessary to
explore the possibility of acquiring such capabilities
commercially. We would like to ask those already
deployed in the force to strengthen their presence and
prolong their deployment.
I wish to say some encouraging words about the
Détachement intégré de sécurité (DIS). Since October
2008, DIS has conducted approximately 3,000 security
escorts and arrested more than 90 individuals suspected
of involvement in various crimes against the
humanitarian community, as well as 56 individuals
accused of armed robbery and five of rape. These rapes
took place around refugee camps.
The rate of recuperation of hijacked vehicles now
stands at 60 per cent compared to 10 per cent before

4

the deployment of the Détachement intégré de sécurité.
Currently, DIS is carrying out an average of about 85
escorts and 240 patrols per week. These are excellent
indicators of performance and motivation.
The May events show that DIS, as a national
police force, risks becoming a target of the armed
opposition groups. The Détachement intégré de
sécurité experienced a number of direct attacks during
and after the incursions, with several casualties as a
result. MINURCAT and the Government are in full
agreement that DIS is a police force without a military
mandate, and that its primary scope is to protect and
secure displaced people, refugees, humanitarians and
the local population.
In the meantime, the United Nations police will
intensify close in-service training of DIS elements,
including the two-month training and certification of
40 judicial police officers. We will also continue to
promote close cooperation between DIS and our
judiciary section. The logistical support of the Mission
to DIS remains a serious weakness that we are trying to
address with a great sense of urgency.
The DIS concept can easily be part of a reform of
the security sector in Chad. However, DIS is funded on
a voluntary basis by Member States, and the Trust
Fund is rapidly running out of money. By the end of
October, the Fund will be penniless. As Council
members can understand, the situation is very serious
and I would plead for their continued support for this
central element of our Mission. The budget to keep
DIS operating for another year currently stands at
around $17 million.
I would like to make a brief comment about
justice and prisons. As Council members know, we
have an important justice support programme in the
section. We have trained civil servants to be deployed
as justices of the peace and prosecutors in eastern Chad
in the absence of magistrates. During the reporting
period, we worked very closely with the United
Nations Development Programme and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to
facilitate the proceedings of mobile criminal courts in
several locations in eastern Chad. However, the
security of judicial authorities remains a constraint to
the deployment of the judges.
We have also provided on-the-job training for
prison staff in eastern Chad. We collaborate very
closely with the Chadian prison authorities and have

09-42729

S/PV.6172

drafted a comprehensive set of laws, policies and
procedures to assist the Government of Chad in the
establishment of a professional prison system. These
measures are now awaiting the approval of Parliament.
Nevertheless, the few existing prisons in eastern Chad
are in a dilapidated state and in urgent need of
rehabilitation.
With regard to human rights, the Mission
continues to follow up on the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 1612 (2005), 1820 (2008)
and 1325 (2000). Eighty-four children were among the
rebel combatants captured during the fighting in early
May. These 84 children were handed over to UNICEF
for demobilization and reinsertion. We commend the
Government for this initiative. However, this event
confirms that the mobilization of child soldiers remains
a serious problem in Chad and a key priority for our
work.
There have also been problems with arbitrary and
prolonged detention of men, women and minors as well
as gender-based violence, forced marriages and
domestic violence. As part of a potentially wider
security sector reform, we need to prepare a
comprehensive plan for arms collection.
With respect to political and civil affairs, I would
like to say very briefly that, during the past few
months, MINURCAT, together with local traditional
and administrative authorities, and with the support of
the European Union and the European Commission,
has initiated an intercommunity dialogue programme,
which is based on strengthening existing traditional
conflict
resolution
mechanisms
through
the
establishment of local reconciliation commissions
between communities, chaired by traditional and
administrative authorities alike.
More particularly, on 30 June, with our
facilitation and with the assistance of local authorities,
the tribal leaders of the Massalit and Zaghawa groups
agreed to address the issues hindering the return of the
Massalit to their villages of origin. This displaced
ethnic group has now started to return in time for the
planting season, giving hope for a long-term resolution
of the conflict. In a very recent similar effort on
15 July, we managed to bring together two
communities that had been in a process of serious
conflict, and they have agreed to live peacefully and
put a stop to their long-lasting feud. This turn of events
will enable more than 1,000 refugees that have crossed

09-42729

the border and are currently in the Sudan to return to
Chad in the next few days or couple of weeks.
These positive developments give hope for
building peace at the grass roots level. They are also
conducive to the return of displaced persons, which, as
Council members know, is the primary benchmark of
our strategy.
I would next like to say one or two words on the
strategic workplan. As outlined in my introduction, we
have developed a strategic workplan including the
main benchmarks for the Mission, indicators of
progress, key activities and some of the necessary
conditions which need to be in place. The question of
the return of a critical mass of internally displaced
persons is of particular interest, as this benchmark
requires the implementation of a comprehensive
approach to fight impunity in eastern Chad, improve
security and strengthen the rule of law and civil
administration. All these aspects require the support of
the international community and good coordination
with national authorities.
Speaking of the authorities, during the reporting
period, we have continued our frequent contacts with
the Government of the Central African Republic
concerning the situation in our area of operations. The
Government of Central African Republic signed on
13 June 2009 an amendment to the status of mission
agreement. The relationship with Chad also remains
very constructive. However, we have not yet been able
to complete the discussions with the Government on
the agreement. It is a matter of great urgency and
utmost importance to the Mission, and we hope to
resolve some of the issues relating to taxation and the
status of mission agreement and come to agreement on
this matter shortly.
We have also maintained a very close liaison with
BONUCA and UNAMID. To address issues of mutual
concern, we have worked closely with the United
Nations country team in the Central African Republic
and arranged bilateral and trilateral meetings between
the United Nations country teams in Chad, the Central
African Republic and Cameroon. We also arranged an
inter-mission meeting between MINURCAT, UNAMID,
the United Nations Mission in the Sudan and BONUCA
to improve coordination between these missions and
look for synergies.
To maximize efforts and avoid duplication, the
Mission and the United Nations country team in

5

S/PV.6172

N’Djamena have also started preparing an integrated
strategic framework for the United Nations system in
Chad outlining peacebuilding activities in the country.
The framework should be finalized by October 2009
and should be considered an example of integration in
a situation where we do not have an integrated mission.

convoys — according to the report of the SecretaryGeneral before us (S/2009/359), 2,600 between October
2008 and May 2009. However, we are concerned by
certain disciplinary problems regarding the conduct of
several DIS personnel, about which we should be
vigilant.

The President: I thank Mr. Angelo for his
briefing.

In order to ensure the best possible functioning of
the DIS, it is also important that there be the best
possible coordination and cooperation between it and
MINURCAT and, in particular, that MINURCAT
provide the necessary logistical support to the DIS.
Good synergy between those two components is
essential not only so that the DIS can carry out its
mission, but also for the credibility of the United
Nations as a whole, in particular in the eyes of the
Chadian authorities.

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Victor Da Silva Angelo,
for his very detailed and comprehensive briefing. The
situation in Chad and the Central African Republic
continues to pose many challenges for the Security
Council and for the United Nations as a whole. I should
like to comment briefly on some of them.
First, it is important to complete the deployment
of the United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) and to ensure the
proper functioning of the Détachement intégré de
sécurité (DIS). Thus far, the transition from the
European Union-led military force to MINURCAT has
been proceeding fairly smoothly, thanks in particular to
the progressive nature of the withdrawal of the
European contingents, the efforts of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the efforts on the ground
to ensure good coordination among all the parties.
However, as Mr. Angelo said, it is essential that
MINURCAT’s deployment accelerate and be
completed. To that end, we call on all States to confirm
their commitments or undertake new ones.
For its part, France has announced that it will
maintain a logistics battalion in addition to its support
detachment for the Togolese battalion in Birao and the
more general support provided through Operation
Epervier. It is also essential that the United Nations
respect the commitments undertaken with Chad
concerning the time frame for rebuilding airport
infrastructure, as well as the commitments undertaken
with the European Union.
With regard to the Détachement intégré de
sécurité, we are pleased that its full deployment has
been possible, that it is providing security in 12 refugee
camps and in certain towns in eastern Chad and that it
has been providing escorts for many humanitarian

6

The second challenge on which I would like to
briefly comment is the protection of populations and
humanitarian workers in a security context that remains
very uncertain. As indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General, the security environment in Chad
and the Central African Republic remains tense.
First, the tension characterizing the relations
between Chad and the Sudan is very worrisome. We
call on both countries to honour their commitments and
to refrain from any provocation and any action that
could lead to an escalation. In particular, all violations
of territorial space and all support for rebel groups
must cease.
Moreover, greater efforts must be made to combat
banditry in Chad and the Central African Republic.
Attacks against humanitarian personnel remain very
numerous. The figures in the Secretary-General’s
report on this are very worrying. I reiterate that 150
attacks have been reported in five months, and I would
also recall that members of the DIS are also being
attacked, as shown by the deaths of three of them, in
April, May and June respectively.
In the Central African Republic, the increase in
ethnic tension has also led to increased insecurity. We
welcome the way in which MINURCAT is carrying out
its mandate, and in particular its assistance to
humanitarian workers during the 6 June and 21 June
attacks. We encourage MINURCAT, in collaboration
with the Chadian authorities, to continue its activities
to end human rights violations and, in particular, to end
the recruitment of child soldiers by armed groups, as
well as sexual violence.

09-42729

S/PV.6172

Finally, the third challenge: There is a need to
continue to encourage the various parties to participate
in the political process in good faith. First and
foremost, it is essential that Chad and the Sudan rejoin
the Dakar process and resolve their problems as
neighbours.
With respect to the internal political process in
Chad, we welcome the progress made in implementing
the 13 August 2007 agreement, in particular thanks to
the finalization of the electoral code, the establishment
of a National Independent Electoral Commission and
the adoption of a law on the status of the opposition
and on political parties. The launch of the census is an
essential step in preparing for elections. It is a
noteworthy development, and we hope that this
positive momentum will continue.
In the Central African Republic also, it is
essential that the peace process continue. In particular,
I should like to mention the importance of continuing
the process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.
In conclusion, I should like once again to thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and to pay tribute to his work and that of his team and
to welcome the strategic work plan set out in the
Secretary-General’s report, which we regard as
particularly suited to the objectives and the situation.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking Mr. Angelo for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) (S/2009/359).
Costa Rica welcomes the preparation of the
strategic work plan for the Mission, which will be a
valuable tool for measuring its progress. We believe
that the inclusion of benchmarks is valuable, as is the
description of activities planned to achieve them. In
particular, we support the decision to include a new
benchmark on improved peace and security in the
subregion in general. As we have stated previously, the
voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable return of
refugees and internally displaced persons in eastern
Chad — a basic objective of MINURCAT’s
deployment — can be achieved only if the root causes
of conflict are addressed within each of the countries
and in the subregion as a whole. This new peace and
security benchmark responds to that need and is a
significant measure that will help us better understand

09-42729

that MINURCAT’s objectives depend on a solution to
the internal conflict in Chad and on improved relations
between that country and the Sudan.
Costa Rica agrees with the Secretary-General
that, if the MINURCAT benchmarks are to be met, in
addition to appropriate performance, there is a need for
other concrete actions by the Government of Chad, the
armed opposition groups, regional actors and the
international community. The Government of Chad has
the responsibility to redouble its efforts to implement
the Sirte Agreement and to promote a political process
that is comprehensive and inclusive of all parties. As
the Secretary-General noted in paragraph 62 of his
previous report on MINURCAT (S/2009/199), for any
reconciliation process to be viable, it is important that
all opposition, political and armed, be associated and
included.
In that connection, we also call on all parties to
the internal conflict in Chad to commit themselves to
the process of dialogue and national reconciliation
within the framework of the Sirte Agreement and the
13 August 2007 agreement. We recognize the progress
made in the past few months in implementing the
13 August agreement and in preparing for elections.
We also welcome the treaty signed between three
rebel groups and the Government of Chad a few days
ago in Tripoli, whereby that coalition of armed groups
renounced armed struggle and committed themselves to
dialogue, setting an example to be imitated by other
armed groups.
We urge the Government of Chad to consider
every possibility for reconciliation, including accepting
the good offices of the Secretary-General to facilitate
dialogue. We join in the appeal issued by the SecretaryGeneral to regional actors and members of the Council
with influence over the parties, urging them to commit
themselves to a peaceful settlement of their
differences.
On the regional level, we once again echo the call
addressed to the Governments of Chad and the Sudan
to refrain from their usual political and military
provocations. It is high time for them to cease
undermining the work of the international community,
to end their support for rebel groups and to devote their
energies to confidence-building and the normalization
of their relations. We hope that the Dakar Contact
Group will meet soon, and we support the efforts of the
Government of Qatar to foster better relationships

7

S/PV.6172

between the two countries. However, it is important to
stress that the ultimate responsibility lies with the
Governments of those two countries, which are called
upon to show the political will necessary to fulfil their
commitments and agreements.
My country is very concerned about the
humanitarian and human rights situation in Chad,
including the prevalence of sexual violence,
particularly that involving members of the Chadian
armed forces. We are also troubled by the recruitment
of children. We support the measures and initiatives
taken by MINURCAT and other national and
international partners to address the issue of the
recruitment and use of children so as to improve the
judicial system and raise awareness of resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008).
We vigorously condemn the attacks on
humanitarian personnel, and we believe that impunity
for those committing these crimes must end.
We are grateful for the inclusion in the report of
specific cases regarding the promotion of dialogue and
reconciliation among local communities, which is a
key part of the mandate. We encourage the Mission to
continue these efforts and to suggest new ways of
supporting and further bolstering the capacity of
MINURCAT in this respect.
We are pleased that the deployment of the
Détachement intégré de sécurité (DIS) has been
completed, and we hope that the process of training
and qualifying DIS agents will be reinforced by
MINURCAT. We also support the establishment of the
Office of Protection and Escorts to improve
coordination between the humanitarian community,
MINURCAT and the security forces.
Finally, we wish to express our concern regarding
the deterioration of the security situation in the Central
African Republic, particularly the increase in conflicts
among ethnic groups. We support the actions of
MINURCAT in its area of operations with a view to
improving the security environment, and we hope that
coordination with the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic will be
extended so as to deal with the resurgence of violence
in north-eastern Central African Republic.
Mr. Somdah (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
First of all, I would like to thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Victor Da Silva Angelo, for his

8

briefing on developments in the situation in eastern
Chad and north-eastern Central African Republic.
The security and humanitarian situation in eastern
Chad and north-eastern Central African Republic
remains worrying due to the ongoing clashes between
Government forces and armed groups. My delegation
once again condemns the attack of 4 May 2009 by
armed groups under the banner of the Union des forces
de la résistance. We reiterate our appeal to all parties,
especially armed movements, to renounce any military
solution to the crisis and to respect their commitments,
in particular the Sirte agreement of October 2007.
The lack of security continues to be a major
source of concern and compromises humanitarian
activities. We are pleased that the Chadian
Government, supported by the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT), has been able to effectively deploy the
Détachement intégré de sécurité (DIS) and thereby
reinforce security in camps for refugees and internally
displaced persons. We encourage the partners to
continue to provide significant logistical support to
DIS so that it can fulfil its mission.
One encouraging event was the signing on 25 July
in Tripoli of a peace agreement between the Chadian
Government and the Mouvement national, which
provided for an end to hostilities and the reintegration
of combatants from the Mouvement into the Chadian
army and of its leaders into Government administration.
At the political level, we are encouraged by the
progress achieved, in particular the consensus reached
on draft laws concerning, respectively, the status of the
opposition, the political parties’ charter and the approval
of decrees to implement laws on the electoral code and
the National Independent Electoral Commission. We
welcome the holding of the general census of the
population, which is a further decisive step towards the
organization and holding of general elections. The
parties must maintain an ongoing dialogue and
coordination to resolve any disagreements.
With respect to the Central African Republic, we
are concerned about the deterioration of the security
situation in the north-eastern part of the country due to
the resurgence of acts of banditry, intertribal violence
and attacks by armed groups, which has increased the
number of refugees and limits the delivery of
humanitarian aid. It is essential that all parties respect
the decisions they reached following the inclusive

09-42729

S/PV.6172

political dialogue of December 2008. We encourage
them to continue to make progress towards genuine
national reconciliation in order to enable the political
process to move forward, with a view to holding
legislative and presidential elections in 2010.
This Council should continue to give particular
attention to the security and humanitarian situations in
the Central African Republic, especially in the
northern, north-western and north-central parts of the
country.
With respect to the situation in the subregion, we
remain convinced that resolving the crisis and putting
an end to instability in Chad will require close and
effective cooperation among States of the region. We
continue to encourage Chad and the Sudan to improve
their bilateral relations and to cooperate fully in order
to put an end to the activities of illegal armed groups,
in accordance with the commitments undertaken in the
Dakar agreement and the Doha agreement of 3 May
2009. We urge them in particular to avoid any act that
could fuel tensions between the two States.
With respect to the deployment of the military
component of MINURCAT, we urge the international
community to do its utmost to ensure the effective
deployment of the military component of MINURCAT
and to make it operational by giving it the logistical
means necessary to carry out its mandate. My
delegation takes due note of the strategic workplan of
MINURCAT. We share the point of view expressed by
the Secretary-General on the preliminary conditions for
the withdrawal of the Mission, which will require the
ongoing commitment of Governments in the region, a
resolution of the potential factors of insecurity and
instability along the border between Chad and the
Sudan, and the support of the international community.
In conclusion, we invite the international
community and the Council in particular, in the light of
the ongoing high level of insecurity in Chad and the
Central African Republic, to remain mobilized in order
to provide significant assistance to the respective
efforts by the Governments of these two countries.
Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too would like to thank Mr. Angelo,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his briefing and for introducing the report on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) (S/2009/359).

09-42729

Unfortunately, the security situation remains
complex. Activities by rebel armed groups continue to
destabilize the situation in eastern Chad. The situation
in the north-eastern Central African Republic has
become more complicated with an ongoing grave
humanitarian crisis. Under those conditions, provision
of external assistance and the continued leading role of
the United Nations remain essential. We share the view
of the Secretary-General that the Government of Chad
bears the main responsibility for stabilization of the
eastern part of the country.
We welcome the progress made by the
Government of Chad in implementing the agreements
with the political opposition. Stabilization in Chad and
in the subregion as a whole will be impossible without
improved relations between those countries and the
Sudan. In that context, we are concerned about reports
incursions by Chadian aircraft into Sudanese territory
and air strikes in western Darfur on 16 July. We believe
that both sides should show the political will to
normalize their bilateral relations, which would be in
the interest of the Sudanese and Chadian peoples and
the subregion as a whole, especially since mechanisms
and a basis for negotiations exist for that. Progress
must continue towards implementing the Dakar
agreement, and diplomatic efforts must be stepped up
in order to resume the work of the Contact Group
established under that agreement.
We commend the activities of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad, in
which Russia is actively participating. We welcome the
conclusion of preparations, with the help of
MINURCAT, and the deployment of the Détachement
intégré de sécurité (DIS) in eastern Chad. In addition to
providing needed logistical support and ongoing
training to DIS, it is also important in our view to work
to coordinate the activities of MINURCAT, DIS and
the Chadian security forces.
We believe that the military components of the
Mission will be fully staffed by the end of 2009. We
also hope that the troop-contributing countries will
provide the necessary air units for the Mission, because
at present the Russian aviation unit bears the brunt of
that burden. The Russian unit will of course continue
to carry out those functions in accordance with the
mandate.
With respect to the question of benchmarks for
MINURCAT, they are an important element in

9

S/PV.6172

assessing the effectiveness of that United Nations
operation. In our view, in the process of developing
those benchmarks the Mission carried out the
necessary consultations with all interested parties, in
particular the Government of Chad.

On our part, Japan in recent months has disbursed
approximately $10 million through United Nations
programmes for humanitarian assistance in Chad and
an additional $4.5 million for humanitarian assistance
in the Central African Republic.

Mr. Takasu (Japan): I too would like to thank
Special Representative Victor Da Silva Angelo for his
informative briefing.

Tension between the Sudan and Chad is another
source of concern for the stability of the region. We
urge both countries to respect the Doha agreement for
improved relations and to resolve differences through
dialogue. To that end, I would like to underline the
importance of immediately halting all hostilities and
resuming the Dakar peace process. We support and
encourage continuous active mediation and confidencebuilding efforts by countries in the region.

On this occasion, I would like to pay tribute to
the late President Omar Bongo of the Gabonese
Republic, who contributed so much to promoting peace
and stability in the region that we are discussing today.
The volatile security situation in Chad and the
Central African Republic is cause for serious concern
to all of us. Attacks by rebel forces continued in
eastern Chad. Violence and banditry by armed groups
increased in the north-eastern part of the Central
African Republic and light weapons continued to
proliferate. The political process to seek stability is
essential to ensure security. Both Governments —
Chad and the Central African Republic — are to be
commended for their efforts at political dialogue with
the rebel groups. For its part, the Government of Chad
signed a peace agreement with three rebel groups in
Tripoli, on 26 July — just two days ago. The valuable
support of Libya is very important.
We are also encouraged by the progress in the
election process since the Government of Chad
launched a general population census in May. It is our
hope that the parliamentary election to be held next
year and the presidential election the year after will be
organized as planned in a free and fair manner.
The Government of the Central African Republic
is also in the process of establishing legal and
institutional frameworks for parliamentary and
presidential elections next year. We welcome those
positive steps. I trust that the political dialogue among
the Government, opposition and rebel groups will be
further promoted and intensified.
Such volatile security affects the humanitarian
situation in Chad and the Central African Republic. A
growing number of refugees and internally displaced
persons are experiencing difficulty in gaining access to
necessary humanitarian support. The international
community must be more active and more generous in
delivering humanitarian assistance to the region.

10

The United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) has an
essential stabilizing role in the region through taking
over the activities of the European Union-led
peacekeeping force. Japan is concerned about the delay
in deployment, which still stands below 50 per cent of
the mandated troop strength. There may be a danger of
gaps, if rotation of troops is not met by reliable new
forces. We appreciate the contributions of all troopcontributing countries, but we need more support. I
urge all concerned to make their best efforts to
expedite seamless transitions in troop deployment.
It is also important to support capacity-building
for Chadian police and judicial institutions. I call for
the pledges to support the Détachement intégré de
sécurité to be implemented without delay, in order to
reinforce security in collaboration with MINURCAT.
We welcome the ongoing efforts to strengthen Chadian
judicial institutions and the rule of law. Such efforts are
essential in order to defend human rights and to protect
women and children.
I would like to conclude by expressing our
gratitude to the members of the MINURCAT for their
dedicated work and for the strong leadership of
Mr. Angelo. MINURCAT needs all possible support to
fulfil its responsibilities based on a strategic workplan
with the benchmarks that have been defined.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): I would like to
thank Mr. Victor Da Silva Angelo, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his very
comprehensive briefing. Let me also commend him for
his management of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) in

09-42729

S/PV.6172

difficult times, particularly during the attacks by
opposition groups in May.
Austria strongly condemns the renewed
escalation of violence. This was the fourth major
incursion by Chadian armed opposition groups
crossing the border from the Sudan. This has again led
to a temporary deterioration of the security situation in
eastern Chad. We are also concerned about reports that
recruitment by the Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) and others — both voluntary and involuntary —
is on the rise in refugee camps. A political solution
remains the only viable one. Progress needs to be
achieved at all levels with the armed opposition and the
political opposition and with regard to relations
between Chad and the Sudan.
Concerning the internal political dialogue
between the Government of Chad and the political
opposition, Austria welcomes the significant progress
that has been made in implementation of the 13 August
agreement. The establishment of the National
Independent Electoral Commission now opens the way
for elections, which we hope will be held in June 2010.
We believe that the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT)
could play a supporting role in the election process,
which therefore should be considered positively if
requested by the Government of Chad. Austria also
welcomes MINURCAT’s activities in resolving
localized conflicts in eastern Chad.
Efforts are also needed to bring the armed groups
back into the democratic process. Three groups signed
a peace deal with the Chadian Government in Tripoli
last weekend. That shows that the Sirte process
remains open. We hope that progress can be made in
bringing the main rebel group, the Union des forces de
la résistance, to the negotiation table. We would like to
commend the efforts of the Government of Libya in
that regard. It will be very important to keep the
implementation of those agreements on track.
We are deeply concerned about the continuation
of severely strained relations between the Sudan and
Chad. The signing of an agreement in Doha on 3 May
provided us with a glimmer of hope. However, the
subsequent incursion of armed groups across the
border has once again shown how tense and
unpredictable the security situation between the two
countries is. Joint border monitoring by Chadian and
Sudanese forces has been suggested on several

09-42729

occasions. Austria thinks that that is an interesting
proposal, and we would be interested in the opinion of
the Special Representative on that issue.
Relations between the Sudan and Chad have a
direct impact on all developments in the region. All
regional and international actors should use their
influence to achieve an improvement of the situation.
We therefore also welcome the fact that the issue of the
improvement of overall peace and security in the
region is now a benchmark by which to measure
progress in the implementation of MINURCAT’s
mandate.
Austria would also like to underline the
importance of MINURCAT’s monitoring of the human
rights situation in eastern Chad. We are concerned
about increasing reports of attacks on humanitarian
personnel, sexual violence and child abductions from
internally displaced persons (IDP) camps. Efforts
should be made to prevent demobilized children from
being recruited once again by rebel groups. All parties
to the conflict should act in compliance with their
obligations under international humanitarian and
human rights laws.
On IDPs, the facilitation of voluntary return and
resettlement in secure and sustainable conditions
constitutes a core part of MINURCAT’s mandate. We
understand that such returns have repeatedly hit
obstacles or are difficult to measure because of
migratory habits. Due to the volatile security situation,
challenges to creating an environment conducive to
returns remain. Furthermore, alternatives to return and
resettlement need to be identified. We hope that those
further aspects will be incorporated into the first
benchmark.
Austria welcomes the training and deployment of
police officers of the Détachement intégré de sécurité
(DIS) in eastern Chad, which has contributed to
enhancing security in refugee camps and key towns.
We acknowledge the efforts undertaken by the Chadian
authorities to deal with recent cases of ill discipline,
and look forward to the upcoming comprehensive
assessment of DIS.
We continue to believe that Chad has a key
significance for the stability of the entire region. As is
known, Austria is engaged in MINURCAT with some
130 troops. An Austrian national, Ambassador Georg
Lennkh, is the Special Representative of the European
Union Presidency for the Political Dialogue in Chad.

11

S/PV.6172

Austria highly appreciates all efforts undertaken by
MINURCAT and the United Nations country team, and
welcomes the benchmarks and timelines for progress
elaborated
in
the
Secretary-General’s
report
(S/2009/359).
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I,
too, would like to thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Angelo for his briefing this morning.
We appreciate the work of the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) in contributing to the security of
refugees and internally displaced persons in those
countries. The United States is also grateful to the
Governments of Chad and the Central African Republic
for their support of MINURCAT and their commitment
to providing humanitarian organizations access to those
in greatest need.
Today, I would like to discuss briefly four issues:
MINURCAT’s deployment; the activities of the United
Nations-trained Chadian special police; increasing
levels of violence in the Central African Republic; and
the deterioration of relations between Chad and the
Sudan.
First, we recognize the difficulties of deploying
to Chad and the Central African Republic, and we
acknowledge that it has been only four months since
the 15 March transfer of authority from the European
Union Force to MINURCAT. Nonetheless, we are
concerned that the deployment of troops has been
impeded by delays in the procurement of contingentowned equipment. The current deployment of the
contingent at 46 per cent of its authorized strength is
insufficient to provide the level of security and
assistance required in MINURCAT’s mandate.
We share the concern of the Secretary-General
that a security gap of any duration leaves the Mission
unacceptably vulnerable. The United States will
continue to provide equip-and-train programmes to
deploying African contingents. We urge all
organizations assisting with the deployment to take
immediate steps to expedite troop deployments and to
ensure that those troops are adequately trained and
equipped to perform the Mission’s mandate.
Secondly, we are pleased that the activities of the
United Nations-trained Chadian special police, the
Détachement intégré de sécurité (DIS), have resulted in
improved security in and around refugee and internally
displaced persons camps. However, we continue to be

12

concerned about deficiencies in training and equipping
DIS. Recent attacks on DIS sadly demonstrate that it
must enhance its capacity to defend itself against
armed bandits.
There also have been cases of serious misconduct
on the part of some DIS officers, and we are glad that
appropriate action has been taken in those cases. We
believe that the DIS would benefit from further United
Nations training on weapons handling and police
conduct. We look forward to receiving additional
information from the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations on its assessment of DIS.
Thirdly, we are deeply concerned about the
growing violence in the Central African Republic,
caused by inter-ethnic disputes, banditry and
lawlessness. Internal displacement around Birao has
increased. MINURCAT’s mandate in north-eastern
Central African Republic includes limited operations to
extract civilians and humanitarian workers in danger,
along with protecting United Nations personnel and
equipment. We urge MINURCAT to maximize its
capabilities to protect civilians and humanitarian actors
in the area by ensuring that the troop contingent
deployed to Birao remains at full strength at all times
and by maximizing the number of patrols conducted.
Fourthly, the insecurity caused by the operations
of armed groups in Chad and in the Sudan jeopardizes
the peace and security of the entire region. We urge
both Chad and the Sudan to work towards easing
tensions and cooperating in implementing the Doha
accord and previous agreements aimed at normalizing
relations between the two countries. Both Governments
must end all military and logistical support to armed
groups operating within their respective countries.
In conclusion, let me reiterate our strong support
for MINURCAT. The Mission functions in the midst of
a complicated regional conflict and fragile security
situation that no single actor is capable of resolving.
We strongly encourage regional actors, such as the
African Union and the Arab League, along with
regional Member States, to use their good offices to
influence the Governments of Chad and the Sudan to
abide by existing peace agreements, end support to
rebel groups, and take all necessary steps to protect and
assist the vulnerable citizens within their borders.
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Angelo,

09-42729

S/PV.6172

for his briefing on the work of the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT).
We
welcome
the
Permanent
Representatives of the Central African Republic and
Chad participating in today’s meeting.
We are concerned about the situation in the
Central African Republic and Chad. We welcome the
progress made in the peace process in the Central
African Republic. We note that the Central African
Liberation Movement for Justice has committed to
laying down its arms and entering into a dialogue with
the Government. We appreciate the unremitting efforts
of the Government and other participants. We hope that
the country’s presidential elections can be conducted
smoothly and according to plan, and call on the
international community to provide the necessary
material and technical assistance.
We support the strengthening of MINURCAT, in
coordination with the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in the Central African Republic, and
hope that it will help to provide more substantive
assistance to the Government of the Central African
Republic in maintaining peace and stability and
promoting economic and social development.
We are following the situation in Chad closely.
We appreciate the consensus reached between the
Chadian Government and the opposition parties on the
legislative framework for the elections and the
National Independent Electoral Commission. We
encourage both parties to maintain their dialogue and
to reach a comprehensive political reconciliation. We
note with pleasure that, on 26 July the three
rebel groups — the Union des forces pour la
démocratie et le dévéloppement, the Mouvement
national pour le renouveau and the Front pour le salut
de la république — signed a peace agreement with the
Government of Chad, and we appreciate the good
offices of Libya in this regard. We condemn the Union
des forces de la résistance (UFR) for its attacks in early
May against eastern Chad, and urge UFR to settle its
disputes through political means and negotiation.
China is deeply concerned about relations
between Chad and the Sudan. We hope that both sides
can maintain restraint and prevent the situation from
deteriorating further. We hope that both sides can
address their concerns and problems through dialogue.
The international community, for its part, should make
greater efforts to promote peace and negotiation. Not

09-42729

long ago, the Chinese Government’s Special
Representative for Africa, Ambassador Liu Guijin,
visited both Chad and the Sudan in an effort to help
improve relations between them. We will continue to
work with the international community in order to help
ease the situation in the region.
China is satisfied with the progress in the
deployment of MINURCAT. We appreciate its efforts
to help the Government of Chad set up the
Détachement intégré de sécurité, which we believe will
help improve the security situation and environment in
the refugee camps in eastern Chad. We hope that
MINURCAT will pursue these efforts and cooperate
closely with the host countries in order to complete its
planned deployment as soon as possible.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): I would like
to thank Mr. Angelo for his briefing. My delegation is
deeply concerned about the tense security situation in
eastern Chad, especially after the military operations
by rebel groups against Government forces last May.
We are also troubled by the deteriorating security
situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT) in the north-eastern part of the
Central African Republic, as well as the rising tensions
in relations between Chad and the Sudan.
On the other hand, we are pleased with the
progress made in the implementation of the agreement
of 13 August 2007 between the Chadian Government
and political opposition parties with regard to the
legislative framework for elections and the census. We
wish to call on all parties concerned to build on this
positive momentum to promote an inclusive and
comprehensive political process in Chad, facilitating a
lasting solution to the current conflict there. We also
urge Chad and the Sudan to exercise the utmost
restraint, defuse the current crisis, and seriously
implement the Dakar agreement, as well as other
relevant accords.
We wish to reiterate our full support for
MINURCAT’s discharging of its mandate in
accordance with Security Council resolution 1861
(2009). In view of the resource constraints facing
MINURCAT, we call upon the donor countries and
troop-contributing countries to extend the necessary
resources and provide military enablers to expedite
MINURCAT’s full deployment.

13

S/PV.6172

Despite enormous challenges, MINURCAT has
made considerable contributions not only to the
management and resolution of conflicts in Chad, but
also to facilitating humanitarian assistance in its areas
of operation. We note positively the assistance
MINURCAT has extended to the Chadian Government
in training and deploying the Détachement intégré de
sécurité, which has helped improve the humanitarian
situation on the ground.

The full deployment of the Détachement intégré
de sécurité (DIS) is a major achievement. Turkey
welcomes the additional security it has provided.
MINURCAT will have to continue to support DIS
logistically, technically and operationally as it assumes
more and more responsibilities and works to become
fully operational. Bearing in mind that MINURCAT
cannot stay forever, the Chadian Government will also
need to do more to support DIS.

We are pleased with the close cooperation and
consultations
between
MINURCAT
and
the
Governments of Chad and the Central African
Republic, especially with regard to the conclusion of
the status of mission agreement. We believe that, if
MINURCAT is to implement its mandate successfully,
such cooperation should be strengthened further.

Ultimately, whether through DIS or its armed
forces, Chadian authorities will eventually have to
assume full responsibility for the security situation in
that part of the country. It is therefore important for the
Chadian Government to work sincerely to create a
political setting through which the sources of conflict
in the East of the country can be efficiently addressed.

Finally, we support the strategic workplan
developed by MINURCAT, and we share the SecretaryGeneral’s observations on the benchmarks for the
Mission’s future exit strategy. We hope that
MINURCAT and the Governments of Chad and the
Central African Republic will work closely with each
other in preparing for this goal and in further
improving peace and stability in eastern Chad, northeastern Central African Republic and the region as a
whole.

The agreement brokered just a few days ago in
Tripoli between the Chadian Government and the
National Movement is a very welcome step in the right
direction. We hope that, with the help of ongoing
mediation efforts, the Chadian Government can build
upon that momentum and create an inclusive and
comprehensive political process through which other
larger elements of armed opposition can be brought
back into the fold.

Mr. Çorman (Turkey): We thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2009/359) and Special
Representative Angelo for his briefing.
Like other members, Turkey is concerned about
the negative developments that have occurred over the
past three months and that have served only to
aggravate an already tenuous humanitarian situation. It
is clear that attacks by the Chadian armed opposition,
and tensions between N’Djamena and Khartoum, have
combined to make the environment in which the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) is being deployed
much more complicated.
The progress that MINURCAT has made thus far
in attaining full operational capacity is noteworthy. We
hope that, as in the case of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur across the border,
MINURCAT can also come close to achieving its
authorized strength before the end of the year. As this
process continues, it will be important to ensure that
there are no security gaps due to delays in deployment.

14

At the regional level, the deterioration of bilateral
relations between Chad and the Sudan is having very
unfortunate consequences on the ground, not least for
civilians. Cross-border air and ground raids are not
helping what is already a grave situation. Both
countries need to understand that their interests lie not
in conflict but in cooperation. A change of tone and
approach is sorely needed. Many agreements have been
enacted, and not implemented. Turkey believes that a
high-level mediation effort, building on existing
agreements, that takes into consideration the complex
interests and dynamics at play and includes the right
incentives is the way forward for a lasting political
settlement.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): I would like to thank Mr. Victor Da Silva
Angelo, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and head of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), for
his introduction of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/359).
The security situation in MINURCAT’s area of
operation continues to deteriorate as a result of

09-42729

S/PV.6172

banditry and rebel activity. Unfortunately, that has
direct repercussions on the humanitarian situation in
eastern Chad and in the North-East of the Central
African Republic. Many refugees and internally
displaced persons are still in great need of
humanitarian assistance. Also disturbing are the results
of the activities of armed groups and bandits during the
period under consideration. They have caused
significant loss of human life and have endangered the
lives of humanitarian personnel and restricted their
movement, resulting in a negative impact on the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to people in need.
We welcome the positive developments in the
implementation of the 13 August 2007 agreement
between the Government of Chad and the political
opposition. In particular, we welcome the consensus
reached on the legislative framework for the elections
and modalities for the establishment of the National
Independent Electoral Commission. We are also
pleased to note that the census is moving ahead, which
will ultimately make it possible to determine the
electoral districts and to hold elections.
The leader of our revolution and the President of
the African Union, Colonel Muammar Al-Qadhafi, has
reiterated his concern about re-establishing peace in
eastern Chad, the Central African Republic and Darfur.
Libya believes that it is possible to end conflict
through comprehensive political solutions in the
region, thereby strengthening international peace and
security. We would therefore like to see rebel groups in
Chad sit down with the Government in order to
implement the Sirte agreement of October 2007. Libya
would also like to see all Chadian opposition groups
join in a national reconciliation effort. In that regard,
we welcome the agreement signed in Tripoli between
the Chadian Government and three opposition groups.
Libya also continues to support the political
process in the Central African Republic to safeguard
the achievements of the political talks held in
December 2008. In that connection, we refer to the
latest positive results in Libya’s mediation efforts,
which led to the signing of an agreement between the
Government of the Central African Republic and armed
groups headed by Mr. Abdoulaye Miskine that brought
this group back into the political process.
We would also like to reiterate the importance of
strengthening peace efforts in the Central African
Republic. We welcome the efforts made by the

09-42729

Government, local stakeholders, the Peacebuilding
Commission and international and regional actors. We
hope that the international community will extend its
support to peace and development projects as they are
an important factor in consolidating stability and
peace.
Libya is aware of the direct impact of the
relationship between the Governments of Chad and the
Sudan on the security and humanitarian situation in
eastern Chad and Darfur. We therefore welcome the
mediation efforts of the Government of Qatar and its
cooperation with the leader of our revolution and the
President of the African Union, Colonel Muammar
Al-Qadhafi, to ensure that the agreements signed
between the parties are implemented in order to
ultimately normalize relations between the countries.
With regard to MINURCAT’s deployment to
eastern Chad and the north-eastern part of the Central
African Republic, we are pleased to note the efforts of
Mr. Angelo and all the Mission’s personnel, who are
working in such dangerous circumstances. We express
our concern over the fact that not all of the Mission’s
staff have been deployed. We hope that that will be
done quickly, so as to resolve problems regarding the
lack of materiel and personnel and to equip the Mission
to effectively carry out its mandate.
We hope that MINURCAT will also be deployed
to areas of tension in the north-eastern part of the
Central African Republic. In that regard, we welcome
the positive role played by the Détachement intégré de
sécurité (DIS) in improving security in refugee camps
and main towns in eastern Chad despite the difficult
circumstances. Those conditions are difficult both due
to the lack of security and want of equipment. We hope
that DIS will be strengthened and its deployment
accelerated.
We welcome the workplan annexed to the report
of the Secretary-General, entitled “Benchmarks,
indicators of progress and key activities: 2009-2011”.
We appreciate the need for and importance of
developing such benchmarks at all levels — military,
humanitarian and political. Having said that, however,
we do not support the imposition of a time frame, even
if one should be established, because timing should be
based on practical forecasts. Otherwise, that would
send an erroneous message to the various political
parties, refugees and the internally displaced.

15

S/PV.6172

We do need to be realistic. Progress may be
achieved soon or delayed for some reason, and that
might make some people particularly optimistic and
others particularly pessimistic. That is why we believe
that it would be wiser to confine ourselves to objective
benchmarks and indicators of progress that are not
associated with a timetable.

I hardly need to point out that the political
situation in the region is delicate. I hardly need to add
that the situation is complicated even further by the
close interrelationship that exists among the situations
of the countries of the region, chiefly Chad, the Central
African Republic and the Sudan. This complexity,
however, should not serve as a pretext for inaction.

In other words, we should ensure that the
benchmarks envisaged are associated with genuinely
realistic indicators of progress. All of that will depend
on the political resolve of all parties concerned and the
provision of assistance by the international community
to the peace process and the ongoing mediation efforts.
It should not be subject to time factors, since it is plain
that they have not been very effective in many longstanding conflicts.

My delegation, following the approach that we
have successfully advocated in other conflicts around
the world, takes the view that peace in the region
requires political dialogue in order to normalize
relationships between Chad and the Central African
Republic, as well as between Chad and the Sudan.
Similarly, we believe in the need to take measures that
will build a climate of trust to ensure that these States
refrain from providing support to armed rebel groups
operating on their territories against their respective
neighbours.

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin my statement by thanking the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Chad and
the Central African Republic, Mr. Victor Da Silva
Angelo, for his briefing this morning. I also welcome
the presence in the Council today of the Permanent
Representatives of the Central African Republic and
Chad.
My delegation acknowledges that the United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and
Chad (MINURCAT) has made significant progress for
the benefit of the region. First of all, it assisted in the
complete deployment of the Détachement intégré de
sécurité in April 2009, in spite of the limitations that
have been pointed out today. Similarly, MINURCAT
has contributed to the agreements between the
Government of Chad and the opposition with a view to
adopting an electoral legislative framework and
establishing a National Independent Electoral
Commission in that country. Lastly, it has participated
very actively in the verification of 1,077 kilometres
free of mines and unexploded ordnance in eastern
Chad.
Despite these significant advances, we view with
concern the delay in the deployment of the authorized
force for MINURCAT. In particular, we are concerned
about the effects that a mission operating at less than
half of its strength may have when it comes to
fulfilling its humanitarian activities. We ask the
Secretariat to keep us informed on progress in this
area.

16

My delegation underscores the importance of
developing measures to fulfil the Doha agreement of
May 2009 and the Dakar agreement of March 2008
between Chad and the Central African Republic. It
might be useful to consider the possibility of
establishing a tracking and monitoring mechanism for
those agreements and for the conflict.
The security situation in MINURCAT’s area of
operations continues to be tense owing to the steppedup activities of armed groups to the detriment of
relationships between the Governments of Chad and
the Central African Republic, and also to the mutual
accusations of support being given to opposition armed
groups.
It is disquieting to see the worsening in the
human rights situation in the area. We need to address
the complaints of incidents directed against
humanitarian workers of the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations, as well as their
facilities and violations directed against vulnerable
groups, particularly women and children.
The violation of the rights of the child in the
Central African Republic and in Chad continues to be
of great concern to my delegation. For this reason,
through our work in the Security Council Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict, we shall seek
to appeal to armed groups and both Governments to
develop plans of action that will help to prevent the
recruitment, the re-recruitment and the use of children,

09-42729

S/PV.6172

as well as accountability mechanisms on the basis of
resolution 1612 (2005).
I take this opportunity to commend the activities
of MINURCAT that led to the handover into the
custody of UNICEF 84 children who were pressed into
service by the Chadian forces during the recent
hostilities.
I would like to conclude by indicating that my
delegation supports the strategic workplan proposed by
the Secretary-General in his report (S/2009/359),
which appears to us to be quite complete as it includes
aspects of protection for civilians and humanitarian
agents, humanitarian assistance and the strengthening
of the legal framework in order to enhance access to
justice, security and the rule of law.
Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland): I join others in thanking Special
Representative of Secretary-General Victor Angelo for
his briefing today. We are very grateful to him and all
the contributors to the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT) for
its work to date.
MINURCAT is clearly starting to have an effect
on the ground, but the situation in eastern Chad
remains of serious concern. I will not repeat the point
that others have made, but it is clear that there has been
a very difficult security situation there, especially since
May.
I would like to focus on three points. First of all,
peace in Chad remains inextricably linked to peace in
Darfur. We need more cooperation between N’Djamena
and Khartoum and less trading of accusations. Chadian
aerial bombing of Darfur is of deep concern to us. We
very much agree with the Secretary-General on the
importance of a political process between Chad and the
Sudan in delivering a lasting solution, and reiterate his
call for a meeting of the Dakar Contact Group. That
should be a very high priority now.
Secondly, we welcome development by the
United Nations of a strategic workplan and the
benchmarks therein. These provide a clearer picture of
the progress of the Mission towards fulfilling its
mandate and of the effect of the wider context on the
progress being made by MINURCAT.
But one area the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2009/359) does not tackle is the issue of recruitment
to rebel movements from refugee and internally

09-42729

displaced persons camps. It would be interesting to
hear the views of MINURCAT and Mr. Angelo, either
today or in a later report, as to the scale of that problem
and, indeed, how it might be addressed.
Thirdly, we welcome the full deployment of the
Détachement intégré de sécurité (DIS) and the
evidence of its improving effectiveness. DIS has
provided us, the Secretary-General’s report notes, with
exceptional humanitarian escorts as MINURCAT has
developed its operational capacity. Going forward,
however, it will be important that DIS ensure that its
escort services are not delivered to the detriment of its
work within the refugee camps and thus do not
undermine the civil status of those camps. So it will be
important that MINURCAT take responsibility for
those escort duties as soon as possible.
Mr. Skračić (Croatia): I would like to join other
delegations in thanking the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Victor Da Silva Angelo, for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/359).
Like other delegations, we welcome the progress
that has been made in implementing the 13 August
2007 agreement between the Government and political
opposition groups in Chad, especially with regard to
the status of the opposition, as well as to the adoption
of implementing modalities for the electoral code and
the successful launching and completion of the general
population census.
As stated by the Secretary-General, the successful
holding of national elections, if they are free, fair,
inclusive and transparent, could not only provide a
fresh chance for national reconciliation, but also prove
to be decisive in strengthening the internal political
dialogue and therefore political stability throughout
Chad. We urge the Chadian Government to build upon
this positive momentum to create the conditions for an
inclusive and comprehensive political process and, it is
to be hoped, address the root causes of conflict in the
eastern parts of the country.
As has been previously stated, the key to
overcoming
Chad’s
internal
weaknesses
and
vulnerability is through an inclusive political dialogue.
We encourage all groups to work together on such
issues as the increased protection of human rights —
including the rights of refugees and internally
displaced persons, especially women and children —
and the fight against impunity for crimes committed.

17

S/PV.6172

It is unfortunate that the aforementioned positive
political momentum in Chad has not been duplicated at
the subregional level. The relations between Chad and
the Sudan seriously deteriorated during the reporting
period, and the security situation in north-eastern
Central African Republic has deteriorated considerably
owing to banditry and armed robbery.
With regard to Chad-Sudan relations, while we
welcome the initial success in reaching the Doha
agreement on 3 May this year, there was an almost
concurrent attack by Chadian armed opposition forces
of the Union des forces de la résistance from western
Darfur deep into eastern Chad, with the stated aim of
overthrowing the Chadian Government. That incursion
not only caused an immediate breakdown of the
aforementioned, hard-fought Doha agreement, but also
precipitated a Chadian armed reaction against targets in
western Darfur, including through airstrikes, which
served only to exacerbate an already precarious
security situation in both countries. Like the SecretaryGeneral, Croatia calls upon the two Governments to
stop supporting each other’s rebel groups and to
redouble their efforts to build mutual confidence and
ease tensions in the region so as to try to restore some
semblance of order and stability.
Croatia is also concerned at the grave
humanitarian situation in eastern Chad, with up to
400,000 refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) seeking aid of some sort. The long-term
presence of refugee and IDP camps in eastern Chad not
only puts pressure on the local populations, but also
provides ample room in which bandits and armed
groups can operate. We therefore very much welcome
the deployment of security elements of the
Détachement intégré de sécurité (DIS) in 12 refugee
camps and some key towns in eastern Chad to provide
security. We
also
welcome
and
appreciate
MINURCAT’s efforts to help ensure that DIS receives
the support and training it needs. We note, however,
that DIS is a community policing force and is not
equipped to react to large-scale military incursions.
Finally, while acknowledging that MINURCAT is
still at less than 50 per cent capacity — which could
definitely have an impact on its effectiveness — we
hope that possible contributions on the part of a
number of troop-contributing countries by sending
troops to bring MINURCAT up to full strength will be
realized by the end of this year. We also acknowledge
that MINURCAT is suffering from a lack of some key

18

enablers, including military helicopters, and express
the hope that new troop-contributing countries will
consider this when making their pledges.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Uganda.
I wish to join other Council members in thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Mission in the Central
African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), Mr. Victor
Angelo, for his briefing. I welcome the participation of
the representatives of Chad and the Central African
Republic in this meeting.
We are encouraged by the efforts of the
Government of Chad and the political opposition
towards the progress made in the implementation of the
13 August 2007 agreement and by the consensus
reached on the legislative framework for elections.
However, much more needs to be done in order to
consolidate the gains achieved so far. The launching of
an attack by Chadian armed opposition groups on
4 May this year illustrates the fragile political situation
in the country.
We commend the Government of the Central
African Republic for the inclusive political dialogue of
December 2008 and for measures undertaken to foster
dialogue, including the establishment of a broad-based
Government on 28 January 2009. Nevertheless, we are
concerned about the armed rebellion in the North-East
and its negative impact on the stability of the country.
We call upon both the Government and armed groups
to take concrete steps towards ending the rebellion by
addressing political disagreements through peaceful
means.
We commend the mediation efforts of the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya. The normalization of relations
between the Sudan and Chad is critical to a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the two countries
and the entire region. Durable peace and stability in the
region will require the resolution of the internal
conflicts prevailing in both countries.
Uganda commends the leadership and the staff of
MINURCAT for their work. In view of the valuable
contribution that the Mission is making, it is critical
that the deployment of MINURCAT to its full capacity
be expedited so that it can better implement its
mandate.

09-42729

S/PV.6172

We welcome the development of the strategic
workplan, with benchmarks to measure progress on the
implementation of activities mandated by resolution
1861 (2009). We call upon MINURCAT to focus on
strengthening the capacities of national institutions as a
core part of its exit strategy.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I call on the representative of the Central African
Republic.
Mr. Poukré-Kono (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): I welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad (MINURCAT)
(S/2009/359) and the latest developments it brings to
the attention of the Security Council and the
international community. On behalf of my Government,
I should like to thank MINURCAT and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Victor
Angelo, for the outstanding manner in which they are
carrying out their mandates. They can be assured of the
full support of the Central African Government.
The situation prevailing in the North-East,
particularly in the prefectures of Vakaga and Haute
Kotto, remains worrisome in several particulars.
Following the inclusive political dialogue clashes
broke out between certain rebel forces and the Central
African armed forces; a new rebel movement formed,
causing a rupture within the Union des forces
démocratiques pour le rassemblement; ethnic clashes
erupted; and alliances were established. These have
been accompanied by mass displacement of the
population and restrictions on humanitarian, economic,
trade, agricultural activities and the proliferation of
light weapons. In order to remedy these problems — in
particular ethnic tensions — the Government has
intervened to try to reconcile the feuding communities.
The restoration of the rule of law is sorely needed.
Government mediation efforts were undertaken
immediately, since the Government is the party with
the primary responsibility for protecting its population
from the woes of insecurity. It therefore launched talks
with certain rebel groups that were hesitant to enter
into the inclusive political dialogue. This approach has
brought those groups into closer interaction with the
Government, and certain groups have signed on to the
Libreville Comprehensive Peace Agreement of June
2008.

09-42729

This progress is welcome, as it will facilitate the
implementation of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process, which is very important for
any country emerging from conflict. That process is
necessary both to respond to the urgent humanitarian
needs created by the conflicts and to support socioeconomic development.
I have mentioned in one of my statements to this
Council the strategic geography of the North-East of
the Central African Republic, which forms a triangle
with Chad and the Sudan. This area was vital to the
country because of the former lively trade with Port
Sudan and the seasonal cattle migration patterns from
Chad, along with its mineral and animal resources.
Since then, it has become too dangerous for economic
activity due to the emergence of rebel groups and the
impact on the area of the situation in southern Darfur.
The activities of MINURCAT, which has replaced
the European Union-led military force in the region,
have increased, and with good reason. The United
Nations has shown great concern for my country from
the time when crises gripped the country for an entire
decade until we emerged from them, and we are
therefore ready to cooperate fully with the
Organization. The consultations between MINURCAT
and the Government have proven fruitful, as most of
our discussions have often led to agreements. Of
course, MINURCAT is mandated to provide counsel
and advice, as evidenced by the fact that the
Government has been able to establish a purely
humanitarian corridor, with no apparent armed escorts,
to come to the aid of its population along the route
from Ndélé, in the Central African Republic, to Daha,
in Chad.
Aware of the logistical difficulties in the Central
African Republic, MINURCAT put its means of
transportation at the disposal of the Central African
Republic authorities in order to enable them to come
occasionally to the area of operations. This occurred
when ethnic groups clashed in the northern part of the
country. Despite the meagre resources at their disposal
and the difficult terrain, MINURCAT has been able to
support the Government in times of crisis.
We would request here a strengthening of
assistance to MINURCAT to enable it to easily deploy
in its area of operations. The difficulties on the ground
are not negligible, which only highlights the
commitment of MINURCAT to the refugees and

19

S/PV.6172

displaced people of the Central African Republic. We
remain grateful for its humanitarian efforts. We
reiterate our commitment to supporting MINURCAT in
the fulfilment of its mandate. We would also like once
again to express our gratitude to France, which is also
helping us in terms of logistics in the northern part of
the country.

The international community, in particular this Council
and all peace- and justice-loving countries, should
work to meet its very urgent staff and equipment needs
so that it can effectively and fully carry out its mandate
in optimal conditions. We warmly thank the institutions
and countries that have contributed human and
financial resources.

My Government believes that the activities of
MINURCAT,
the
United
Nations
Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic,
the Mission of the Economic Community of Central
African States for the consolidation of peace, and the
Peacebuilding Commission must complement each
other in a country emerging from conflict. In its exit
strategy, MINURCAT identified the criteria for
stabilizing the situation in north-eastern Central
African Republic with disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes that we will carry out in
accordance with the Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding in the Central African Republic of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

We also express our gratitude and thanks to the
generous contributors to the Détachement intégré de
sécurité (DIS) trust fund. That local policing unit is
quite original and has a role on the ground that is of
great importance. The financing of the DIS will
unfortunately be a source of concern, if, by the end of
the year, additional financial efforts are not made both
by previous contributors, who have been generous, and
by new contributors. Chad, for its part, intends to
commit to progressively taking charge of the DIS
following negotiations planned for 2010 with the
Secretariat of the United Nations.

In conclusion, I call once again for a serious
examination of the situation in north-eastern Central
African Republic on the basis of a regional approach.
The stakes are high for all the actors on the ground.
Another concern is the activities of the Ugandan rebels
of the Lord’s Resistance Army, who carried out
incursions in 2008 and 2009 in Obo in the South-East,
leaving behind victims, taking supplies and seed stock
with them, taking men hostage as porters, kidnapping
women and enlisting child soldiers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chad.
Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): I take
the floor to say a few brief words on the excellent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/359) on the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), which has just been
introduced to us by Mr. Angelo. First of all, however, I
would like to extend my congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for this month of July.
With respect to MINURCAT, I note that it is
deploying to the satisfaction of my country and the
United Nations. Its positive role in protecting
vulnerable populations, including refugees, displaced
persons, humanitarian workers and others, should be
recognized and welcomed, as most speakers have done.

20

I would like to note, as most speakers today have
done, that the tireless resolve of Chad to resolve its
domestic problems has recently been illustrated by
three major events: the completion of a census of the
population, with a view to holding free and transparent
legislative and then presidential elections, beginning in
June 2010; the establishment of the National
Independent Electoral Commission, which is equitably
made up of 15 members of the majority and 15
members of the opposition, with its chairman chosen
by a consensus of all parties; and the return to legality
of several hundred elements of armed groups in the
country, which had come from the Sudan. I would note
in particular, as the Council has, the Mouvement
national of Mr. Ahmat Hassaballah Soubiane which on
25 July signed a reconciliation agreement with the
Government thanks to the ongoing good offices of our
brother and guide, Muammar Al-Qadhafi, to the
mediators of the Community of Sahelo-Saharan States.
Faced with Sudanese aggression, we remain wary
and poised to deal with any eventuality. Given our
previous
disappointment
following
Khartoum’s
violations of many peace agreements, the international
community may well understand our suspicions.
Contrary to recent allegations made by our Sudanese
neighbour, we have not been flying over its airspace or
carrying out strikes against armed groups in Darfur.
Curiously, the Sudan claims that we are carrying out
flyovers of its territory with Jaguar and Mirage-type
planes, which our air force does not possess.

09-42729

S/PV.6172

We acknowledge having carried out air strikes to
destroy forces that came from the Sudan and assembled
along the border on the side of Tissi, in Chadian
territory. The international community cannot reproach
us for exercising our legitimate and inalienable right to
self-defence by land or air military means. However,
we remain fully ready to normalize our relations with
the Sudan, in the interests of our two peoples, who are
brothers and neighbours. Therefore, we take due note
of the concerns and observations expressed by all
speakers and will do our best to provide them with
appropriate follow-up. We reaffirm our full cooperation
with the United Nations as it carries out its noble
mission of peace in our country.
The President: I will now give the floor to
Mr. Angelo to respond to comments and issues that
have been raised.
Mr. Angelo (spoke in French): I take the floor to
clarify two or three points, but before I do I wish to
show the Council a number of photographs.
The first photograph is of Birao, the capital of
Vakaga, at least 60 per cent of which was destroyed by
the two attacks in June. Until late May, the town was
an important commercial centre; life had started up
there again. Since then, the town has been almost
completely abandoned; it is a ghost town. The
population has fled to the bush and, despite our
deployment, they are not confident enough to return.
The second photograph is an example of a
Détachement intégré de sécurité (DIS) police station in
our area of operations in eastern Chad. The men and
women in blue are from contingents of the
Gendarmerie and the Chadian National Police that we
have trained as DIS officers and deployed on the
ground. These photographs are women of the DIS.
This photograph is of the Iriba prison in eastern
Chad. I did not want to show conditions inside because
I do not wish to shock the Council. I am just showing
the outside walls, and leaving the rest to the
imagination. We will revisit the subject of prisons
tomorrow at a meeting on our programme activities in
eastern Chad.
This is photograph shows a conflict resolution
meeting on among the communities. I will speak of
that shortly, but this is to show a specific example of
people of different ethnic groups meeting together and

09-42729

spending an entire day — in this case — discussing
ways to resolve their conflicts.
(spoke in English)
I would now like to say two or three things. First,
I thank members for the kind words that have been said
by all of the delegations concerning the work of the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad. We have staff throughout the
country, in some cases in extremely difficult
conditions. Very often we receive complaints — from,
for instance, the Détachement intégré de sécurité —
that their living conditions are not good at all. That is
true, but then I take them to see the living conditions of
our own staff, and in many cases those conditions are
not better. I therefore thank Council members for their
kind words. We can pledge that we will maintain our
engagement and commitment, and at the same time we
will try to improve the working and living conditions
not only of the staff, but of the Détachement intégré de
sécurité and their elements.
When it comes to conflict resolution at the
community level, I would like to mention two things. I
think it is a very important activity because very often
these conflicts are a first source of combatants for the
rebellions if they are not addressed. Very often, some
of those combatants join the rebellions because there
have been a number of conflicts between different
groups at the community level. Those conflicts have
not been properly addressed or properly mediated, and
one of the sides decides to take the road to the desert
and join one of the rebellions.
The second thing to mention that is important in
the context of community dialogue and community
conflict resolution is that, with conflict resolution, we
create conditions for the return of the displaced, and
that is very important as well.
As far as the Dakar process is concerned, we
believe that the conditions are there for the border
monitoring mechanism to be put in place. We need a
meeting as soon as possible of all of the members of
the Dakar group, and preferably that meeting should
take place in Khartoum. The most recent meeting took
place in N’Djamena. As a confidence-building
measure, the next meeting should take place in
Khartoum, and during that meeting Chad, the Sudan
and all of the other members of the Dakar process
should agree on the immediate implementation of the
border monitoring mechanism.

21

S/PV.6172

As I said, I believe the conditions are there. The
point is to make sure that, on both sides of the border, a
number of confidence-building measures are taken
prior to the next meeting of the Dakar process. I am
very much counting on the different countries that are
part of the process to be able to create those
confidence-building measures and hold that meeting.
With respect to DIS, there was a reference to
discipline. I have to say that we and the Government of
Chad have taken questions of discipline very seriously.
All of those who have misbehaved have now been
expelled from the force. I must also note that the
percentage of cases of serious indiscipline stands at
around 3 per cent. That is well within accepted
standards, because very often these types of forces
have an indiscipline rate of about 5 per cent. We have
discipline problems, but not only have we been able to
deal with them, but in percentage terms they are not
outside the usual range for these types of forces.
The DIS approach is an extremely innovative one
that combines international security mechanisms with
strengthened national security mechanisms. We must
make sure that the DIS is a successful experience. We
need resources and we also need to be sure that
everyone understands that one of the key criteria of our
successful presence in Chad is the successful
implementation of the DIS concept.
Like all Council members, we, too, are concerned
about the deployment delays. We urge all those who
have pledged to contribute to the force to make those
contributions as soon as possible. We also urge those
already there to envisage an extension of their presence
if they are planning to leave within the near future. We
truly need the presence of everyone. I can assure the
Council that, if we are fully deployed, we will make a
difference in eastern Chad. The Council can note my
words as I speak, and we can talk about that at one of
the Council’s future meetings. We will make a
difference; we only need to make sure that we are fully
deployed there. We also need, of course, the military
enablers.

22

We are certainly very concerned by the situation
in the north-eastern Central African Republic. Since
early May, there has been a very serious deterioration
of the situation. There has been a proliferation of
ethnic-based militias and weapons. Recently, we have
seen also some of the militias crossing the border into
Darfur and looking for support from their kith and kin
there in their fight against other groups. We are very
concerned about that.
We are trying to make sure that the resources that
we have available in Birao are maximized. We are not
asking for additional resources. We are trying to make
full use of the limited resources that we have in the
area, and we are creating the security conditions for the
political work that the Government of the Central
African Republic is supposed to do in the area. We are
providing not only the security environment that it
needs to do the mediation and the political work, but
also some logistical support, taking into consideration
the extremely limited means of the Government in
Bangui.
Allow me to say a final word on benchmarks and
the workplan. The United Kingdom delegation asked
for some concrete figures and analysis of the question
of recruitment in the camps. We will certainly do that
in the next report. That is a very serious matter. We are
looking at different approaches and strategies to deal
with it. It is ongoing, and we will come back to the
Council with not only an analysis, but also with
concrete measures that we intend to implement, or
might already be implementing at that stage, depending
very much on our capacity on the ground, particularly
in terms of the force strength.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

09-42729
