RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED AND DECISIONS TAKEN
BY THE SECURITY COUNCIL IN 1950
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTEES ET DECISIONS PRISES
PAR LE CONSEIL DE SECURITE EN 1950

Part l. Questions considered by the Security Council
under its responsibility for the maintenance OJ
international peace and security

THE

INDIA-PAKISTAN QUESTION 1

Premiere partie. Questions examinees par le Conseil
de sec11rite en tant qu 'organe responsable du maintien
de la paix et de la securite internationales

LA QUESTION INDE-PAKISTAN 1

80 (1950). Resolution of 14 March 1950

80 (1950). Resolution du 14 mars 1950

[S/ 1469]

[S/1469]

The Security Council,

Le Consei/ de securite,

Ayant pris acte des rapports 2 que lui a envoyes la
Having received and noted the reports 2 of the United
Nations Commission for India and Pakistan established Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Jnde et le Pakistan
by its resolutions 39 (1948) of 20 January and 47 (I 948) creee par ses resolutions 39 (I 948) du 20 janvier et 47
(1948) du 21 avril 1948,
of 21 April 1948,
Having also received a11d noted the report of General
Ayant egalement pris acte du rapport que Jui a envoye
A. G. L. Mc Naughton a on the outcome of his discussions le general A. G. L. McNaughton 3 sur le resultat des
with the representatives of India and Pakistan which 1 conversations qu 'il a cues avec les representants de
were initiated in pursuance of the decision taken by the l'Inde et du Pakistan en execution de la decision prise
Security Council on 17 December 1949, 4
par le Conseil de securite le 17 decem bre 1949 ',
Commending the Governments of India and Pakistan ; Felicitant Jes Gouvernements de l"lnde et du Pakistan
for their statesmanlike action in reaching the agreements pour la sagesse politique dont ils ont fait preuve en
embodied in the United Nations Commission's reso- concluant Jes accords formules dans lcs resolutions de

' Resolutions or decisions on this question were also adopted by
the Council in 1948 and 1949.
2
Official Records of the Security Council, Third Year, Supplement
fiJr November 1948, document S/1100: ibid., Fourth Year, Supplement
for January 1949, document S/1196; and ibid., Fourth Year, Special
Supplem£nt No. 7.
3 Ibid., Fifth Year, Supplement for 1 January through 31 May
/.'150, document S/1453.
• Ibid., Fourth Year, Resolutions and Decisions of the Security
Cmmril. 1949, p. 7.

1
Question ayant fait l'objet de resolutions ou decisions de la
part du Conseil en 1948 et 1949.
2 Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite, troisieme annee,
Supplement de novembre 1948, document S/1100; ibid., 'l.uatrieme
annee, Supplement de Janvier 1949, document S/1196; et ibid., quatrieme annee, Supplement special n° 7.
• Ibid., cinquieme annee, Supplement de la periode du 1~r janvier
au .JI mai T.950, document S/1453.
• Ibid., quatrieme annee, Resolutions et decisions du Conseil de
securite, 1949, p. 7.

la Commission dt,; Nations Unies en date du 13 aout
l 948 5 et du 5 janv1er 1949 6 , relatifs a une suspension
d'armes, a la demilitarisation de l'Etat de Jammu et
Cachemire et a la fixation du statut definitif de cet Etat
conformement a la volonte de la population exprimee
de fai;on democratique par un plebiscite libre et impartial,
et felicitant notamment Jes parties d 'avoir partiellement
mis en reuvre ces resolutions: 1) en cessant Jes hostilites
le I er janvier I 949, 2) en etablissant une ligne de suspension d 'armes le 27 juillet 1949, et 3) en acceptant la
nomination de l'amiral Chester W. Nimitz au postc
d 'administrateur du plebiscite,
Consideranr qu'il y a lieu, pour resoudre Jes difficultes
qui subsistent, de se fonder sur l'accord appreciable qui
a deja cte realise sur des principes fondamentaux, et
considerant que des mesures devraient etre prises immediatement en vue de demilitariser l'Etat et d 'en fixer
rapidement le sort conformement a la volonte librement
exprimee de ses habitants,
I. Invite Jes Gouvernements de l'lnde et du Pakistan.
sans prejudice de leurs droits ou revendications et
compte dument tenu des exigences de l'ordre public,
a prendre immediatement Jes dispositions necessaires
pour preparer et executer, dans un delai de cinq mois a
compter de la date de la presentc resolution, un programme de demilitarisation qui s'inspire soit des principes
enonces au paragraphe 2 de la proposition du general
McNaughton 7 , soit des modifications apportees a ces
principes par accord mutuel;
2. Decide de nommer un representant des Nations
Unies qui sera habilite a exercer ses fonctions en tout
lieu ou tous lieux qu'il jugera appropries, et qui sera
charge:
a) D'aider a preparer le programme de demilitarisation susvise, d'en surveiller )'execution et d'interpreter
Jes accords conclus par Jes parties en vue de la demilitarisation;
b) De se mettre a la disposition des Gouvernements
de l'Inde et du Pakistan et de soumettre a ces gouvernements ou au Conseil de securite toute proposition qui
Jui semblerait de nature a contribuer au reglement rapide
et durable du differend qui a surgi entre les deux gouvernements au sujet de l 'Etat de Jammu et Cachemire;

lutions of I 3 August 1948 5 and 5 January 1949 6 for a
cease-fire, for the demilitarization of the State of Jammu
and Kashmir and for the determination of its final
disposition in accordance with the will of the people
through the democratic method of a free and impartial
plebiscite, and commending the parties in particular
for their action in partially implementing.these resolutions
by (l) the cessation of ho,:tilities effected I January 1949.
(2) the establishment of a cease-fire line on 27 July 1949,
and (3) the agreement that Fleet Admiral Chester
W. Nimitz shall be Plebiscite Administrator,
Considering that the resolution of the outstanding
difficulties should be based upon the substantial measure
of agreement on fundamental principles already reached,
and that steps should be taken forthwith for the demilitarization of the State and for the expeditious determination of its future in accordance with the freely expressed
will of the inhabitants,
I. Calls upon the Governments of India and Pakistan
to make immediate arrangements, without prejudice to
me1, rights or claims and with due regard to the
requirements of law and order, to !Jrepare and execute
within a period of five months from the date of this
resolution a programme of demilitarization on the basis
of the principles of paragraph 2 of General McNaughton's
proposal 7 or of such modifications of those principles
as may be mutually agreed;

2. Decides to appoint a United Nations Representative
for the following purposes who shall have authority to
perform his functions in such place or places as he may
deem appropriate :
(a) To assist in the preparation and to supervise the
implementation of the programme of demilitarization
referred to above and to interpret the agreements reached
by the parties for demilitarization;
(b) To place himself at the disposal of the Governments
of India and Pakistan and to place before those Governments or the Security Council any suggestions which,
in his opinion, are likely to contribute to the expeditious
and enduring solution of the dispute which has arisen
between the two Governments in regard to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir;
(c) To exercise all of the powers and responsibilities :
c) D'exercer tous Jes pouvoirs et attributions devolus
devolving upon the United Nations Commission for a la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le
India and Pakistan by reason of existing resolutions of Pakistan en vertu des resolutions existantes du Conseil
the Security Council and by reason of the agreement of de securite et en vertu de !'accord conclu entre les parties
the parties embodied in the resolutions of the United et qui figure dans Jes resolutions adoptees par la CommisNations Commission of 13 August 1948 5 and 5 January sion des Nations Unies les 13 aofit 1948 5 et 5 janvier
1949; 6
1949 6 :
(d) To arrange at the appropriate stage of demilitad) De prendre, au stade approprie de la demilitarirization for the assumption by the Plebiscite Administrator sation. les dispositions voulues pour que l'administrateur

• Ibid., Third Year, Supplement for November lfJ48, document
• Ibid., troisieme a11nee, Supplement de norembre 1948, document
S/1100, para. 75.
, S/1100, par. 75.
• Ibid., Fourth Year, Supplement for January 194fl, document
• Ibid., quatrieme annee, Supplement de janvier 194.9, document
S/1196, para. 15.
, S/1196, par. 75.
7
7 Ibid., cinquieme a1111ee, Supplement de la periode du Jcr janvi,,r
Ibid., Fifth Year, Supplement for 1 January through 31 May
1960, document S/1453, p. 14.
au -31 mai 1960, document S/1453, p. 14.

2

of the functions assigned to the latter under agreements du plebiscite puisse exercer Jes fonctions qui Jui ont ete
conferees par les accords conclus entre les parties;
made between the parties;
e) De soumettre au Conseil de securite tout rapport
(e) To report to the Security Council as he may consider
necessary, submitting his conclusions and any recommen- qu 'ii jugera necessaire, avec les conclusions et les
recommandations qu 'ii estimera devoir presenter;
dations which he may desire to make;
3. Prie Jes deux gouvernements de prendre toutes Jes
3. Requests the two Governments to take all necessary
precautions to ensure that their agreements regarding precautions utiles pour s'assurer que les accords relatifs
the cease-fire shall continue to be faithfully observed, a la suspension d 'armes seront fidelement observes et
and calls upon them to take all possible measures to invite ces gouvernements a prendre toutes les mcsures
ensure the creation and maintenance of an atmosphere possibles pour creer et maintenir un climat favorable a
la poursuite des negociations;
favourable to the promotion of further negotiations;
4. Exprime ses remerciements aux membres de la
4. Extends its best thanks to the members of the United
Nations Commission for India and Pakistan and to Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Inde et le Pakistan
General A. G. L. McNaughton for their arduous and et au general A. G. L. McNaughton pour Jes travaux
ardus et fructueux qu'ils ont accomplis;
fruitful labours;
5. Agrees that the United Nations Commission for , 5. Decide que la Commission des Nations Unies pour
India and Pakistan shall be terminated, and decides l'Inde et le Pakistan sera dissoute et que cette dissolution
that this shall take place one month after both parties i prendra effet un mois apres le jour ou. Jes deux parties
have informed the United Nations Representative of auront fait connaitre au representant des Nations Unies
their acceptance of the transfer to him of the powers and qu'elles acceptent le transfert audit representant des
responsibilities of the United Nations Commission pouvoirs et attributions vises a l'alinea, du paragraphe 2
referred to in paragraph 2 (c) above.
ci-dcssus.
Adopted at the 470th meeting
by 8 votes to none, with 2
abstentions ( India, Yugoslavia).•

Adoptee d la 470• sea11ce par
S voix ca11tre zero, avec 2 abs-

tentions ( lnde, Yougoslavie) 8 •

Decision

Decision

At its 471st meeting, on 12 April 1950, the Council
appointed Sir Owen Dixon United Nations Representative
for India and Pakistan.

Asa 47l e seance, k 12 avril 1950, le Conseil a nomme
sir Owen Dixon representant des Nations Unies pour
l'I nde et le Pakistan.

Adopted by 8 votes to 11011e,
with 2 abstentions ( India,
Yugoslavia). •

Adoptee par S voix comr
zero, avcc 2 abstentions ( Jnde,
Yougos/avie) •.

COMPLAINT OF AGGRESSION UPON
THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA

PLAINTE POUR AGRESSION
CONTRE LA REPUBLIQUE DE COREE

Decision

Decision

At its 473rd meeting, on 25 June 1950, the Council
decided, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure, to invite the representative of the Republic of
Korea to take a place at the Council table during the
consideration of the question.

A sa 473e seance, le 25 juin 1950, le Conseil a deci.de,
en vertu de !'article 39 de son reglement interieur provisoire, d'inviter le representant de la Republique de
Coree a prendre place a la table du Conseil pendant
l'examen de la question.

• One member (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) was absent.

. •. Un des membres (Union des Republiqucs socialistes sovietiques)
eta11 absent.

3
