United Nations

A/RES/64/89

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 January 2010

Sixty-fourth session
Agenda item 31

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 10 December 2009
[on the report of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) (A/64/405)]

64/89. Operations of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 194 (III) of 11 December 1948, 212 (III) of 19 November
1948, 302 (IV) of 8 December 1949 and all subsequent related resolutions, including
its resolution 63/93 of 5 December 2008,
Recalling also the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Having considered the report of the Commissioner-General of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East covering the period
from 1 January to 31 December 2008, 1
0F

Taking note of the letter dated 10 June 2009 from the Chairman of the Advisory
Commission of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East addressed to the Commissioner-General, 2
1F

Deeply concerned about the critical financial situation of the Agency, as well as
its rising expenditures resulting from the deterioration of the socio-economic and
humanitarian conditions in the region and their significant negative impact on the
provision of necessary Agency services to the Palestine refugees, including its
emergency-related and development programmes,
Recalling Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter of the United Nations and the
Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 3
2F

Recalling also the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, 4
3F

_______________
1
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/64/13); and
ibid., Supplement No. 13A (A/64/13/Add.1).
2
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/64/13), pp. vi
and vii.
3
Resolution 22 A (I).
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2051, No. 35457.

09-46717

*0946717*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/64/89

Affirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949, 5 to the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
4F

Aware of the continuing needs of the Palestine refugees throughout the Occupied
Palestinian Territory and in the other fields of operation, namely, Jordan, Lebanon and
the Syrian Arab Republic,
Gravely concerned about the extremely difficult living conditions being faced by
the Palestine refugees in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem,
particularly in the refugee camps in the Gaza Strip, as a result of the continuing
prolonged Israeli closures and severe economic and movement restrictions that in
effect amount to a blockade and the military operations in the Gaza Strip between
December 2008 and January 2009, which caused extensive loss of life and injury,
particularly among Palestinian civilians, including children and women; widespread
damage and destruction to Palestinian homes, properties, vital infrastructure and public
institutions, including hospitals, schools and United Nations facilities; and internal
displacement of civilians,
Commending the extraordinary efforts by the Agency to provide emergency
relief, medical, food, shelter and other humanitarian assistance to needy and displaced
families in the Gaza Strip,
Recalling, in this regard, its resolution ES-10/18 of 16 January 2009 and Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009) of 8 January 2009,
Expressing regret over the continued suspension of the Agency’s efforts to repair
and rebuild thousands of damaged or destroyed refugee shelters due to the continued
prohibition of the import of essential construction materials into the Gaza Strip by
Israel,
Stressing the urgent need for reconstruction to begin in the Gaza Strip, including
through the completion of numerous suspended projects managed by the Agency,
according to the proposal of the Secretary-General, and the commencement of United
Nations-led civilian reconstruction activities,
Welcoming, in this regard, the International Conference in Support of the
Palestinian Economy for the Reconstruction of Gaza, held in Sharm el-Sheikh, Egypt,
on 2 March 2009, and urging the disbursement of pledges to accelerate the
reconstruction process,
Taking note of the Agency’s continuing efforts to assist those refugees affected
and displaced by the crisis in the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp in northern Lebanon, and
welcoming the efforts of the Government of Lebanon and the international community
to support the rebuilding by the Agency of the Nahr el-Bared camp,
Aware of the valuable work done by the Agency in providing protection to the
Palestinian people, in particular Palestine refugees,
Gravely concerned about the endangerment of the safety of the Agency’s staff
and about the damage and destruction caused to the facilities of the Agency, in
particular as a result of the military operations in the Gaza Strip during the reporting
period,

_______________
5

2

Ibid., vol. 75, No. 973.

A/RES/64/89

Deploring the extensive damage and destruction of Agency facilities in the Gaza
Strip caused during the military operations between December 2008 and January 2009,
including to schools where civilians were sheltered and the Agency’s main compound
and warehouse, as reported in the summary by the Secretary-General of the report of
the Board of Inquiry 6 and in the report of the United Nations Fact-finding Mission on
the Gaza Conflict, 7
5F

6F

Deploring also, in this regard, the breaches of the inviolability of United Nations
premises, the failure to accord the property and assets of the Organization immunity
from any form of interference and the failure to protect United Nations personnel,
premises and property,
Deploring further the killing and injury of Agency staff members by the Israeli
occupying forces in the Occupied Palestinian Territory since September 2000,
Deploring the killing and wounding of refugee children in the Agency schools by
the Israeli occupying forces,
Expressing deep concern about the gravely negative impact of the continuing
prolonged closures and severe restrictions on the movement of persons and goods,
which in effect amount to a blockade in the Gaza Strip, and the construction of the
wall, contrary to international law, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in
and around East Jerusalem, on the socio-economic situation of the Palestine refugees,
Deeply concerned about the continuing imposition of restrictions on the freedom
of movement and access of the Agency’s staff, vehicles and goods, and the injury,
harassment and intimidation of the Agency’s staff, which undermine and obstruct the
work of the Agency, including its ability to provide essential basic and emergency
services,
Aware of the agreement between the Agency and the Government of Israel,
Taking note of the agreement reached on 24 June 1994, embodied in an exchange
of letters between the Agency and the Palestine Liberation Organization, 8
7F

1.
Reaffirms that the effective functioning of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East remains essential in all fields of
operation;
Expresses its appreciation to the Commissioner-General of the United
2.
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, as well as to
all of the staff of the Agency, for their tireless efforts and valuable work, particularly in
the light of the difficult conditions and dangerous circumstances faced during the past
year, and, on the occasion of her impending retirement, expresses its appreciation to
Commissioner-General Karen Koning AbuZayd for her nine years of dedicated service
to the Palestine refugees;
Expresses special commendation to the Agency on the occasion of the
3.
sixtieth anniversary of its establishment;
4.
Expresses its appreciation to the Advisory Commission of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, and requests
it to continue its efforts and to keep the General Assembly informed of its activities;
_______________
6

See A/63/855-S/2009/250.
A/HRC/12/48.
8
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 13 (A/49/13), annex I.
7

3

A/RES/64/89

5.
Takes note with appreciation of the two reports of the Working Group on
the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East 9 and the efforts of the Working Group to assist in ensuring the
financial security of the Agency, and requests the Secretary-General to provide the
necessary services and assistance to the Working Group for the conduct of its work;
8F

Commends the Agency’s six-year Medium-Term Strategy, commencing in
6.
January 2010, and the continuing efforts of the Commissioner-General to increase the
budgetary transparency and efficiency of the Agency, as reflected in the Agency’s
programme budget for the biennium 2010–2011 10 and its comprehensive, three-year
organizational development plan;
9F

7.
Requests the Secretary-General to support the institutional strengthening of
the Agency through the provision of sufficient financial resources from the regular
budget of the United Nations;
Endorses the conclusions in the report of the extraordinary meeting of the
8.
Working Group on the Financing of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, 11 in particular its request that the SecretaryGeneral provide a report on the strengthening of the management capacity of the
Agency to the relevant bodies of the General Assembly at the earliest possible date;
10F

Also endorses the efforts of the Commissioner-General to continue to
9.
provide humanitarian assistance, as far as practicable, on an emergency basis, and as a
temporary measure, to persons in the area who are internally displaced and in serious
need of continued assistance as a result of recent crises in the Occupied Palestinian
Territory and Lebanon;
10. Welcomes the pledges made at the International Donor Conference for the
Recovery and Reconstruction of the Nahr el-Bared Palestine Refugee Camp and
Conflict-affected Areas of Northern Lebanon, held in Vienna on 23 June 2008, and
urges all parties to expedite the reconstruction of the camp to alleviate the ongoing
suffering of the displaced persons;
11. Acknowledges the important support provided by the host Governments to
the Agency in the discharge of its duties;
12. Encourages the Agency, in close cooperation with other relevant United
Nations entities, to continue making progress in addressing the needs and rights of
children and women in its operations in accordance with the Convention on the Rights
of the Child 12 and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women, 13 respectively;
1F

12F

13. Expresses concern about the relocation of the international staff of the
Agency from its headquarters in Gaza City and the disruption of operations at the
headquarters due to the deterioration and instability of the situation on the ground;
14. Calls upon Israel, the occupying Power, to comply fully with the provisions
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949;5
_______________
9

A/64/115 and A/64/519.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 13A (A/64/13/Add.1).
11
A/64/115.
12
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.
13
Ibid., vol. 1249, No. 20378.
10

4

A/RES/64/89

15. Also calls upon Israel to abide by Articles 100, 104 and 105 of the Charter
of the United Nations and the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the
United Nations3 in order to ensure the safety of the personnel of the Agency, the
protection of its institutions and the safeguarding of the security of its facilities in the
Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem;
16. Urges the Government of Israel to speedily compensate the Agency for
damage and destruction to its property and facilities resulting from actions by the
Israeli side, including as a result of the military operations in the Gaza Strip between
December 2008 and January 2009, and to expeditiously reimburse the Agency for all
transit charges incurred and other financial losses sustained as a result of delays and
restrictions on movement and access imposed by Israel;
17. Calls upon Israel particularly to cease obstructing the movement and access
of the staff, vehicles and supplies of the Agency and to cease the levying of extra fees
and charges, which affect the Agency’s operations detrimentally;
18. Also calls upon Israel to cease its obstruction of the import of necessary
construction materials and supplies for the reconstruction and repair of damaged or
destroyed Agency facilities and for the implementation of suspended civilian
infrastructure projects in refugee camps in the Gaza Strip;
19. Requests the Commissioner-General to proceed with the issuance of
identification cards for Palestine refugees and their descendants in the Occupied
Palestinian Territory;
20. Notes with appreciation the progress made by the Agency in the
modernization of its archives through the Palestine Refugee Records Project, and
encourages the Commissioner-General to finalize the project as rapidly as possible and
to report on the progress made to the General Assembly at its sixty-fifth session;
21. Notes the success of the Agency’s microfinance and microenterprise
programmes, and calls upon the Agency, in close cooperation with the relevant
agencies, to continue to contribute to the development of the economic and social
stability of the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation;
22. Reiterates its appeals to all States, specialized agencies and nongovernmental organizations to continue and to augment the special allocations for
grants and scholarships for higher education to Palestine refugees in addition to their
contributions to the regular budget of the Agency and to contribute to the establishment
of vocational training centres for Palestine refugees, and requests the Agency to act as
the recipient and trustee for the special allocations for grants and scholarships;
23. Urges all States, specialized agencies and non-governmental organizations
to continue and to increase their contributions to the Agency so as to ease the ongoing
financial constraints, especially with respect to the Agency’s regular budget deficit,
noting that financial shortfalls have been exacerbated by the current humanitarian
situation on the ground that has resulted in rising expenditures, in particular with
regard to emergency services, and to support the Agency’s valuable and necessary
work in assisting the Palestine refugees in all fields of operation.
62nd plenary meeting
10 December 2009

5
