THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2508’”

MEETING:

20 DECEMBER

1983

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2508). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionoftheagenda.................................................

1

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Angola
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16216). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

SfPV.2508

. ..

I..

.

:

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965. became fully operative
on that date.

2508th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 20 December 1983, at 3 p.m.
President:

Mr.‘Max
VAN DER STOEL
(Netherlands)

Mr. DOS Sanfos (Mozambique),
.Mr. Anyaoku (Nigeria), Mr. Medina (Portugal),
Mr. Adan (Somalia),
Mr. von Schirnding
(South Africa),
Mr, Giikce
(Turkey), Mr. Rupia (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and Mr. Lusaka (Zambia) took
the places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them document S/16226, which contains the text
of a draft resolution submitted by Angola, Botswana,
Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Mozambique,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan, Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

agenda (S/Agenda/2508)

of the agenda

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Angola to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16216)
The meeting

3. Mr. SINCLAIR
(Guyana): I wish to assure you,
Mr. President, of my delegation’s great pride and satisfaction at seeing you preside over the Council in this
month of December. The qualities of patience and tact
which, without question, you possess, and your wellknown and proven diplomatic
skills, combine to give’
my delegation the assurance that the conduct of the
business of the Council this month will be smooth and
efficient.

was called to order at 3.50 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
4. I take this opportunity
also to congratulate your
predecessor, Mr. Gauci, of Malta, for the very efticient and capable manner in which he presided over the
deliberations of the Council in the month of November.

Complaint by Angola against South Africa:
Letter dated 14 December 1983 from the ‘Permanent
Representative of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16216)

5. My delegation is in complete solidarity with the
Government and the people of Angola in respect of the
question we are now considering. We recall that on
several occasions in the past the Governments of Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique
and Zambia have had
cause to complain to the Council about acts of aggression directed against their sovereign territories by
South Africa. The Governments of Swaziland and Zimbabwe, while not formally complaining to the Council,
have also been victims of such actions on the part of
South Africa.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
taken at previous meetings .on this item [2504th to
2507th meetings], I invite the representative of Angola
to take a place at the Council table. I invite the representatives of Argentina, Benin, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, India, the Libyan Arab Janiahiriya,.
Mauritania, Mozambique,
Nigeria, Portugal, Somalia,
South Africa, Turkey, the United Republic of Tanzania, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

6. When all of the independent States which are South
Africa’s neighbours at various times accuse South
Africa of aggression, it is clear that we are witness to a
phenomenon which cannot be explained in terms of a
desire by those States to distract attention from internal
problems, as the representative of the racist Pretoria
regime so simplistically
sought to do before the Council
last Friday in respect of Angola [2504th meeting]. The
explanation needs to be sought rather in the attitude of
the accused State towards its neighbours.. In this regard

At the invitation of the President, Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola) took a place at the Council table; Mr. Muiiiz
(Argentina), Mr. Ogouma (Benin), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Maciel (Brazil), Mr. Pelletier (Canada),
Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Deressa (Ethiopia), Mr. Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Krishnan
(India),
Mr. Treiki (Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Ould Hamody (Mauritania),
1

our minds turn inevitably to the official philosophy of
the Pretoria regime, the system known as apartheid,
which the General Assembly has condemned as a crime
against humanity [resolution 2672 F(XXV) of8 December 19701. Internally, repression is the major part of the
apparatus for maintaining white-minority
control over
the large black majority in South Africa. Policies of
fear, intimidation
and torture are all part of that apparatus.
7. Parallel to this policy of repression within is a conscious policy towards its neighbours designed to make
southern Africa safe for apartheid. With that in view,
the racist regime seeks to deprive the oppressed majority in South Africa of any external support, whether
moral or material, in their effort to bring an end to their
oppression, and it seeks to destabilize those neighbouring States so as to weaken them or to create or
reinforce dependence on South Africa. It is in that
context that South Africa’s aggression against Angola
is seen.
8. The devastating effects which this aggression has
had and continues to have on Angola have been well
documented in the White Paper which the Angolan
delegation has made available to the Council [S/16198,
annex]. The continuation
of that situation threatens
disastrous consequences, not only for Angola itself but,
ultimately, also for regional and international peace and
security. The Council is therefore called upon to make a
positive and forthright response to Angola’s complaint
and to South Africa’s open defiance of its authority and
its decisions.
9. South Africa’s aggression against Angolais nothing
recent. It dates back to 1975, when South African
troops invaded Angola moments after the proclamation
of the latter’s independence in a vain attempt to rob the
Angolan people of their hard-won victories in the liberation struggle. Since then, the aggressive acts have
continued and intensified. The details of those acts are
well known to members of the Council.
10. What is more, part of the territory of Angola continues to be under military occupation by five battalions
of the armed forces of the racist Pretoria regime. This is
a clear and open violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and of international law. This occupation persists despite several decisions by the Council calling for
the immediate and unconditional
withdrawal of South
African forces [resolutions 428 (Z978), 447 (Z979), 454
(2979) and 475 (1980)]. That call was sustained and
reinforced by the Seventh Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983 [see S/Z5675 and CorrJ
and 2, annex, sect. I, para. 621, as well as by the
Commonwealth
Heads of Government Meeting, held at
New Delhi from 23 to 29 November
[see S/16206,
annex; Final CommuniquP,
para. 161.
11. This aggression and occupation are compounded
by another kind of interference in the internal affairs of

the sovereign State of Angola. I refer to South Africa’s
insistence on linking the withdrawal of Cuban troops
from Angola with a peaceful settlement of the Namibian
question. It is time that the international
community,
and the Council in particular, put a halt to this blatant
trampling underfoot of the independence and territorial
integrity of Angola.
12. The persistence of this situation is, in part, the
fruit of the permissiveness
which has always been
shown towards South Africa by its major Western
friends, even in the face of repeated calls by the international community for action to force compliance by
South Africa with the decisions of the Council. We have
not forgotten that it was the negative vote of a Western
permanent member that prevented the Council in 1981
[i3OOth meeting] from adopting a resolution which
would have had the overwhelming support of the international community.
Those who make such accommodations with apartheid undercut the efforts of the
intematfional community to achieve change in southern Africa and give comfort and encouragement to the
racists in Pretoria, thereby making possible situations such as that in Angola, which now occupies our
attention.
13. The Council cannot, therefore, consider its duty
done if it simply listens to a debate and adds yet another
resolution to the list of those which South Africa continues to ignore. There must surely now be a recognition of the need to ensure that the Council’s authority
is respected and that this body can assert itself to protect a Member State against violations of the Charter by
another. The people of Angola deserve and have a right
to such protection by the United Nations, which is
committed to the equal rights of nations large and small.
14. The Government of Guyana, undistracted by the
diversionary South African manoeuvre contained in
document S/16219 of 15 December, calls for the withdrawal of all South African troops from Angola. That
withdrawal must be immediate and without prejudice to
the sovereign right of the Government and the people of
Angola to make and to pursue whatever arrangements
they may consider appropriate for their defence against
external attack. South Africa must show the strictest
respect for Angola’s independence,
sovereignty and
territorial integrity.
15. We also call for the payment by South Africa of
full compensation for the loss of life and material dam- ’
age which Angolans have been made to suffer as a result
of South Africa’s invasion and occupation.
16. .We see these as being among the essential elements of what should constitute the response-by the
Council to the complaint brought by Angola. We trust
that those States which wield influence with the Pretoria regime will exert that influence to help to promote rather than imperil peace and stability in southern
Africa.

occupation of Namibia, and in its relations with its
neighbouring countries, not only are fanning the fires of
discontent but are also sowing the seeds for intensification of conflict in the future. By its actions South Africa
may be encouraging the very events which it professes
to fear and is most certainly disparaging the very principles which it professes to defend.

17. My delegation has agreed to join the o%Iber nonaligned members of the Council as well as some
non-member non-aligned States irrsponsoring the draft
resolution now before us for consideration [S/262261.
We would most certainly have preferred and could have
given our support to a draft resolution that was more
categorical and unequivocal
in its expression. For
example, the language of operative paragraph 4 to us
represents a retreat from language already adopted by
the Council in its resolution 387 (1976), in which South
Africa is specifically called upon to meet the just claims
of Angola for full compensation for the damage and
destruction inflicted on its State. We have nevertheless
given our co-sponsorship out of our duty of solidarity
with the Government and people of Angola. It is our
sincere hope that the spirit of accommodation
.which
the sponsors of the draft resolution displayed in respect
of its wording will be matched by a willingness on the
part of Pretoria’s friends, particularly among the permanent membership of the Council, to intensify pressure on the regime to respect Angola’s independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

24. In this, his sixth complaint against South Africa
since 1976, the representative of Angola has given even
more recent, indeed current, details of further armed
intervention by South African forces in his country. In
his statement the genuine concerns of his Government
and people over the repeated attacks and prolonged
occupation of parts of, Angola by South Africa were
fully reflected. These are shared by my Government.
Though small and geographically distant, we view with
dismay the deterioration
of the situation in southern
Africa and deeply regret the grievous harm caused to
Angola’s infrastructure
and economic development
and the loss of life inflicted.
25. I should therefore like to assure Mr. de Figueiredo, whom, even before his country’s independence,
I first had the pleasure of meeting in our more carefree
student days at Columbia University, that my Govemment will within its modest means continue to strive to
bring about the peaceful change necessary in the southem part of Africa. For this to be achieved a prerequisite
is the independence of Namibia and a changed attitude
by South Africa towards its own inhabitants and towards its neighbouring countries.

18. My delegation reaffirms its support for the Government and people of Angola, for their right to live in
peace and security with their territorial integrity intact
and to pursue their own development free from outside
interference. The Council has a solemn obligation to
secure for the Government and people of Angola the
free and unfettered exercise of that right.
19. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): You have put to good use,
Mr. President, the many excellent qualities of your
previous high office in the exercise of the present one,
the presidency of the Council for this month. We have
all benefited as a result. I wish to express to you therefore both my pleasure at your assumption of the presidency and my sincere compliments on your perception
and perseverance, which have guided us in overcoming
the difftculties faced by the Council so far this month.

26. Even against the unfortunate
background
of
South Africa’s known record of delay and prevarication, we still hope that its most recent letter [S/16229]
portends the beginnings of a change of attitude. We will
study and await, the outcome of a fair and objective
assessment of that letter in due course, but we cannot
hide our regret that the date of the letter itself coincided
almost exactly with the latest military offensive against
Angola, whose openness and disposition for negotiations have been reaffirmed time and time again.

20. Permit me also to thank all those delegations that
_ have generously expressed appreciation
of Malta’s
presidency last month. I should like especially to thank
those of our colleagues on the Council whose term
expires this month, and to express my appreciation of
their valued co-operation over the past year.

27. The withdrawal of South African troops from
Angola is therefore called for. An admonition by the
Council against the use of force is in order. Malta has
co-operated in the negotiation
of the draft resolution that will be introduced. We have urged restraint
in language in order to promote new attitudes in the
coming year, which we sincerely hope will be a better
one for all of us here and for the Organization. We hope
also that there will be no dissenting voice against the
draft resolution.

21. The eloquent appeal made by our colleague from
Angola [250&h meeting] for the assistance of the Council in shielding his country from aggression should
inevitably
strike a responsive chord among Council members, and my delegation for one will respond
accordingly.
22. The details of the many aggressive acts by South
Africa against Angola, which have been reflected in the
White Paper reproduced in the .annex to document
S/16198, make sorry reading. Most certainly they are
not conducive to a peaceful future in southern Africa.

28. The ‘PRESIDENT:
ment in my capacity
NETHERLANDS.

I shall now make
as representative

a stateof the

29. My delegation has followed closely the debate in
the Council ‘on the complaint put forward by the Government of Angola concerning South Africa’s aggres-

23. The big-stick policy and attitude of South Africa,
both in its internal administration
and in its illegal
3

.

sion against that country and the occupation of parts of
southern Angola by South African forces. It is hardly
surprising that much of what we have heard in the
course of the debate has sounded familiar. The records
of the United Nations bear abundant testimony to the
fact that during the past years the Council has convened
time and again to consider the consequences of South
Africa’s acts of aggression against Angola. Indeed,
since it gained independence in 1975, the young Republic of Angola has scarcely known a day when it has not
had to worry bout the situation at its southern border.
Even more disturbing is the fact that the pattern of
South Africa’s aggressive behaviour has, far from diminishing,
acquired
permanent
features, thereby
posing a clear threat to the security and stability of the
region. What I am referring to is this: since the Council’s debate in August 1981[2296th ro2300rh meetings],
following a massive incursion of South African forces
into Angola, South Africa has been in constant occupation of a broad swath of territory in Angola’s southern
Cunene province.

need to deny the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) a sanctuary from where that organization would be able to launch its operations in Namibia
with impunity. In our opinion, this attempt to present
South Africa’s attacks as an act of self-defence lacks
any validity. The truth is that the dangerous conditions
now prevailing in southern Africa result directly from
South Africa’s stubborn refusal to terminate its unlawful occupation of Namibia and its failure to co-operate
with the United Nations in bringing about the peaceful
accession of Namibia to internationally
accepted independence.
34. Only two months ago, the Council concluded yet
another debate on the question of Namibia by adopting
resolution 539 (1983), which, among other things, rejected South Africa’s insistence on linking the independence of Namibia to issues outside the scope of
resolution 435 (1978). In the course of that debate, my
delegation had the opportunity to make it clear that, in
the opinion of the Netherlands Government, it would
be unacceptable for an early exercise by the Namibian
people of their internationally
recognized and inalienable right to self-determination
and independence to be
impeded because of the situation in a neighbouring
country [248&h meeting, para. 651. Unfortunately,
the
South African Government has already informed the
Secretary-General
by its letter of 29 October [S/16206]
that it has no intention of complying with the Council’s
request to facilitate the immediate and unconditional
implementation
of the United Nations settlement plan
for Namibia.

30. In view of the grave consequences which may
ensue from this violation of Angola’s sovereignty and
territorial integrity, my Government deems it imperative that the Council, in exercise of its responsibility
under the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security, should take urgent action to redress
this intolerable situation.
31. The representative of Angola presented to us in
his statement [2504th meeting] a vivid picture of the
human suffering and economic dislocation created by
the armed intervention of South Africa. We fully understand the bitterness felt about these unprovoked
attacks in Angola, a country which, as Mr. de Figueiredo has pointed out, does not even share a common
border with South Africa. For this reason, my Government has never hesitated to condemn in the strongest possible terms South Africa’s unjustifiable invasion
of Angola as a blatant violation of the Charter of the
United Nations.

35. On the eve of the present debate, the Minister of
Foreign Affairs and Information
of South Africa,
Mr. R. F. Botha, informed the Secretary-General,
in a
letter dated 15 December, that South Africa was prepared to begin a disengagement of forces on 3 1 January
1984 for an initial period of 30 days if such a measure were to be reciprocated by Angola [see S/16219,
annex IJ.
36. While my Government welcomes any move likely
to contribute to a lessening of the tensions in the region,
it wishes to reserve its final judgement on this proposal
until it has received some clarifications. For instance,
the present wording of the proposal leaves it a matter of
conjecture whether South Africa intends to withdraw
its forces completely from Angolan territory. We also
note that in the letter implementation
of the settlement
plan for Namibia is once again being made contingent
upon a solution of the issue of linkage.

32. According to press reports, last Saturday and
Sunday, South African planes bombed targets 300 kilometres inside Angolan territory in the provinces of
Huila and Kuando Kubango, exacting a heavy toll in
civilian lives. On this occasion, I wish to express once
more our heartfelt sympathy to the Government
of
Angola for the loss of many innocent lives and for the
extensive damage caused by South Africa’s actions.
The Netherlands will continue to associate itself completely with the demand of the Government of Angola
that all South African troops should be withdrawn
immediately and unconditionally
from its territory and
that South Africa should scrupulously respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola.

37. My Government is deeply concerned about the
consequence of South Africa’s illegal occupation of
Namibia and its aggressive policies towards neighbouring countries for the future of the region and hence
for international
peace and security. In its own inter‘ests; the South African Government
should use its
power to defuse a situation which may plunge the region into even deeper turmoil, without sparing South
Africa itself. A withdrawal of the South African forces

33. My delegation
also listened carefully to the
statement made by the representative of South Africa
[ibid.], who argued that his country’s decision to use
military force against Angola has been prompted by the
4

which has specific consequences under the Charter.
Moreover, my delegation considers that the wording of
operative paragraph 2 is unfortunate. We should like to
make it plain that it should in no way be taken as a
justification for further intervention by foreign forces in
the internal affairs of Angola. Such action would indeed
endanger international
peace and security.

from Angola would be a significant step in that direction. For that reason, my delegation whole-heartedly
supports the draft resolution
before the Council
[5/26226]. In particular, we appreciate the mandate
which the draft resolution would confer upon the Secretary-General to monitor its implementation.
38. Finally, I wish to express the hope that the Government of South Africa, in complying with the Council’s demand to withdraw its troops from southern
Angola and to respect Angola’s sovereignty, territorial
integrity and independence, will make the gesture of
good will needed to promote the political settlements
without which it and its neighbours will know no
enduring peace and prosperity.
39.

I now resume my function

46. The United Kingdom has consistently pressed,
both in public and through quiet diplomacy, for the
withdrawal of all South African forces from the territory of the Republic of Angola. We believe that the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Angola must
be fully respected. The withdrawal of these forces
-indeed,
of all foreign forces-would
make a major
contribution to the reduction of tensions and contentious issues in the region for which the Secretary-General called in his report of 29 August [S/25943].

as PRESIDENT.

40. It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft resolu- tion to the vote now.

47. It was for this reason that, in my statements in the
Council on 23 May [2439th meeting] and 28 October
[2492nd meeting], I said that there was no justification
for the presence of South African troops in Angola, and
that those forces should be withdrawn. It was for this
reason that, in a public speech in London on 14 November, the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, Sir Geoffrey
Howe, deplored the trend towards greater violence,
terrorist attacks and destabilization
in southern Africa,
and called on all parties strongly to respect the sanctity
of national borders. As Sir Geoffrey Howe pointed out,
cross-border violence is counter-productive.
Crossborder raids cause fear, bitterness and .hatred, and
make peaceful change much more difficult.

41. I call on the representative of the United Kingdom, who wishes to make a statement before the
voting.
42. Sir John THOMSON
(United
Kingdom):
Mr. President, it gives my delegation much pleasure to
see you presiding over our deliberations. In the recent
debate on the United Nations Peace-keeping Force in
Cyprus, you demonstrated
the outstanding
talents
which we in Europe have long known you to possess. It
is good that your clarity of thought and ability to produce agreements through quiet diplomacy are now to be
exercised on the world stage.

48. A number of speakers in this debate have called
for the unconditional
withdrawal of South African
troops from Angola, and, indeed, the draft resolution
says this. But our main concern, which we trust others
share, is that the objective of the draft resolution
-that is, the withdrawal of South African forces from
Angola-should
be achieved. My Government
has
therefore welcomed the indication in the letter dated
15 December from the South African Minister of Foreign Alfairs and Information
to the Secretary-General
that South Africa would begin to disengage its forces in
Angola [see S/16219, annex rJ. This is a major opportunity for progress towards peace and the reduction of
tension in the area. This matter now needs to be dealt
with in a co-operative way and through confidential
exchanges between the parties.

43. We also congratulate
your
predecessor,
Mr. Gauci, for his notable achievements in presiding
over the Council in November. He too had to bear a
heavy burden in the matter of Cyprus. His skill and
impartiality
brought us in this and other matters to
satisfactory conclusions and we thank him.
44. The United Kingdom is glad to be able to support
the draft resolution which will shortly be put to the vote
[ibid.]. Before I explain our vote, I should like to pay a
tribute to the representative of Angola, who requested
the present meetings of the Council, and to colleagues
on the Council who have played a leading part in the
formulation of the present draft resolution. They have
enabled the Council to deal with this difficult and emotive question harmoniously and succinctly. This should
serve as a model for our handling of other matters.

49. There are a number of very obvious and very
considerable difliculties and sensitivities in the present
situation. We understand the concern which exists in
various quarters. But unquestionably
an opportunity
now exists for further progress through quiet diplomacy. In the interests of all the inhabitants of the region, my Government sincerely hopes that any opportunity to move away from conflict and towards peaceful
solutions will be fully explored.

45. It is in that spirit of co-operation that the United
Kingdom will vote in favour of the draft resolution,
although we have reservations on certain points in it.
My delegation does not consider that the last preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 2 fall within
the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations or constitute a finding or decision
5

50. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put the draft resolution in document S/16226 to the vote.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta,
Netherlands,
Nicaragua,
Pakistan,
Poland, Togo,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zaire, Zimbabwe.
Against:
Abstaining:

None.
United

States of America.

The draft resolution was adopted by 14 votes to none,
with I abstention [resolution 545 (1983)].
51. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the representative of the United States, who has asked to be allowed
to make a statement after the voting.
52. Mrs. KIRKPATRICK
(United States of America): Mr. President, I have already expressed in the
privacy of your bilateral consultations and in our informal consultations my personal regard and that of my
country for the very great energy, judgement,
good
sense, imagination
and effectiveness with which you
have conducted the affairs of the Council during this
month.
53. We have also put on record, but I am happy to
reiterate today, our very high regard for the conduct of
the presidency under your immediate predecessor, the
representative of Malta.
54. We feel, Mr. President, that in your conduct of the
presidency you have shown unusual determination
and
creativity, which have marked so many of your country’s most distinguished
accomplishments
through
history-here
in the search for a consensus and for
solutions to the terrible problems that confront us.
55. My country, together with a good many others,
has been deeply involved for a number of years in the
quest for peace in southern Africa, in the quest for
independence for Namibia, in the quest for the pacification of that troubled area. We remain today deeply
involved in that quest. This effort has been, and remains, an issue of high priority for the United States.
56. In the course of our quest, we have consulted
closely with Angola, South Africa and other interested
States in and outside the region which also seek peace
in the region. The Namibian political parties, our partners in the contact group, the other African Governments, the Secretary-General-all
of us have spoken
together again and again in the search for peace in this
troubled region. The Secretary-General’s
role in this
process has been particularly constructive. We are all
indebted to him for his constructive involvement in this
search for peace in the region.

57. The South African commitment
to begin a disengagement of its “forces which from time to time conduct military operations against SWAP0 in Angola, on
3 1 January 1984” was announced in a letter of 15 December from the South African Minister of Foreign
Affairs and Information
to the Secretary-General
[see
S/26229, annex Z& In our judgement it represents a
major new step in this arduous process. We welcome
this public announcement of a readiness to disengage its
forces. We believe this step has the potential to contribute substantially to a climate that could facilitate
further movement
in the negotiations
in southern
Africa, and we hope conditions on the ground will
permit a cease-fire as soon as possible.
58. A durable settlement of the problem of southern
Africa clearly depends on mutual respect for the essential principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity of
all States in the region. We further believe that such a
settlement, if it is to be achieved, must take account of
the security of all in the region. We therefore hope that
once a cease-fire comes into effect it will extend beyond
the initial 30-day period proposed by the South African
Government
in order that these conditions have a
-chance to take hold.
59. The South African announcement
underscores
the validity of the effort in which we and our partners in
the contact group have been and are involved. We
continue to believe that this effort provides the best
hope of bringing lasting peace to the area.
60. The questions before us now are essentially these:
do we seize on this significant new development, this
hopeful and encouraging first step, and allow it to be
considered and tested by those most directly involved,
or do we reject it out of hand as meaningless and choose
instead to engage in this forum in fruitless recriminations? The alternatives are clear, and so should be the
answer--clear to all who genuinely seek peace in the
region.
61. The position of my Government is in any case
clear. We are deeply concerned with the escalating
cycle of violence in southern Africa. We are particularly disturbed by the problem of cross-border violence. We have urged and will continue to urge military
restraint and respect for national boundaries. We do not
believe there are military solutions to the conflicts in
southern Africa.
62. The policies of the United States are grounded in
the belief that negotiated solutions are both possible
and essential. Cross-border violence cannot be condoned, whether it be in the form of terrorist attack by
externally based organizations or violation of the territorial integrity of Angola by South African forces.
Neither contributes to the process of building a structure of peace which is so ardently desired by all those
who live in the region.
63. Our own effort to pursue peace in southern Africa
is moving forward actively through contacts with the

States most directly involved. We are in close and
regular touch with the States of the region. We will do
nothing which will jeopardize this delicate and, we
believe, hopeful peace process. Our position in this
current debate is shaped pre-eminently by our commitment to achieving results in the ongoing negotiations.
64. Each of us must decide whether to pursue the new
hope towards peaceful reconciliation
or to bury it in
mistrust and condemnation.
For my Government the
choice is clear. We do not intend to let this opportunity
pass us by; thus, we have abstained in the vote.
65. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
has asked to speak. I now call on him.

of Angola

66. Mr. de FIGUEIREDO
(Angola): Mr. President,
on behalf of my Government and my delegation, I wish
to express our appreciation of your able handling of this
debate and your assistance both in and outside the
Council chamber. The Government and the people of
the Netherlands gave valuable support to the liberation
struggle of the Angolan people and have since shown
solidarity with our aims and causes.
67. I should also like to thank all those who spoke out
in support of Angola’s position, inter alia, on behalf of a
State’s right to territorial integrity and national sovereignty, its right to defend itself against aggression, its
right to demand the withdrawal of South African racist
troops from its soil and its right to fight for justice and
peace.

72. When the racist representative said that South
Africa would have preferred to resolve the problem by
“peaceful means” [ibid., puru. 391, he presumably
meant United Nations acquiescence in illegal, racist
occupation of Namibia, and its subsequent incorporation as South Africa’s fifth province, and the subjugation of all the independent States in southern Africa to
racist hegemony. Angola represents a threat to Pretoria’s military expansionism and economic stranglehold over southern Africa: hence the occupation of
parts of southern Angola is a concerted effort to cripple
the nation and destabilize the Government.
73. The Pretoria regime is making desperate attempts
to justify its despicable actions not only in Angola but in
all of southern Africa. And these despicable and pathetic excuses do not deserve to be taken seriously,
though unfortunately
the United Nations must deal
with the consequences arising from the racist acts
which necessitate those excuses. However, the people
of Angola do deserve a response from the Council, to
which they have appealed so many times. And they
deserve redress for their grievances and an end to the
misery imposed on them by the forces of imperialism
and racism.
74. The resolution which has just been adopted requests the Secretary-General to monitor its implementation. My Government
will surely request another
meeting of the Council in early 1984 for this purpose, at
which time the Council and I will see the truth behind
the recent racist offer.

68. The Council has just adopted a resolution
expressing that position; however, it is with regret that
I point out that this is the sixth resolution adopted on
the subject by the Council since 1976. As the supreme
peace-keeping organ of the United Nations, the Council
has the political, legal and moral obligation under the
Charter to ensure implementation
.of its resolutions,
which are mandatory. In fact, the Charter itself provides the means to ensure such compliance. It remains
for the Council to invoke those measures.

75. The Council has heard my appeal, an appeal by
my Government conveyed by me. But in no possible
manner can I ever convey the anguish of the sons and
daughters of Angola, the grief of the survivors, the
misery of the injured, the desperation of the homeless,
the terror of the raped, the fear of the kidnapped and the
loss of the dead and dying. The racist troops invaded
Angola in May 1978 and butchered over 1,000 civilians
at Cassinga. Now, since 1981, there are daily Cassingas
all over southern Angola.

69. Peace is serious business. So is war, especially for
those on the battlefield, facing the array of sophisticated arms technology wielded by the racist armed
forces of South Africa.

76. Will the Council continue to be simply a forum for
anguished appeals and official catharsis? Or will the
Council finally shoulder in every sense its responsibilities under the Charter and vindicate the reason for
which the United Nations was founded?

70. The Council has heard once more the racist regime’s incredible assertions. In fact, Pretoria’s version
of the situation in southern Africa in general, and in
southern Angola in particular, gives rise to the thought
that Pretoria probably believes that South Africa is
situated in another time and place: in which case, of
course, the racist regime’s assertions make perfect,
though hallucinatory,
sense!
71. What the representative of the racist regime referred to as “security operations” in southern Angola
[see 2504th meeting, paru. 351 are, in fact, since 1981
the occupation of parts of my country by five battalions.

77. The Government and the people of Angola wait
for an answer. A lutu continua!; a vitoriu e certu!
78. Mr. NATORF (Poland): Assuming that we might
not have a formal meeting before the end of this year
and now that the Council has, as I understand it,
already concluded its consideration today of the item
on its agenda, may I be allowed to say a few words,
since Poland’s term of membership
in this body is
coming to an end.
79. This is the fourth time my country has served as a
non-permanent
member of the Council. There have

always been urgent tasks and duties stemming from the
fact that this organ is entrusted with the responsibility
for maintaining international
peace and security. The
present term, however, cannot but be assessed as particularly different and demanding. For at no point in the
entire post-war development of the international situation have the ominous clouds of tension been so heavy
and dark; never before has the sense of anxiety and
threat to security been so strong and universally felt as
it is at present and the uncertainty of maintaining world
peace so prevalent as it is today.

and international security in the world. It derived from
our historical experience and from our concern for the
future of the world and the fate of all mankind and our
own future, It originated from our understanding that
peace is an indispensable prerequisite for successful
and just solutions to pressing international
problems
and issues of utmost urgency in the world today.
84. Serving on the Council is a particular and unique
experience for every Member of the Organization.
Frustrations and feelings of limitation notwithstanding,
it is the sense of fulfilled duty that prevails.

80. At no point in the past two decades have the
stepped-up policy of confrontation and the heightened
and technologically
advanced ‘arms race posed such a
threat to mankind, which is faced with the real possibility of a thermonuclear
catastrophe. Never before
could any conflict the Council has been dealing with
-even most remotely; or seemingly without further
consequences and implications for international
security-have
become a pilot flame for conflagration on a
much larger scale.

85. In-concluding
our present term, we feel that we
have spared no effort and that we have tried consistently to discharge the mandate vested in us as best we
could.
86. My delegation wishes to thank all delegations that
have been with us on the Council, either full term or for
just one year, for the opportunity to work together in
the interest of peace. Our thanks go also to the members
of the Secretariat. To the delegations that will join the
Council in January 1984, and to all the other delegations
on the Council, we wish every success in discharging
the responsible mandate of the Council as provided for
in the Charter of the United Nations.

81. Faithful to the principles of its foreign policy,
which is consistently pursued in the interest of peace
together with its socialist friends and allies, Poland has
stood firm on the position that the preservation of contacts and dialogue is of vital importance for easing
tensions and improving
the international
situation.
Whenever possible, we tried to introduce an element of
restraint into our dialogue and deliberations. During the
past two years we have maintained this line in the
Council. Both the records of the Council containing
our statements and the position presented during
the consultations-which
is known to the members of
the Council-are
evidence of that. We have been convinced that it is always possible to seek constructive
solutions as long as the parties are ready to demonstrate
the political will and understanding for international
security.

87. The PRESIDENT:
It is, of,course, Article 28 of
the Charter of the United Nations which reminds us
that “The Security Council shall be so organized as to
be able to function eontinuously”.
So it could be, theoretically speaking, that the Council might meet on the
last day of the year. But let me reassure the members of
the Council that I have no immediate plans to convene a
meeting on that occasion.
88. Indeed, this may be the last time this year that the
representatives of Guyana, Jordan, Poland, Togo and
Zaire are sitting at this table. I am sure that I am
speaking on :behalf of the remaining members of the
Council in expressing our thanks for their contributions
to our work.

82. In the course of serving our present term on the
Council, we have, as on the previous occasions, made
every effort to contribute to reducing hotbeds of tension and to extinguishing the flames of conflict, for in
doing so we have pursued an important element of the
struggle to strengthen international
security and done
our duty as a member of the Council.

89. We are facing a world situation with much tension
and many crises. I can only express the hope that in the
coming year the Council will be able to play an active
and also decisive role in promoting stability, peace and
security.

83. Our activity in the Council stemmed from our
obligation to enhance the national security of Poland

The meeting

8

rose at 4.45 p.m.

;
/.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprts de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Genive.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas pattes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o ditijase a: Naciones Unidas, Section de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations,

New York

00300

9040205-March

1992-2.050
