S/PV.8723

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fifth year

8723rd meeting

Thursday, 13 February 2020, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Goffin/Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Belgium)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Volmer
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Licharz
Mr. Djani
Mr. Ankourao
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. DeShong
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Ladeb
Ms. Pierce
Ms. Norman-Chalet
Mr. Dang

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict situations
Letter dated 4 February 2020 from the Permanent Representative of Belgium to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2020/98)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

20-03786 (E)
*2003786*

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Transitional justice in conflict and
post-conflict situations
Letter dated 4 February 2020 from the
Permanent Representative of Belgium
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2020/98)
The President (spoke in French): I warmly
welcome the ministers and other representatives present
in the Security Council Chamber. Their presence today
underscores the importance of the subject matter
under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Angola, Argentina, Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Colombia,
Croatia, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, the Gambia, Georgia,
Guatemala, India, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Kenya, Lebanon,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Morocco, Nepal,
the Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, Portugal,
Qatar, Romania, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Turkey and Ukraine to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Michelle
Bachelet, United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights; Mr. Francisco de Roux, President of the
Commission for the Clarification of Truth, Coexistence
and Non-Repetition of Colombia; and Ms. Yasmin
Sooka, Executive Director of the Foundation for Human
Rights in South Africa, Trustee of the Desmond Tutu
Peace Centre and Chair of the Commission on Human
Rights in South Sudan.

13/02/2020

of the Red Cross to the United Nations; and His
Excellency Mr. Björn Olof Skoog, Head of Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2020/98, which contains the text of
a letter dated 4 February 2020 from the Permanent
Representative of Belgium to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bachelet.
Ms. Bachelet: I am grateful to Belgium for
organizing this vital discussion of such relevance to
international peace and security, which I am sure will
contribute to the increasing consideration of transitional
justice as a useful peacebuilding tool by the Security
Council and other bodies.
We know that lasting peace is interlinked with
justice, development and respect for human rights.
We know that peace does not automatically happen
when weapons fall silent and atrocity crimes cease.
To be able to rebuild lives without fear of recurrence
and for society to move forward, suffering needs to be
acknowledged, confidence in State institutions restored
and justice done. Demands for justice can be denied, but
they will not disappear. The recent popular overthrow
of the regime in the Sudan was driven in large part by
demands for justice across society built up over decades
of impunity for human rights violations. Mass protests
across the world have once again brought home the
power of popular demands for equality, social justice,
gender justice, climate justice and fundamental rights.

Ms. Bachelet is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Geneva.

Transitional justice processes have repeatedly
shown that they can help to address grievances
and divisions. I have seen that first-hand. My own
experience in Chile convinced me that transitional
justice processes that are context-specific, nationally
owned and focused on the needs and informed choices of
victims can connect, empower and transform societies,
and thereby contribute to lasting and just peace. The
multiple post-conflict or post-authoritarian situations I
have witnessed have strengthened that conviction.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the following
to participate in the meeting: Mr. Robert Mardini,
Permanent Observer of the International Committee

Truth-seeking initiatives not only enable victims
to recount their experiences, they also open new
spaces where victims and perpetrators can re-establish
a connection. They facilitate the recognition and

2/31

20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

accommodation of multiple narratives about what
has occurred and the formulation of more searching
recommendations for redress and reform. Over the past
30 years, various truth commissions in the Americas
and elsewhere have greatly contributed to transitional
justice processes. Guatemala stands out for the landmark
final report of its truth commission — Memoria del
Silencio. The 1999 report provided an authoritative
record of human rights violations during the conflict,
giving a voice to the victims and analysing the dynamics
underlying 36 years of conflict. It was instrumental in
advancing victims’ rights, including in several highprofile judicial cases of conflict-related sexual violence
and other crimes, which resulted in orders for victimcentred and transformative reparations.
Such processes are often deeply empowering for
victims, in particular women, indigenous communities
and minorities that have been marginalized. That
is vital to healing wounds and binding societies
together. I have just returned from a mission to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, where the recent
United Nations-supported consultations in the Kasai
region enabled many victims to express their views on
truth, reconciliation, reparation and the prevention of
future conflict. The consultations laid the groundwork
for the establishment of a provincial peace, justice
and reconciliation commission. That locally driven
project, like others supported by the Peacebuilding
Fund, establishes important links between transitional
justice processes, the root causes of conflict and
socioeconomic reintegration.
While I was in Bunia, Ituri province, I was struck
by the strong desire expressed by both the Hema and
Lendu communities for transitional justice processes
and by their emphasis on justice as the path to peace
and reconciliation. The current conflict between the
Lendu and Hema was preceded by a previous cycle of
violence in 2003 that did not give rise to a concerted
effort to promote accountability. I am convinced that
the failure to sustain justice processes has been a factor
in the revival of violence today. Equally, an inability to
address the violence of today could pose a serious risk
of renewed violations and abuses in the future. We have
learned these lessons and know how to address them.
The real question is whether there is the collective will
to do so.
My Office has witnessed the transformative power
of transitional justice in many countries, particularly
its role in shaping guarantees of non-repetition. Such

S/PV. 8723

guarantees comprise a package of recommended
measures to prevent the recurrence of conflict and
human rights abuses and are grounded in deep analysis
of the root causes and escalating manifestations of
conflict and atrocity crimes. United Nations factfinding missions and commissions of inquiry have
repeatedly played a vital role in bringing facts to light,
providing national authorities and the international
community with an honest mapping of often complex
and long-lasting issues. The contribution of such recent
mechanisms in relation to Myanmar, South Sudan,
Syria and Yemen, for example, cannot be overstated.
For a society to truly succeed in establishing
a transition to sustainable peace, issues such as
systemic discrimination and exclusion, institutional
deficiencies, unfair power structures, inequalities and
structural impunity must be identified, acknowledged
and addressed. Guarantees of non-recurrence will
therefore often relate to institution-building. It is also
essential to ensure the broadest possible participation
of civil society organizations in decision-making. In
recognition of that value, many transitional justice
recommendations emphasize the empowerment of civil
society, history education, trauma counselling and
memorialization initiatives.
In virtually every conflict or post-conflict
situation, it is particularly crucial for military and
police forces — and, more broadly, all institutions of
Government — to regain the confidence of traumatized
and abused communities. Fair, even-handed and
accountable use of public power is central to rebuilding
shattered trust in law enforcement. To that end,
vetting processes and security sector reforms should
be given high priority, while noting that a disciplined,
professional and principled force is in the interest of the
security forces and the Government itself as well.
Considerable work is currently being undertaken
in Colombia with regard to such guarantees of
non-recurrence in the context of the Comprehensive
System for Truth, Justice, Reparation and
Non-Repetition, which my Office supports. The
landmark victims law of 2011 calls for a wide range
of preventive and potentially transformative measures.
They include the promotion of mechanisms that prevent
and resolve social conflict, legal empowerment of
victims, distributive land restitution measures and
measures to dismantle economic and political structures
that have benefited from, and given support to, armed

20-037863/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

groups. I acknowledge the importance of the Council’s
support of that key process.
To further that work, the Colombian Commission
for the Clarification of Truth, Coexistence and
Non-Repetition has established 28 field presences and
engaged in non-repetition dialogues at the community
level. It has also received thousands of testimonies
from victims and individuals from State and military
institutions. Those and other measures that recognize
victims’ rights, tackle root causes of the conflict and
its consequences for the people and promote positive
social, economic and political transformation constitute
pillars designed to structure a culture of non-repetition
in the country. I look forward to hearing Mr. Francisco
de Roux address the Council shortly on his experience
and insight in that area.
In its sustaining peace resolution (resolution 2282
(2016)), the Council rightfully emphasized that a
comprehensive approach to transitional justice is a key
component of the efforts to sustain peace. Creating trust
and understanding between former enemies and charting
a path towards sustainable peace and reconciliation will
always be a difficult challenge. We know that transitional
justice cannot be imported or imposed from outside.
Locally led and locally appropriate permutations of
transitional justice have the best chances of success.
Without humility and modesty, the risk of failure is
real. However, the international community, and the
Council in particular, have key roles to play in assisting
transitional States in those complex processes — by
sharing experiences, mandating international support
and encouraging the implementation of genuinely
comprehensive approaches.

13/02/2020

of atrocity crimes. But that criminal accountability,
which is vital, should be accompanied by a broad range
of complementary measures to support truth, justice,
reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence, which
help to break cycles of violence.
There is clearly no single way to get the mix of
those measures precisely right. But there is a way to get
it wrong — and that is to consider that victims’ rightful
demands for justice are an inconvenient distraction that
can be papered over or indefinitely delayed. A failure
to engage in such processes will not resolve conflicts; it
will fuel recurrence. I encourage the Security Council
to acknowledge and make full use of the transformative
impact of transitional justice in its consideration of
matters of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Bachelet for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Roux.
Mr. De Roux: I would like to express my gratitude
to the Security Council and to the Belgian people for
inviting me to take part in today’s debate on the issue of
transitional justice, which is so important to us.
(spoke in Spanish)

Clear mandates such as those provide a strong and
welcome foundation for United Nations engagement
with Government and civil society.

On behalf of the victims and Colombia’s Truth
Commission, I would like to begin by saying that
transitional justice is the most comprehensive, dynamic
and promising peacebuilding instrument at the disposal
of victims around the world and of peoples who have
endured gross human rights violations during situations
of internal armed conflict. It is currently the best
international response to tragic wars waged against
humankind. It has a very small budget as compared
to the money allocated to military operations and
used in business transactions. Yet it is the most sacred
and most important activity in the work of the United
Nations, because it brings together victims around the
world — along with their own understanding of the
very nature of being a victim — and future generations,
which have the right to live in dignity. Peace between
the State and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia (FARC), thanks to those who brokered the
peace agreement and thanks to transitional justice, has
brought about vital positive changes in Colombia and
given our society new hope despite all the difficulties.

Transitional justice should not be seen as an
alternative to criminal accountability for perpetrators

I will touch on five points — victims, truth in
transitional justice, non-repetition, comprehensive

A recent example is the Council’s mandating, in
paragraph 5 (e) of resolution 2489 (2019), of the United
Nations Assistance Mission to Afghanistan explicitly
to advise on the
“establishment and implementation of judicial
and non-judicial processes to address the legacy
of large-scale human rights violations and abuses
as well as international crimes and to prevent
their recurrence”.

4/31

20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

transition and the role of the Security Council and of
the international community.
First, the victims of armed conflict are the raison
d’être of transitional justice, which allows itself to
be influenced by the pain of human tragedy in the
quest for solutions that bring about coexistence and
reconciliation. During the conflict in Colombia, which
lasted 50 years and ended in November 2016, nearly
240,000 civilians died and almost 9 million were
recognized as victims. The victimized communities
continue to clamour for an end to the war now, from all
sides. Transition in all countries undergoing it begins
with a ceasefire and peacemaking and develops into
the long and difficult process of peacebuilding, in
which the most important protagonists are the victims.
With transitional justice, not only are reparations made
to the victims; they are recognized as citizens, with
full political and social rights in their countries and
the world.
Secondly, the truth has become the gateway to
transitional justice and the basis for the collective
building of a shared future in countries divided by war.
Transitional justice has been improved and has distinct
institutions that form a system that operates on the basis
of three kinds of truths. The first is legal truth, which,
in Colombia, is unveiled by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, tasked with ensuring that there is no impunity.
It is a truth that determines those who are guilty under
the law, as well as their sentences. It is built with the
testimonies of the victims and victimizers. The victims
participate in the sentencing, while punishment is not
based on revenge but on the rehabilitation of victims
and perpetrators. One such example in my country is the
sentence requested by the victims for former guerrillas
to tell the truth and acknowledge their part in the
killing by the FARC of 11 deputies of an Assembly of
one of our territories. The perpetrators were sentenced
to eight years of restricted freedom and must build a
school, with their bare hands, for 2,000 children.
The second type of truth is moral, historical and
social truth. The Truth Commission is responsible
for truth of that kind. It is a truth that is not built but,
instead, uncovered. It comes to light and cannot remain
shrouded in secrecy. It is truth that starts with the
testimony of victims from all sides, seeks to determine
the reason for the events and the violence that took
place and calls for reflection in the quest for an overall
understanding of the tragedy, with the aim of building
a new future, whether in Colombia, Peru, Guatemala,

S/PV. 8723

Sierra Leone or Mali. It is a truth without political
or economic interests. It seeks the greatest possible
independence and condemns no one individual but
holds itself accountable to public ethics. It also listens
to the various parties to the conflict and compares
and contrasts their opinions and interpretations. Truth
of that kind does not seek to increase the number of
accusations or fuel hatred but rather to overcome social
divisions based on the painful but liberating truth.
Lastly, there is a third type of truth, for which
the Search Unit for Missing Persons in Colombia is
responsible. The Unit assists families in dealing with
the aftermath of the most cruel and concrete way to
break someone — to make him or her disappear forever.
In Colombia, seeking that truth is a tremendous feat, as
more than 100,000 people are missing.
Thirdly, non-repetition is the legacy of truth
commissions and their contribution to transition.
Several programmes are employed to ensure that armed
conflict never recurs. That legacy continues with State
entities and institutions, civil society and stakeholders
who were in the war. In order to ensure non-repetition,
public events acknowledging the dignity of the
victims and the acceptance of responsibility by those
accountable are required. South Africa set the example.
Such events are taking place in Colombia today, and
tomorrow I will travel to Medellín to participate in one
of them. Former FARC fighters asked for forgiveness
last week for the terrorist bombing attack in which they
killed 36 people and injured 196 others in a prominent
social club in Bogotá 17 years ago.
In order to ensure non-repetition, processes for
coexistence are also needed in communities divided by
war. Such is the case in the small town of Riachuelo,
in my country, which is seeking reconciliation after
paramilitary troops sexually abused the children of the
local high school, and the community became divided
in the face of the brutal and overwhelming power of the
armed troops. Thousands of communities throughout
the world are in need of reconciliation to prevent
children in the future from having to experience the
violent clashes that their grandparents experienced
during the conflict.
My fourth point concerns comprehensive transition.
That is the process by which the State and the rebels
strive to fully comply with the signed peace agreement.
Comprehensive
transition
demands
assuming
responsibility for the lives of the ex-combatants and

20-037865/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

reintegrating all of them into society with dignity. It
demands that the process of cultural, economic and
political change in the structures and dynamics that
gave rise to the conflict be carried out with foresight
and determination over a period of several years. It
demands political will within Governments, which must
not only comply with the totality of the agreement but
go even further, until all political violence is quelled.
When new Governments fail to sign State
agreements, lack clarity about supporting what was
agreed and create doubts about the transition that
has been set in motion, the polarization that existed
during the war is re-intensified within society. In
such contradictory situations the energy and audacity
needed for transition are jeopardized, and the very
programmes involving former combatants and
communities established by the Administration in order
to demonstrate that it favours peace are weakened.
(spoke in English)
In that regard, the intense diplomatic activity of the
Security Council is of the utmost importance.
(spoke in Spanish)
Fortunately, when the process of comprehensive
transition is already in the hands of society, especially
young people, no one can stop it, as peoples will not
give up on peace once they have experienced the joy of
living free of terror.
Fifthly, with regard to the Security Council, the
Council and the international community must play a
vital role in ensuring transitional justice. Peace is the
responsibility of a nation’s citizens, but the cases that
call for transitional justice involve extreme ruptures in
the human experience. Ensuring transitional justice is
therefore incumbent on the world community, as we are
dealing with dynamically and externally interrelated
conflicts that no country can manage alone.
Transitional justice is a process involving a high
level of ethics at the international level to address the
core issue of the human tragedy at hand, absent any
interest related to political or military intervention. It is
implementing the sum of lessons learned with regard to
best practices in order for restorative justice to prevail
over criminal justice, safeguard the sentences dictated
by this justice of peace and place the interests of people
above all other issues.
6/31

13/02/2020

Without such international support, an end to
the wars in the countries being considered in this
debate would not have been possible, and neither
would the peace and transition in Colombia have
been possible, which saw the presence of the United
Nations Verification Mission and the mission of
the Organization of American States, the constant
solidarity of the community of nations and the united
and decisive support of the Security Council.
The peoples who are moving towards a greater
peace on the path of transitional justice place their trust
in the Council and are profoundly grateful to it.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. De Roux for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Sooka.
Ms. Sooka: I would like to thank the Belgian
Government for inviting me to participate in this
important open debate on transitional justice.
I come from a country where, during the years
of apartheid, scores of detainees were said to have
jumped out of windows at police headquarters, hanged
themselves in cells or died by hitting their heads
against police filing cabinets or by fatally slipping on
bars of soap. Inquests held under the apartheid system
found nobody responsible for their deaths. Two decades
after South Africa’s transitional justice process, those
inquests are at last being reopened, and families now
have hope for justice.
“I would like to know how and why he died,” said
Jill Burger, the sister of trade union activist and doctor
Neil Aggett, two weeks ago when she testified at the
reopened inquest. The apartheid State responsible for
his death in custody found that he had hanged himself
in his cell. Many of those who were detained and
tortured during that period are now speaking out about
their torture at the hands of South Africa’s notorious
apartheid security branch.
Reopened inquests are a symbol of hope for
countless victims and their families all over the world
in their long arduous struggle for truth and justice.
The reopened inquests in South Africa and the latest
report that Omer Al-Bashir might at last be transferred
to the International Criminal Court to face genocide
and war crimes charges demonstrate the importance
of addressing impunity, which is directly linked to
restoring the rule of law as a prerequisite for national
healing and reconciliation.
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Transitional justice suggests the drawing of a line
between the past and the future. However, even the
best transitional processes often exclude many people
who are not yet ready to speak or who have not been
given an opportunity to tell their stories. As in my own
country, it can take decades to deliver justice, and often
the quest for the truth will be driven by the families of
victims, helped by a handful of determined civil society
actors assisting them.
I was fortunate to be a part of South Africa’s
Truth and Reconciliation Commission, established
in 1995 by Nelson Mandela, South Africa’s first
democratically elected President. South Africa’s
process was deeply influenced by the Latin American
experiences of establishing accountability while at the
same time ensuring stability and the continuance of the
new Government.
As an actor in the process I was, however, always
deeply conscious of the limitations of the narrow
mandate, which did not allow us to consider structural
violations. The Principles to Combat Impunity,
developed by Louis Joinet and later updated by Diane
Orentlicher, advanced the field of transitional justice,
as Joinet posited that States are primarily responsible
for ensuring that victims and their families are able
to realize their inalienable right to truth, justice
and reparations.
Joinet transformed transitional justice from a
technocratic process of one-size-fits-all to a holistic
approach that is context-specific, inclusive and
participatory and centralizes the rights of victims.
Joinet’s work was premised on the recognition that
gross human rights violations and atrocity crimes are
rooted in State structures that manifest unequal power
asymmetries and shape contexts of extreme violence
and repression.
African experiences have also challenged the
narrow focus on civil and political rights violations
in the light of the legacies of violence and structural
violations arising from their colonial histories and wars
of liberation, including land dispossession, corruption
and economic crimes. Earlier transitional justice
processes also ignored the gender dimension of conflict.
However, the transitional justice processes adopted in
countries like Sierra Leone, Peru and, more recently,
Tunisia have adopted a gender lens that deliberately
focuses on the inclusion and participation of women
and girls.

S/PV. 8723

When they were consulted on the recommendations
of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, rural
women in Sierra Leone asked the Commission to
ensure that the Government allocate a percentage of
the funds that it received from the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Initiative towards the secondary
education of girls, as most poor families prioritized the
education of boys. The women also recommended that
the Government implement constitutional reforms to
improve their legal status regardless of whether they
had been married under Islamic law or customary law.
The work of the Truth and Dignity Commission in
Tunisia has been ground-breaking, including ensuring
an independent budget to facilitate the inclusion and
participation of women and girls.
However, accountability for conflict-related sexual
and gender-based violence remains a challenge at both
the domestic and international levels. My experience
in investigating sexual and gender-based violence has
convinced me of the importance of understanding the
role that gender norms play in the fostering of violence
and human rights abuses. Sexual and gender-based
violence is still too often narrowly framed as a matter
of gender identity, and insufficient attention is given
to its causes. That obscures the fact that the drivers of
conflict-related sexual violence are similar, irrespective
of the victim’s identity.
In fact, evidence shows that perpetrators use
prescribed gender roles to punish and terrorize
women and employ the same tactics to humiliate and
emasculate men. Focusing on women and girls is
critical, but ignoring the violations perpetrated against
men and boys limits our analysis of how gender norms
fuel the use of sexual violence in conflict and stymies
our efforts at prevention. That is evidenced by the
testimony that is emerging from many war zones.
However, fragile States emerging from conflict
have not always been able to implement the ambitious
transitional justice programmes that they adopt. In
many instances, they lack technical capacity and,
often, the political will to do what is necessary. In both
those instances, the United Nations should be required
to provide vital support for the implementation of
such processes. Since 2004, the Security Council has
referred to or prescribed rule-of-law and transitional
justice interventions in more than 60 resolutions.
For example, the transitional justice-related
role of peacekeeping missions, such as the United

20-037867/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali, has been critical for international peace and
security. Peacekeeping operations are also the best
forums for promoting transitional justice through
their support programmes for the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants
and their contributions to prevention through
institution-building.
The recent fifth research report on the rule of law
of Security Council Report focuses on how impunity
has been responsible for some of the world’s most
devastating conflicts, exploring in great detail four
country situations: Myanmar, Syria, Ukraine and
Yemen. The report notes that,
“Ending impunity is not only a matter of principle.
For the Council, it is also a practical tool to maintain
international peace and security. Lack of action on
accountability in conflicts where mass crimes are
committed risks hampering the Council’s ability to
address and resolve those conflicts more broadly,
in a way that ensures long-term stability and avoids
the resumption of conflict.”
Continental bodies, such as the African Union
(AU), have also begun to play a critical role in promoting
transitional justice, as evidenced by the African
Union’s role in 2006 in the prosecution of Hissène
Habré, the former President of Chad. The AU and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development have
also been instrumental in facilitating the peace process
for South Sudan, as well as the Revitalized Agreement
on the Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan.
African Union member States also recently adopted
the AU’s transitional justice policy on 12 February 2019.
That policy is meant to guide member States towards
achieving sustainable peace, justice, reconciliation,
social cohesion and healing after experiencing mass
atrocities. While the policy is to be welcomed, we
should remember that policies alone cannot substitute
for a lack of political will to deal with accountability
for grave crimes.
The Security Council Report document I mentioned
explores in great detail the response by various organs of
the United Nations to the crisis in those four countries,
but notes that the Security Council has to date been
unable to either bring justice to the victims or seriously
8/31

13/02/2020

affect the course of the conflict. The Security Council
must address impunity using a prevention lens to ensure
the non-recurrence of violations, but it also needs to
address the indirect causes of conflict or factors that
exacerbate conflict, namely, structural violence,
discrimination, economic exploitation, unequal power
relations and climate justice.
In charting the road ahead, the Council needs to be
more innovative, taking decisive approaches towards
current conflicts on its agenda and acting in concert
with other United Nations bodies, including the Human
Rights Council, the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the General Assembly and continental
bodies such as the African Union, so as to enhance
its legitimacy and its effectiveness in maintaining
international peace and security. That is also true for
a continental body like the African Union, if we are to
silence the guns by 2020.
As we take forward a transitional justice agenda,
it is essential to ensure that peace and justice are
seen as mutually reinforcing imperatives and are not
replaced by the erroneous notion that peace must come
first, before accountability. Prevention and building a
sustainable peace require that we address mass atrocity
crimes, which are the legacy of violent conflicts, and
that we restore the trust deficit between the State and
its citizens so that the State works for all citizens,
irrespective of ethnicity, religion, gender or race. While
we have to acknowledge the constraints that we operate
under, we must also focus our efforts on ensuring that
victims and their families are able to access justice and
have their dignity restored.
Mr. President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Sooka
for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Belgium.
How can we reconcile and rebuild a society
following mass atrocities and massive human rights
violations? Such events destabilize families and entire
communities. Their consequences are usually felt over
decades or even generations. The three testimonies
that we heard today illustrate those challenges but also
outline prospects for solutions.
Transitional justice is the set of measures intended
to respond to that difficult past. It encompasses the full
range of tools to provide truth, justice and reparations to
victims, with the objective of preventing the recurrence
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of future conflicts or atrocities. The Security Council
plays an important role in that area. Peace operations
can help States build capacity and reform their public
institutions in order to restore the rule of law. For
almost 30 years, they have contributed to implementing
transitional justice measures.
Many of those processes, if not all, have had a
significant impact on the populations concerned by
giving them some form of justice to which they would
otherwise not have had access. For my country, it is
clear that establishing accountability for human rights
violations and the most serious crimes is crucial in
order to restore the population’s confidence in inclusive
institutions and thereby achieve lasting peace.
Peace and justice should not be seen as opposing
objectives, but rather as mutually reinforcing. In
accordance with the principle of complementarity, the
International Criminal Court may also have a role to
play alongside national transitional justice measures in
cases where the State concerned is unwilling or unable
to effectively carry out the investigation or prosecution.
However, the implementation of transitional justice
is complex and of course involves many challenges.
There is often a risk of falling into a victor’s justice.
Certain measures, including the restoration of a
criminal justice system, can be very costly and entail
a timeline that is unable to address the immediate
challenges. Similarly, the financial resources required
by disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes may appear inadequate compared to the
victims’ expectations with regard to reparation.
The sequence of the measures to be adopted
is therefore critical for a successful transition.
Mechanisms such as truth commissions and vetting
processes are sometimes more appropriate than
criminal proceedings when the post-conflict situation
remains fragile, although some of those measures may
facilitate prosecutions at a later date. Therefore, when
the Security Council adopts measures to support a
transitional justice process, it must be careful not to
take a generic approach. We must focus our attention
and actions on clear objectives that take the specific
context of each situation into account. Certain guiding
principles can nevertheless be drawn from numerous
experiences over the past 30 years. In that connection, I
would like to emphasize the following points.
First, an approach that encompasses all aspects of
transitional justice is fundamental in order to prevent its

S/PV. 8723

four pillars — truth, justice, reparation and guarantees
of non-recurrence — from developing independently
of each other. Those pillars are interdependent and
complementary and should also create synergies with
other transition processes. A holistic approach is
therefore essential, and the Security Council has a role
to play in that regard.
Secondly, any transitional justice process must be
subject to national ownership. For example, we have
seen cases in which the lack of physical proximity of
certain criminal mechanisms can make it difficult to
find solutions and support the population. Awareness
campaigns are also often crucial.
Thirdly, the needs and demands of victims
must be at the heart of transitional justice processes.
Victims should be recognized as rights holders and
included in the definition of measures decided by the
national authorities.
Fourthly, a more inclusive process will be more
effective. That means paying particular attention to the
most vulnerable victims, beginning at the development
phase of transitional justice programmes, by organizing
national consultations that involve victims as well as
civil society.
Transitional justice processes must also include
a gender perspective. The voices of women are often
overlooked when it comes to establishing a version of
past events.
Fifthly, and finally, transitional justice is a vital
tool for enabling sustainable peace and development,
and therefore the root causes of conflicts must also be
taken into account.
Those are some of the key principles that could
guide the Council in its efforts to support transitional
justice processes. I welcome the presence of a large
number of Member States that have come to share their
experiences and suggestions. I look forward to their
contributions to this debate.
To conclude, I would like to echo the words of
Secretary-General Guterres when he said that the
challenge we face here is bringing truth, justice and
reconciliation together.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

20-037869/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Cooperation, African Integration and Nigeriens Abroad
of the Republic of the Niger.
Mr. Ankourao (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow
me to congratulate Belgium on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. As this is the first
time I take the floor here, I wish to assure Belgium of
my delegation’s full support. I welcome the choice of
theme for this open debate, which is particularly relevant
due to the importance attached by the international
community to transitional justice in conflict and postconflict situations, especially in Africa.
In his 2004 report on the rule of law and transitional
justice, the former Secretary-General said that:
“The notion of ‘transitional justice’ ... comprises
the full range of processes and mechanisms
associated with a society’s attempts to come to
terms with a legacy of large-scale past abuses, in
order to ensure accountability, serve justice and
achieve reconciliation.” (S/2004/616, para. 8)
In the same vein, I would like to recall the words of
the current Secretary-General, Mr. António Guterres,
during an open debate last year:
“Reconciliation ... cannot be a substitute
for accountability or pave the way for amnesty
for serious crimes under international law.”
(S/PV.8668, p. 3)
That is why I remain convinced that, while it
is necessary to promote reconciliation, it is equally
important to break the cycle of impunity, especially
in extreme situations characterized by mass atrocities.
Therefore, the successful implementation of a just
transition and a process of true reconciliation contributes
to preventing the resurgence of conflicts and allows for
their sustainable resolution.
In that connection, the Niger supports the actions
of the United Nations in the area of transitional
justice, in particular those aimed directly at ensuring
peacebuilding and peacekeeping. The Niger will always
support the efforts of political missions and of the
country offices of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights that aim to strengthen
trust between populations and security forces and to
consolidate peace in the wake of conflicts.
Due to the conflict we are enduring with terrorist
groups that are attacking our people along some of our
10/31

13/02/2020

borders, the Niger has created the High Authority for
Peacebuilding — an entity that has been tasked with the
mission of ensuring that the essential needs of victims
are met, preventing serious human rights violations,
guaranteeing transitional justice and establishing a
climate of trust between the population and the security
forces. That entity, which has received strong support
from the United Nations system and other partners, has
achieved significant success, which I must commend.
The Niger supports General Assembly resolution
70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016),
which place particular emphasis on the critical
importance of transitional justice in efforts to sustain
peace. We also endorse the African Union’s transitional
justice policy adopted in February 2019. As pointed out
by the Chairperson of the Commission, Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, transitional justice is essential for
the promotion of human rights and justice, peace and
security, good governance and development.
In that regard, the Niger notes that it is crucial
for the African Union to have a frame of reference
for authentic African transitional justice, based on its
many progressive approaches and methodologies, that
is rooted in African shared values, traditional African
justice systems and African experiences.
Mr. Volmer (Estonia): Estonia thanks the Kingdom
of Belgium for organizing today’s open debate, as well
as all the briefers for their interventions.
If we intend transitional justice mechanisms to
truly heal grief-stricken communities, the measures
taken need to be comprehensive, coherent, locally
owned and based on international law.
Based on our own national experience — and
indeed we have been there — in order overcome the
harmful legacy of mass atrocity crimes, it is vital to
build strong institutions capable of preserving the rule
of law and ensuring human rights for all. After regaining
independence in 1991, Estonia re-established the rule of
law and reinstated democratic institutions, in conformity
with international legal standards and obligations, while
bringing to justice the perpetrators of war crimes and
crimes against humanity that were committed during
the occupation by the repressive regime.
Estonia has been active in sharing the experience and
lessons learned in this process, including by providing
capacity-building in the Eastern Partnership region of
Europe and programmes relating to good governance,
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

in particular e-governance and cybersecurity, in all
regions of the world.
Estonia has further assisted women in gaining
livelihoods and worked to provide children with
educational opportunities in various conflict and postconflict situations through development cooperation
initiatives. Today we can hardly imagine a community
being whole without the empowerment and full and equal
participation of women at all stages of the rebuilding
of societies. We also have to ensure the engagement of
children in justice and reconciliation processes.
If we want communities to be peaceful and resilient,
it is critical to acknowledge past violations and to have
redress for victims.
No one can remain above the law. If authorities are
unable or unwilling to fulfil their primary responsibility
of bringing the perpetrators of the most serious crimes
to justice, and there is no other criminal accountability
mechanism setup, it is the International Criminal Court
(ICC), as a complementary judicial institution, that
assists States in bringing about justice for past crimes.
Estonia welcomes recent reports of the Sudan’s
commitment to cooperate with the ICC and its readiness
to hand over all five suspects to the ICC to face charges
of crimes against humanity, war crimes and genocide.
That would clearly constitute a significant step in the
pursuit of justice, since the Security Council’s first-ever
referral of a situation to the ICC, in March 15 years ago.
As the road to justice may be long and winding,
it is also vital to collect and preserve evidence of
atrocities committed during conflict and ensure their
usefulness for possible future justice mechanisms. In
that regard, Estonia strongly supports international
independent fact-finding and evidence-preservation
efforts, including in Syria and Myanmar.
We acknowledge the role of the United Nations
in enhancing the sustainability of transitional justice
processes. In a post-conflict situation, the United
Nations should be able to provide a smooth transition
from humanitarian relief to reconciliation, from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
the United Nations Development Programme. We further
welcome the consolidation of accountability efforts
with regard to country situations, so that all transitional
justice mechanisms are able to work cohesively.
At the same time, all United Nations activities need
to systematically incorporate rule-of-law aspects. We

S/PV. 8723

appreciate the work of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights as the lead entity
of the United Nations on transitional justice issues.
We would like to conclude by calling for transitional
justice measures to be better examined and utilized in
the area of the prevention of mass atrocity crimes as
well. We underline the role of the Security Council
in upholding and promoting transitional justice by
responding decisively to early warning signs of grave
violations of international law, including humanitarian
law and human rights law, in order to prevent and
mitigate human suffering. We look forward to a more
consistent United Nations record on concrete action in
the field of atrocity prevention.
Mr. Matjila (South Africa): The South African
delegation wishes to thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this important debate on transitional
justice as a building block towards sustaining peace.
We extend our thanks to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, Ms. Michelle
Bachelet; the President of the Commission for the
Clarification of Truth, Coexistence and Non-Repetition
of Colombia, Mr. Francisco de Roux; and Ms. Yasmin
Sooka, Executive Director of the Foundation for Human
Rights in South Africa, for their insightful briefings.
We welcome also all the ministers and deputy ministers
present today.
South Africa recognizes and values the importance
of national transitional justice processes in achieving
sustainable peace. In our own case, as Ms. Sooka
said, transitional justice was a vital cog in securing
a relatively peaceful transition from apartheid to the
stable constitutional democracy we are today.
To that end, it is important to note that this debate
is taking place shortly after our country marked the
thirtieth anniversary of the release from imprisonment
of one of the most notable champions of transitional
justice and reconciliation, our former President Nelson
Mandela, a global icon of our struggle.
Former President Mandela and his leadership
collective recognized as early as the time of his
release from 27 years of imprisonment that national
reconciliation rather than vengeance and retributive
justice would be the only viable foundation on which
sustainable peace in a democratic South Africa could
be constructed.

20-0378611/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

However, the sustainable peace that former
President Mandela and his colleagues sought to build
did not have the narrow goal of just ending conflict
but aimed to rebuild the political, security, social and
economic dimensions of a society emerging from
conflict. This included addressing the root causes of
conflict and promoting social and economic justice,
as well as putting in place political structures of
governance and the rule of law to help consolidate
peacebuilding, reconciliation and development.
South Africa notes that transitional justice has an
enormous role to play as countries evolve from conflict
situations to peacebuilding. This would necessarily
entail that the whole spectrum of transitional justice
be explored, including criminal prosecutions, truth
commissions, reparations and restitution programmes,
exhumation of mass graves, apologies, amnesty and
various kinds of institutional reforms to redress human
rights abuses.
Such a process should, however, not follow a
one-size-fits-all approach but, rather, respond to the
specific context of the country concerned. For South
Africa, the restorative justice approach we chose
through the Truth and Reconciliation Commission
sought to combat impunity and recreate a culture of
accountability, uncover the truth about gross human
rights violations and assist the families of the victims
in getting closure. The Commission also had the
broad strategic objective of promoting national unity
and reconciliation in a spirit of understanding which
transcends the conflicts and divisions of the past.
Regrettably, South Africa’s experience of a
repressive regime is not unique. Many countries
emerging from authoritarian rule and conflict also
suffered extensive human rights violations and often
crimes of a heinous nature. Where atrocities were
committed on such a widespread scale, holding
individual perpetrators accountable may not be possible
or even the most desirable result.
While ensuring justice by means of individual
accountability is an important mechanism to achieve
peace, it often overlooks the complexity of conflict and
the structural nature of violence. It thus fails to address
the broader structural challenges that likely contributed
to violence in the first place and that may very well
cause a State to fall back into conflict.
South Africa is of the view that the United Nations
should be enabled to provide more support to national
12/31

13/02/2020

transitional justice processes through peacekeeping
missions, the Peacebuilding Commission and other
United Nations structures and representation.
The Security Council has an important role to play
in promoting sustainable peace through transitional
justice by encouraging adherence to international
guidelines and regional policies.
Healing, however, comes from within and cannot
be imposed from without. It is therefore important
that ownership of transitional justice processes not
be appropriated by the international community.
Transitional justice must be driven by those emerging
from conflict and tailored to their circumstances in
order to ensure that it results in long-lasting peace.
In February 2019, the African Union adopted its
transitional justice policy to assist African Union
member States to develop their own context-specific
comprehensive policies, strategies and programmes
towards democratic and socioeconomic transformation
and achieving sustainable peace, justice, reconciliation,
social cohesion and healing. It thus serves as a guide
for countries to develop a comprehensive policy while
maintaining national ownership, which is imperative to
ensure that any transitional justice process is successful.
As the newly elected Chair of the African Union for
2020 and in line with the AU’s collective aspiration to
silence the guns on the African continent, South Africa
will focus its efforts on conflict resolution across the
continent. That includes supporting transitional justice
processes in our peacebuilding efforts. In that regard,
South Africa will continue to advocate for AU-United
Nations cooperation.
As we witness the drawdown of peacekeeping
missions and see countries transition from conflict
to post-conflict situations, South Africa wishes to
highlight the importance of including reconciliation,
through transitional justice, in holistic comprehensive
transition plans. That includes taking into account
community-based justice mechanisms and ensuring
that the most vulnerable, particularly women and young
people, are represented.
Grass-roots populations in conflict-ridden regions
generally tend to be the most affected by the scourge
of conflict. Transitional justice therefore requires the
active participation of all sectors of society. The role
of women should also not be underestimated. The
African Union Transitional Justice Policy Framework,
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

for instance, promotes women’s representation and
participation in the transitional justice process by
expressly stipulating their participation in peace
agreements, laws and policies.
Less attention is paid to ensuring local grassroots participation and the inclusiveness of security
sector reform in post-conflict situations. While there
is expansive and commendable literature in the field
of security sector reform, there is scant research on
the role of locals in the form of young people, women,
traditional leaders, chiefs and community- and
village-based organizations in security sector reform
processes. As a result, the methods and approaches
used tend to be elite-focused and -driven. We should
therefore bolster United Nations support for locally
driven and generated security sector reform in an effort
to enhance the peace dividend and reinforce strategic
pillars in order to avoid relapse.
One of the greatest challenges in transitional
justice is institutional reform. It is therefore imperative
that institutions that were previously the instruments
of repression be restructured for the good of society so
as to create trust between victims and institutions. In
addition, new progressive institutions should also be
established with a view to strengthening, consolidating
and safeguarding peace and democratic governance in
order to avoid a potential relapse into conflict.
As former President Mandela said,
“Peace is not just the absence of conflict; peace
is the creation of an environment where all can
flourish, regardless of race, colour, creed, religion,
gender, class, caste or any other social markers
of difference.”
Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I
would like to thank all of today’s briefers.
Before I begin my remarks today, I must take a
moment to raise a point of profound concern for my
Government — the release yesterday by the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights of a database of companies operating in, or
connected to, Israeli settlements in the West Bank.
We are astonished and deeply disappointed by the
decision of High Commissioner Bachelet. The United
States has long opposed the creation or release of that
database, which was mandated by the discredited
Human Rights Council in 2016. Its publication only
confirms the unrelenting anti-Israel bias so prevalent

S/PV. 8723

at the United Nations. The United States will never
provide any information to the High Commissioner to
support the compilation of such lists.
We further express our support for the United
States companies referenced. We call upon all States
Members of the United Nations to join us in rejecting
that effort, which facilitates the discriminatory Boycott,
Divestment, Sanctions campaign and delegitimizes
Israel. Attempts to isolate Israel run counter to all of
our efforts to build conditions conducive to IsraeliPalestinian negotiations that lead to a comprehensive
and enduring peace.
Turning to the subject of today’s briefing, it has
been a number of years since the Council specifically
discussed the critical issue of transitional justice;
therefore, we very much appreciate and thank Belgium
for convening and presiding over such an important
discussion. Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) calls
for comprehensive approaches to transitional justice.
We recognize the vital role that transitional justice
plays in uncovering difficult truths, acknowledging
abuses and fostering reconciliation. United Nations
tribunals can play an integral role in that regard, and we
call for more equitable burden-sharing in financially
supporting those courts.
Transitional justice must be tailored to local
circumstances, with communities playing a central role
in its design and implementation. It must incorporate
the perspectives of victims and survivors, including
religious and ethnic minorities and civil society.
Transitional justice is also a political process. Political
leaders have a pivotal role to play in setting the tone
for justice and accountability during transitions. They
should develop a public record of abuses, reform
security sectors responsible for abuses and reintegrate
those members of the forces into society.
Transitional justice processes must be nationally
owned, inclusive processes that account for victims’
needs. It is imperative that the needs of women and
girls be reflected in transitional justice mechanisms,
which will help address the unique barriers to women’s
participation in peace processes and transitional
justice initiatives. That is essential because women’s
direct participation in peace negotiations increases the
sustainability of peace agreements.
We know the characteristics of effective transitional
justice measures. Our task is to ensure that they animate
our pursuit of justice for victims and accountability

20-0378613/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

13/02/2020

for perpetrators. Furthermore, when considering
transitional justice strategies, we must take countries’
existing legal and institutional structures into account.

Together we can ensure that the voices of survivors and
victims are heard, that their needs are met and that their
dignity is honoured.

In South Sudan, the people have told us that there can
be no peace without justice. We call on South Sudan’s
leaders to implement all aspects of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan, including those related to transitional justice.
The establishment of the African Union (AU) hybrid
court for South Sudan is critical to securing lasting
peace in a country devastated by conflict. That is why
we contributed $4 million to the African Union to help
create that institution, which will uphold the rule of
law, accountability and justice.

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
Belgium for convening this open debate on transitional
justice. I would also like to thank the briefers. I welcome
the presence of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Niger, Spain and Guatemala and the Deputy Foreign
Minister of Estonia.

We would also like to recognize the comprehensive
approach to transitional justice implemented in the
Central African Republic. There, the Peacebuilding
Fund supported the latest AU-led peace process,
ensuring that it linked back to the inclusive consultative
process of the Bangui Forum on National Reconciliation
of 2015. We were pleased that some women-led civil
society groups were consulted in the peace agreement,
but are concerned that no women were signatories.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
has supported the vetting of security forces and a
comprehensive assessment of past human rights abuses
and atrocities, all of which has enabled transitional
justice and security sector reform efforts to proceed.
The United Nations Development Programme has
worked to build the capacity of Central African police,
justice and corrections institutions, with funding from
the United States Department of State, thereby shoring
up Government institutions to support justice and
accountability in the Central African Republic. We
have also seen the creation and implementation of the
Special Criminal Court.
That comprehensive United Nations approach
has supported several key components of transitional
justice in the Central African Republic. The United
States is committed to supporting all efforts that ensure
coherent, comprehensive and integrated United Nations
approaches to transitional justice. We underscore
that transitional justice processes must be nationally
owned, inclusive and gender-sensitive if they are to
fully account for the needs of victims. The Council
and the United Nations can rely on the full support of
the United States for transitional justice initiatives.
14/31

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Countries emerging from conflict are often
confronted with numerous challenges in building and
sustaining peace, including the provision of justice for
victims of conflict and the promotion of reconciliation.
Addressing those complex issues, while not easy, is a
key requisite to achieving a durable and prosperous
peace. In that context, allow me to share the following
three pertinent points.
First, transitional justice processes should be
forward-looking. They are not only about addressing
past grievances; crucially, such processes must also lay
the foundation for reconciliation and rebuild trust in
society while avoiding repetition. Therefore, a forwardlooking approach will help countries move towards
sustainable peace and development. Transitional
justice processes should become part and parcel of
broader efforts to build and sustain peace. Given that
each country has its own particular context, needs
and capacities, there is no one-size-fits-all strategy.
A nationally determined comprehensive approach is
required for transitional justice to be successful.
Secondly, transitional justice must be nationally
owned and inclusive. All elements of society must be
extensively consulted and involved in the design and
implementation of a transnational justice process in
order to ensure a sense of national ownership, which is
essential for the long-term effectiveness of transitional
justice. Women must play a central role in that process,
and their voices should be heard carefully. Indonesia is a
strong advocate of women’s robust role along the entire
peace process continuum. As part of that commitment,
Indonesia is currently working on the establishment
of a regional network of women negotiators and
mediators. We will continue to amplify the call for
greater participation of women in peace processes.
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8723

Thirdly, comprehensive reform is essential.
Countries in transition often face capacity challenges in
the political, legal, security and socioeconomic sectors.
To address those issues, countries need to seek solutions
beyond institutional reform. While we recognize the
importance of supporting countries in building their
capacities in effective rule-of-law, governance and
related areas, it is also crucial to build their economic
resilience to the recurrence of conflict. Among its
initiatives, Indonesia organized an international
workshop on crops for peace last year, which provided a
platform for sharing best-practices on agriculture-based
economic development in post-conflict countries. At
the global level, Indonesia also continues to contribute
to United Nations peacekeeping operations with a view
to ensuring coherence in the support to nationally
driven transitional justice processes.

objectives of transitional justice in all cases are based
on common elements, namely, promoting peace as
well as political, social and economic harmony while
preventing the renewal of conflicts and serious human
rights violations.

In conclusion, while everyone must contribute,
the Security Council should play a greater role in
effectively supporting countries in transition to build
and sustain peace. Indonesia reiterates that justice,
reconciliation and economic development should
be pursued hand in hand. The various activities
surrounding transitional justice should pave the way to
well-being and prosperity, with the long-term goal of
building a durable peace, putting a human approach at
the forefront while protecting humankind and providing
hope for future generations.

In the aftermath of the revolution against the
dictatorship and at the beginning of the democratic
transition, Tunisia had an important experience in
the field of transitional justice. Civil society played
an early leading role in moving the process forward
even before the adoption of the Constitution of the
Second Republic. Indeed, Organic Act No. 53, on the
establishment and organization of transitional justice,
was adopted on 24 December 2013 with a view to
dealing with human rights violations and corruption
during the First Republic. Transitional justice in Tunisia
drew inspiration from comparative experiences and
international references in the field of human rights. It
also focused on women and young people. As a result,
national law defines transitional justice as

Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by thanking the briefers and welcoming the
ministers who are here today. I also thank the Kingdom
of Belgium for organizing this meeting, which we
hope will lead to a productive exchange of experiences
and opinions on transitional justice in order to benefit
from best practices and lessons learned and provide a
comprehensive picture of what the Council can achieve
in moving forward in the service of international peace
and security.
Many countries around the world have had diverse
experiences with transitional justice, including in
post-armed conflict and post-dictatorship situations.
Although those experiences are many and diverse,
the reasons for moving forward in transitional justice
processes are tied to profound political changes
ushered in after civil wars or during periods of
transition following revolutions against dictatorships.
Such periods are usually characterized by large-scale
violations of people’s freedoms and harm to their
physical and emotional health. We believe that the

It is indeed difficult for any phase of political
transition and peacebuilding to succeed without
transitional justice where past violations are
investigated in order to shed light on the truth, provide
restitution to the victims and their families, ensure
accountability and, thereby, make progress towards
national reconciliation, with the aim of turning the page
and building reconciled societies living in peace and
harmony. Without such transitional justice, violations
will sow the seeds of hatred and discord that could
undermine peacebuilding any time.

“an integrated process of mechanisms and means
put in place to identify and remedy past human
rights violations by revealing the truth, holding
those responsible for such violations accountable,
compensating the victims and restoring their
dignity in order to achieve national reconciliation,
preserve and archive the collective memory,
establish guarantees of non-recurrence and enable
the transition from dictatorship to a democratic
regime that contributes to the consecration of
human rights”.
In addition, we have established the Truth and
Dignity Commission, chaired by a woman, and
entrusted it with a series of missions in the field of
transitional justice, namely, to bring the truth to light
until reconciliation is achieved. That independent body
completed its work at the end of its four-year mandate.

20-0378615/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The implementation of transitional justice
mechanisms poses certain problems in some cases.
However, such crises can be contained by relying on
the political maturity of State institutions and the
contribution of civil society to correct mistakes and
achieve comprehensive reconciliation among the
population, on the one hand, and between the population
and the State apparatus and institutions, on the other.
Practice has shown that there are no pre-established
models for transitional justice. There can be no
imposed prescriptions or wholly legal approaches. We
must not lose sight of the local dynamics of political,
economic and social transition that enable us to address
violations and achieve just social changes over the
long-term. In that regard, the Security Council can
encourage innovative processes of transitional justice
through reconstruction contexts that are derived from
the specificities and concepts of local justice, while
benefiting from the experience and capability of
international criminal justice.
Tunisia supports strengthening international
cooperation to reform legislation and legal sovereign
institutions in post-conflict or post-repressive periods in
affected countries so that such legislation is in line with
international law, the criteria of international criminal
justice and international human rights law. That would
lead to providing the requirements of effective national
ownership over transitional justice.
Tunisia also supports benefitting from the
opportunities provided by international criminal
justice in order to realize reconciliation through the
Rome Statute and the Trust Fund for Victims of the
International Criminal Court. That would allow the
victims of gross violations to be offered reparations and
reintegration, which contribute to promoting peace,
stability and peacebuilding.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): May I join others
in thanking Belgium for convening today’s important
debate. I am very pleased that the High Commissioner
for Human Rights was able to join us and brief the
Security Council today. May there be many more
occasions where that might happen. I also thank our
other two briefers.
I will make three short points. First, I would
briefly like to state the reasons the United Kingdom
considers accountability for conflict-related crimes
so important for peace and security. Secondly, I
would like to acknowledge some of the important
16/31

13/02/2020

developments in transitional justice policy and practice
over the past two decades and their relevance beyond
the traditionally understood transition cycle. Thirdly, I
would like to propose that, for transitional justice to be
more meaningful for sustaining peace, we need to find
better ways and means of connecting it with social or
socioeconomic justice.
With regard to my first point, the United Kingdom
believes that legal accountability for conflict-related
crimes serves as a deterrent, punishment and a method
for upholding victims’ rights. Without it, there can
be neither reconciliation of communities, faith in the
functioning of rule-of-law institutions nor respect for
the rules-based international system. Those are the
principles for which my Government stands. There
should be no impunity for international crimes and
no amnesty for gross violations. As a spokesman for
the Sudanese Government put it on Tuesday (see
S/PV.8718), justice cannot be achieved if we do not heal
the wounds. And I would like to welcome the decision of
the Government of the Sudan to hold former President
Omer Al-Bashir and others accountable, which will be
a significant step towards a peace settlement in Darfur.
The victims of human rights violations in Myanmar
also deserve justice. It is difficult to see how Rohingya
refugees in Bangladesh can return to Rakhine state if
they are not confident that the perpetrators, the Burmese
military in particular, will be held accountable.
With respect to my second point, transitional
justice began as an innovative way of enabling justice
in post-conflict environments. Over the past 25 years,
there have been significant developments in this field
and many of the representatives round the table, in
particular South Africa and Tunisia, have set out
some of those developments in their countries, which
was very interesting. Mechanisms and processes have
been increasingly inclusive and nationally owned. The
consultative, inclusive and independent manner in
which the Gambia established its Truth, Reconciliation
and Reparations Commission has shown the benefits of
national ownership to secure public confidence. I would
also like to welcome the recent verdict by the Bangui
Court of Appeal in the Central African Republic,
holding accountable 28 individuals for war crimes
and crimes against humanity, related to the killing of
75 civilians and 10 United Nations peacekeepers in the
Bangassou area.
Transitional justice processes have assumed an
increasingly victim-centred approach. More and more
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

efforts have been situated in broader institutional reform,
including security sector reform. Transitional justice
initiatives in Afghanistan have demonstrated what
can be achieved in terms of local-level reconciliation,
even prior to the signing of a comprehensive peace
agreement. That breadth of application across such a
range of issues has taught us that transitional justice has
relevance far beyond the transition cycle traditionally
associated with countries emerging from conflict. It
can make inroads even amid ongoing hostilities, and
its toolkit can serve States and communities long after
a conflict ends.
Notwithstanding those developments, the time
has come to have a critical conversation about what
transitional justice has achieved in terms of building
peace that is sustainable and what more can be done.
The root causes of conflict are persistent; their
manifestations are as adaptable as they are pernicious.
That brings me to my final point. We now possess
evidence that, unless there is a proper response for
dealing with wider social and economic injustices, the
root causes of conflict are highly capable of morphing
into other forms of violence and discrimination further
down the line. Not only does that risk the achievements
of transitional justice being reduced to little more than
lip-service in the eyes of those affected by conflict as
they continue to experience a wide array of injustices in
their daily lives, it presents a real risk of further cycles
of conflict and insecurity. As transitional justice policy
and practice continue to evolve, we should start to forge
closer links with broader challenges to peace, justice
and inclusion. Truth and reconciliation commissions
in Kenya and Tunisia have shown impressive results in
that space, while demonstrating that transitional justice
mechanisms and mandates are well positioned to make
an increasing contribution to addressing the root causes
of conflict.
Mr. Licharz (Germany): I would like to echo the
expression of gratitude by colleagues to our briefers. I
am delighted to see the High Commissioner for Human
Rights briefing the Security Council. She has our full
support. We look forward to more briefings from her in
the very near future.
Colleagues and briefers have eloquently elaborated
on the importance of transitional justice. Let me share
with the Council an example of our recent past. In 1991,
in the aftermath of the fall of the Berlin Wall and in the
process of reunification, the so-called State Security

S/PV. 8723

Records Agency was established in Germany. The
task of the Agency was to manage research and, most
important, make accessible files, documenting how the
authorities of the German Democratic Republic spied on
its citizens. People were able to obtain hundreds, even
thousands, of pages of those files, in which the State
Security Agency recorded details of their personal lives.
People were also able to obtain the names of those who
passed on information that could lead to incarceration,
torture or even more severe consequences. Perhaps
some representatives have seen the movie The Lives
of Others. It is an Oscar-winning movie that addresses
the issue. If representatives have not seen it, I strongly
recommend it.
The shocking findings once the files were opened
led to further measures. The German Parliament set up
two commissions aimed at the reconciliation of society
to create a framework for coming to terms with the
German Democratic Republic’s past, give back to the
people their right to information self-determination,
strengthen democratic education and dialogue with
the public and support the development of a common
political culture. The commissions and the Agency
helped keep the subject in the public debate. It was no
coincidence that the Head of the State Security Records
Agency, Joachim Gauck, became the German President.
What are the lessons that we have learned from our
own experience? In echoing what the Ambassador of
the United Kingdom said earlier, transitional justice
should have a survivor-centred approach. It should
not limit itself to punishing perpetrators, but should
also respond to the needs of the individuals affected
and their families and networks and to the needs and
perceptions of communities. That holds especially true
for the most egregious crimes against those who are
vulnerable, such as sexual and gender-based violence.
Resolution 2467 (2019) therefore for the first time
introduced a survivor-centred approach.
In the search for reconciliation, it is equally
important to establish accountability and to fight
impunity. Holding those who are individually
responsible for atrocities and human rights violations
accountable under criminal law is a key prerequisite
for sustaining peace. Therefore, Germany is a strong
supporter of the International Criminal Court, as well
as the investigative mechanisms mandated by the
Human Rights Council and the General Assembly.

20-0378617/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

National ownership can be guaranteed only by the
inclusion of all, most important marginalized groups
and civil society, and by the promotion and protection
of everyone’s human rights. Transitional justice at the
local level must be embedded in a broader national
discourse and policies. I listened with great interest
to the very inspiring statement by Francisco de Roux
about the peace process in Colombia.
Through project funding, Germany supports the
peace process in Colombia and helps strengthen peace
institutions involved in conflict resolution, such as the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the Truth Commission
and the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing
in the Context of and Due to the Armed Conflict
through the German-Colombian Peace Institute.
Every country, society and community should
decide for itself whether it needs outside assistance.
If anyone requires such help, we should provide it to
the extent possible. In order to help national solutions
to progress, we support the Joint United Nations
Development Programme-Department of Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs Programme on Building National
Capacities for Conflict Prevention through peace and
development advisers, who have proven to be very apt
at supporting reconciliation processes.
In that vein, we explicitly want to express our
support for the United Nations toolbox. We need to
strengthen the Security Council’s focus on human
rights, conflict prevention and respective instruments.
Reconciliation and mediation capacities must be
included in missions’ mandates more often. The
Security Council should invite commissions mandated
by the Human Rights Council to brief the Council on
their efforts in collecting evidence and establishing a
path leading towards accountability.
In South Sudan, for example, the Commission on
Human Rights has a mandate critical for collecting and
preserving evidence, with a view to ending impunity and
providing accountability and to make such information
available to all transitional justice mechanisms.
Therefore, I very much welcome the participation
of Ms. Yasmin Sooka, Chair of the Commission on
Human Rights in South Sudan, in today’s debate. We
also heard earlier that the transitional Government in
Khartoum has publicly apologized to the victims of the
military rule. I think that that is a very positive signal
with regard to the reconciliation process in the Sudan.
18/31

13/02/2020

The Peacebuilding Commission plays a crucial
role in post-conflict situations, as well as prevention
efforts. It contributes to the much-needed platform for
cooperation and the exchange and sharing of lessons
both within and outside the United Nations. Germany
wants the Peacebuilding Commission to make more
frequent use of its expertise and advisory role to the
Security Council. The Security Council should also
look at emerging conflicts more frequently and use
mediation as a tool to prevent outbreaks, as called for
by Article 33 of the Charter of the United Nations. The
link between mediation and transitional justice needs
to be reflected in the design of transition processes for
peace to be sustainable.
No country can ever be guaranteed that violence
and conflict will not reoccur. Transitional justice has
no endpoint. It is a constant endeavour that we have
to undertake every single day in order to safeguard
ourselves and the societies in which we live against
sliding back into disaster. Assuming responsibility for
its past, Germany is convinced that safeguarding the
human rights of all and working towards more inclusive
societies is the only way to achieve reconciliation
and peace.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights for her briefing, and I once again express to
her our full confidence. I also thank Mr. De Roux and
Ms. Sooka for their briefings. I will focus on five points.
First, the Colombian and South African experiences
perfectly illustrate that no society can recover in a
lasting manner from a crisis if a deadlock involving
massive violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law exists. In every case, achieving
lasting peace is predicated upon establishing the truth
with regard to the abuses committed, affording victims
their status as victims and establishing individual
and collective responsibility. It is imperative that the
United Nations help States in transition to meet those
challenges. Beginning with the peace negotiations
stage, the United Nations must devote the necessary
resources to meet them within the framework of the
resources allocated to peacebuilding and development.
We commend the work of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which
enjoys the expertise to assist in developing transitional
justice policies. That requires the implementation of
judicial as well as non-judicial solutions adapted to the
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

specific situation of every national context, without
resorting to a one-size-fits-all approach.
In the Central African Republic, we encourage the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to support the establishment of the Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation Commission
provided for in the Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, signed
one year ago. That body complements the establishment
of an impartial and independent judicial system capable
of responding to the call for justice demanded by the
people of the Central African Republic. In that regard,
we are encouraged by the investigations launched by
the Special Criminal Court, which France supports in
helping train its judges.
Secondly, every segment of society must be
involved. Women, who are the first victims of conflicts,
must be able to participate in the very development
of the transitional justice policy in accordance with
resolution 1325 (2000) and the women and peace and
security agenda. Young people, historians, community
and religious leaders and victims groups must also be
able to fully play their role. Strengthening democratic
governance and education are also critical prerequisites.
It is the responsibility of States to allow for
remembrance and fight against historical revisionism.
In the Balkans, as we commemorate the twentyfifth anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre, it is
unacceptable that political leaders glorify war criminals
and deny the crimes that were determined to have taken
place by the criminal courts established by the Council.
Thirdly, international mechanisms must support
the reform of national justice systems. Thanks to the
mechanisms established for the crimes committed by
Da’esh in Iraq and the atrocities committed in Syria and
Burma, evidence will not disappear and those crimes
will not go unpunished. France reiterates its unwavering
support for the International Criminal Court, which
must play a central role at the international level in
the fight against impunity, in full accordance with the
principle of complementarity. We call for the universal
ratification of the Rome Statute and welcome States
that have decided to join the International Criminal
Court or cooperate with it within the framework of
transitional justice, by following the example of Tunisia
in June 2011 and the Sudan today.
Fourthly, the attention afforded to victims plays
a fundamental role. The establishment of reparation

S/PV. 8723

and compensation mechanisms for victims should
be widespread. That is particularly the case for victims
of sexual violence, who must receive the medical,
psychological, legal and social assistance that is
essential for their reintegration into society. That is why
we also call for supporting the Global Survivors Fund,
launched by Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege.
To conclude, I wish to pay special tribute to
the families of victims of forced disappearance. We
all have in mind the weekly demonstrations by the
Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo in Buenos Aires to
find their children who were abducted by the military
dictatorship. That fight continues today. Sadly, those
crimes are far from being a thing of the past or limited
to a specific region of the world. The Syrian regime
has been using those crimes systematically to eliminate
all forms of opposition since 2011. The victims are
peaceful activists, intellectuals, artists and ordinary
Syrians, who are victims of merciless methods. The
resolution of that issue is inseparable from the quest for
a political solution, and the Security Council must give
the resolution of the Syrian crisis its full attention.
Ms. DeShong (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We wish to join other members in thanking Belgium
for organizing this briefing. We also recognize and
welcome the Foreign Ministers and Deputy Foreign
Ministers present, and thank High Commissioner
Bachelet, Father De Roux and Executive Director
Sooka for their insightful and thoughtful briefings.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes
today’s discussion on transitional justice — a critical
component of building and sustaining peace in many
settings. We wish to recall the Security Council’s
discussion in November, under the United Kingdom’s
presidency, on the role of reconciliation (see S/PV.8668).
Transitional justice facilitates reconciliation by ensuring
accountability for perpetrators and offering justice
for victims. Without justice, lasting and sustainable
peace will remain elusive. Without reconciliation, our
Council’s work to build a peaceful and prosperous
world will remain futile.
Transitional justice mechanisms should always
form part of a larger political strategy that addresses the
structural inequalities in conflict-affected societies, for
the benefit of all stakeholders without discrimination.
That inclusive approach should consider the different
needs and abilities of all participants. Women, young
people, ethnic and religious minorities, indigenous

20-0378619/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

populations, persons with disabilities, the elderly,
constituents of rural communities and civil society
representatives must always be present as crafters,
participants and beneficiaries of transitional justice
initiatives at all stages of the conflict cycle — before,
during and after the conflict. Indeed, building trust and
ensuring justice is a never-ending process.
Transitional justice mechanisms should also be
complemented by sustainable development initiatives
that address the root causes of insecurity and empower
people to live in dignity. The Security Council
should more often seek to engage the Peacebuilding
Commission’s strategic advisory capacities and,
where necessary, make use of the Secretary-General’s
Peacebuilding Fund to address important governance
gaps and to initiate projects and programmes that
stimulate socioeconomic and political participation.
We emphasize, however, that there is no
one-size-fits-all approach, as others have said. Those
initiatives must always be designed with respect for local
customs and values. To that end, we also welcome the
African Union’s continental guideline for transitional
justice, adopted one year ago, which takes into account
the many-sided complexities of mass violence yet
privileges local traditions when delivering justice
and accountability. That comprehensive road map is
a credible source of best practices and lessons learned
that all members of the international community may
find useful.
Transitional justice safeguards institutional
integrity and promotes structural improvements across
the peace, security and development nexus. Welldesigned transnational justice mechanisms help to
restore public confidence in State institutions. They
also foster normative realignments across societies as
new precedents are created to provide accountability,
rehabilitation and reparations to survivors of injustices.
On the issue of reparations, it must be emphasized
that there should be no statutes of limitation that
prevent restitution for mass atrocity crimes, especially
where those historical injustices have left legacies of
underdevelopment, intergenerational traumas and
social inequities in their wake. Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines reiterates that the historical injustices
of native genocide and chattel slavery, including the
trans-Atlantic slave trade, compel all former colonial
Powers to provide reparatory justice.
20/31

13/02/2020

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a young nation
that reclaimed its independence only 40 years ago.
Like many young societies, we understand that only by
healing the collective memory enmeshed deep within
our social fabric can we truly come to terms with our
past indignities and embrace our future possibilities.
That is the lens through which we view transitional
justice — a medium to bridge a painful past to a
peaceful future by listening to those cries that too often
go unheard.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes and thanks you, Mr. Minister, for presiding
over this open debate. We thank Ms. Bachelet, United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, as well
as Mr. De Roux and Ms. Sooka for their briefings.
Some conflict-affected countries and regions
are currently faced with the arduous task of postwar reconstruction. Their conflict-weary populations
eagerly look forward to an early restoration of the
rule of law and justice so that they can embark on the
road towards sustainable development. The United
Nations peacebuilding architecture is committed to
coordinating the international community’s support for
the reconstruction of post-conflict countries and has
played a positive role in consolidating the fruits of peace
and achieving sustainable development in the countries
affected. The issue of transitional justice is a key
component of peacebuilding. It should be addressed in
the context of peacebuilding and sustaining peace and
its discussion should be strictly limited to in-conflict
and post-conflict situations.
First, based on the Charter of the United Nations
and universally recognized international law, it is
imperative to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of every country. It is important to respect
the countries concerned in their efforts to advance
their transitional justice processes step by step, in a
manner consistent with their own national conditions.
No models should be imposed from outside, or should
any interference be permitted in their internal affairs
or struggles. Only by adhering to the principle of
sovereignty can transitional justice efforts be justified,
thereby winning the trust of the countries concerned
and promoting peace and development.
Secondly, it is necessary to help the countries
concerned enhance their capacity-building, with a focus
on the effective functioning of their judicial systems. In
the long term, no special interim measure or external
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8723

measure can substitute an effectively functioning
domestic judicial system. After an extended period
of turmoil and conflict, the rule of law of a given
country will have been seriously affected and it must
be faced with shortages and challenges in financial,
technological and human resources. The international
community should reach out to the countries concerned
and enhance their capacity-building. The Peacebuilding
Commission, as a body jointly established by the
General Assembly and the Security Council, with the
advantage of straddling both the political security and
development areas, has an important role to play in
that regard.

responsibility of upholding international law and the
basic norms governing international relations. It needs
to effectively advance political settlements, support
good offices and mediation, maintain unity and
cooperation and ensure the implementation of relevant
resolutions. That is the only way in which we can truly
prevent and resolve conflicts and avoid creating further
differences and divisions. Efforts should be made to
enable the people of the world to enjoy the same vision
of peace and prosperity and to facilitate the building of
a community of shared future for humankind.

Thirdly, the nexus between transitional justice and
the political process, economic development and social
integration should be viewed through the correct lens
and integrated measures should be taken to promote
the rule of law and judicial justice. Transitional justice
is not only a legal issue but should also contribute to
establishing lasting peace and stability, economic
development and social progress in the country
concerned, as well as the long-term well-being of local
populations. Security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration efforts should be
carried out in order to advance the transitional justice
process. Economic and social measures, such as poverty
eradication and job creation, should also be adopted in
order to promote peace, achieve national reconciliation
and eliminate the latent threats of conflict.

“Those who seek to bestow legitimacy must
themselves embody it; and those who invoke
international law must themselves submit to it.”
(A/59/PV.3, p. 3)

The rule of law and justice must be highlighted at
both the national and the international levels. Many
of the ongoing conflicts in the world today have
remained unresolved for decades, with ever-deepening
rifts between the parties — a deplorable situation.
Such difficult situations often represent the bitter
consequences of breaching international consensus
and disrupting the international order based on
international law.
The basic principles of international law, such as
adhering to the peaceful settlement of international
disputes and prohibiting both the threat and use of force,
constitute the core of the Charter of the United Nations,
which underpins the contemporary international order
and other obligations under international law that
countries must abide by. They embody the authentic
meaning of the rule of law at the international level.
As the cornerstone of the international security
architecture, the Council must shoulder the lofty

As the late former Secretary-General Annan said at
the General Assembly in September 2004:

Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We welcome you, Sir, along with
the Deputy Foreign Minister of Estonia and the Foreign
Ministers of the Niger, Spain and Guatemala. I wish
to thank the Kingdom of Belgium for bringing this
important topic to the Security Council. We express our
appreciation to our briefers, Ms. Bachelet, Father De
Roux and Ms. Sooka, for their important statements.
Their first-hand experiences in implementing various
transitional justice mechanisms have made a major
contribution to our better understanding of the
advantages of those mechanisms and the challenges
they face.
The genuine tragedy experienced by a post-conflict
population calls for the urgent establishment of the
rule of law in a State where human beings can live in
freedom, human rights are respected and legislation
is subject to international law. The reinstatement or
establishment of the rule of law becomes imperative
in order to safeguard human dignity, which is the goal
of transitional justice. However, that is no easy task.
We must therefore continue to examine and improve
the various tools at our disposal to enhance transition
mechanisms and ensure that peace and security are
permanently restored to societies that have fallen
victim to conflict.
When a society experiences conflict, many different
kinds of victims emerge. That is why we understand
that the classification of the types of victims must be
taken into account when drawing up the laws, norms,
protocols and regulations of truth commissions, courts

20-0378621/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

and special commissions, as well as other institutions
created for the post-conflict transition. That is of the
utmost importance in order to directly and specifically
respond to violations of rights so as to create more
efficient mechanisms for reconciliation. Post-conflict
processes must include specific mechanisms to provide
relief and help to families, as well as to develop
programmes for family reunification, the search for
missing persons, the right to information about family
members and reparations for moral damages.
Furthermore, the Dominican Republic would like to
highlight the importance of including a gender analysis
in the measures created to guarantee rights, justice,
reparation and non-recurrence. The realities, needs and
evolving nature of the roles of women survivors of the
conflict must be taken into account, particularly with
regard to preventing impunity.
We take this opportunity to congratulate the people
of Colombia for their efforts to achieve a transition
from a conflict situation to one of lasting peace,
reconciliation and progress for its population, including
both the victims and the actors involved in the conflict.
There is no doubt that transitional justice presents
major challenges, such as the optimization of time and
budgets for the operation of the various mechanisms,
the participation of victims and the development of
special and specific protocols to serve as guidelines.
However, we are confident that those challenges
will be successfully overcome and that the Colombian
people will emerge as a stronger, safer, more resilient
and more united society. During the visit of Security
Council members to Colombia last year, we witnessed
first-hand the efforts of the Government, the parties
and the general public to implement the mechanisms
for a peaceful transition. We also observed the
important role that Security Council missions play and
the significant support they represent within peace and
post-conflict processes.
Finally, members of the Security Council must
make a greater effort to promote the culture of peace.
As an international community, it is incumbent upon
us to fight for the restoration of peace and to foster
an ideology for effective transitions towards peace,
democracy, justice and guarantees of non-recurrence,
avoiding at all costs the political polarization of
such processes.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the Belgian
presidency for organizing today’s very important open
22/31

13/02/2020

debate on this topic. I also thank all the briefers for
their interventions. We extend our warmest welcome
to the Foreign Ministers of the Niger, Guatemala and
Spain and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Estonia.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
At the international level, justice plays an
extremely important role in relations among States and
has solidified its place in international law, including
in the Charter of the United Nations itself. Similarly,
at the national level, in conflict and post-conflict
situations, transitional justice can play an important
role in national reconciliation and development.
The United Nations in general and the Security
Council in particular have attached vital importance
to promoting justice, the rule of law and post-conflict
national reconciliation, as well as preventing a return to
conflict in the future. Over time, the Security Council
has used all of its tools to address transitional justice
in conflict and post-conflict contexts. I would like to
share the following points in that regard.
First, justice shall be served, and justice shall serve.
It can be an immediate result, but it also is a means
to the long-term goal of sustainable national unity
and development. All efforts to promote transitional
justice and post-conflict peacebuilding need to always
keep that long-term goal into consideration, including
addressing the root causes of conflict.
While the past can be heavy and difficult, focusing
on a future that is sustainable, peaceful and prosperous
may be the way forward. We owe it to future generations
to make the right choice.
Secondly, transitional justice needs to be nationally
owned and nationally led. As mentioned earlier,
transitional justice reflects a society’s attempts to
come to terms with a legacy of large-scale past abuses.
Transitional justice needs to be society-based and play
a harmonious role in conjunction with other attempts to
heal society.
As such, the State concerned should have
primary responsibility for its own transitional justice,
reconciliation and future. Here I would like to
underscore one point in the report of the SecretaryGeneral, mentioned also in Ms. Bachelet’s briefing:
that transitional justice cannot be imported or imposed
from outside. A locally led and locally appropriate
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

implementation of transitional justice has the best
chance of success. In other words, nationally owned
and nationally led is the only way to go, and there can
be no one-size-fits-all solution to all conflicts.
Thirdly, international assistance is crucial and
can be most effective if based on national needs,
particularities and capacities.
The international community should focus on
helping build up and strengthen national institutions and
mechanisms in accordance with national conditions.
Training, knowledge and experience-sharing are very
useful in most situations. Ensuring a smooth transition
should be the benchmark of international assistance,
especially of United Nations missions.
Fourthly, the development and implementation of
the processes and mechanisms of transitional justice
need to take into account their impact on and the active
role of women, youth, children and other vulnerable
groups in peacebuilding processes.
Fifthly, regional arrangements can play a
constructive role in assisting peace and reconciliation
processes, in accordance with the aforementioned
points and the principles of international law.
As the central mechanism for peace, security
and stability in South-East Asia, the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) established the
ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation and
other mechanisms for conducting activities on capacitybuilding, experience-sharing on reconciliation,
peacebuilding and the promotion of the role of women
and children.

S/PV. 8723

We believe that the approach formulated regarding
the topic of our discussion is the right one. It is important
to determine the role and the most useful forms of
transitional justice in the achievement of its main goal,
the establishment of a lasting peace and the prevention of
the resumption of conflict. Internal armed conflicts are
the main instance of the use of military force in today’s
world, and there is a dangerous tendency towards their
proliferation against the backdrop or as the result of the
overthrow or destabilization of legitimate Governments
through external interference.
Conflicts do not arise by themselves, therefore in
resolving each one of them we must take an approach
that bears their causes in mind. Transitional justice
is not always the key to establishing peace. What is
important is not to get carried away and prescribe the
same medicine to all patients, independently of the
diagnosis or the symptoms of the disease. However,
that does not mean that the extensive instruments
of transitional justice available should not be used
where they are necessary. That is a multidimensional
phenomenon that includes not only legal but political
mechanisms, and national and international efforts are
essential to establish peace in specific States.
We are not convinced that the 2010 guidance note of
the Secretary-General on the United Nations approach
to transitional justice, which was drawn up without the
participation of Member States, is right in all its aspects
concerning this framework.

In conclusion, based on Viet Nam’s own experience,
we always speak with candour and are sympathetic to
countries and peoples who are going through difficult
phases of conflict and post-conflict peacebuilding.
They can count on our continued support inside and
outside the Council.

The United Nations has been through various
phases in the use of transitional justice instruments.
In the early 1990s, great hopes were pinned on the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda,
created by the Council. However, by the early 2000s, it
had already become clear that this mechanism was not
effective. In spite of various political statements by and
positions of States, the true assessment by all parties of
the work of those bodies was almost identical.

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): Belgium has proposed a debate on a
very important topic, and we are grateful to it. We
welcome the presence of Ministers here, and we also
welcome Ms. Bachelet and other keynote speakers and
thank them for their contribution to this discussion
on the role of transitional justice in efforts towards
peacebuilding and sustaining peace in conflict and
post-conflict situations.

The Council, first, agreed to their costly reform,
known as the completion strategy, and then opted
not to replicate such mechanisms. The attention
of the international community then shifted to the
International Criminal Court, a body that seemed
very attractive to many because, unlike the Tribunals
for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, it was based
on the principle of complementarity. It was supposed
not to replace but rather complement national justice.

20-0378623/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

However, the further activities of the Court showed
that the idea of complementarity remained a dead letter,
while the general trend towards the politicization of the
work of international judicial bodies manifested itself
in its ugliest forms.
To date, the most important international
achievement in combating crimes against peace and
humanity is the Nuremberg tribunal. It was created
on the basis of the unity of all allies in the anti-Hitler
coalition based on the principle of fair judicial
procedure. That tribunal did not need any kind of
completion strategy or any special and costly measures
to preserve its legacy. The authority of the decisions of
the Nuremberg Tribunal are indisputable, in spite of all
the time that has elapsed.
Let us come back to today’s world. By the mid2000s, it had become clear that the most effective forms
of transitional justice were those based on national
dialogue in conflict-affected countries, complemented
by United Nations efforts. Establishing a post-conflict
reality is impossible without focusing on local traditions
and specific features. In some places, for purposes of
reconciliation truth and reconciliation commissions
are needed, but in others traditional mechanisms are
required, such as the Gacaca trials in Rwanda.
Since sound national reconciliation is the
determining factor in the successful resolution of a
conflict and preventing its resumption, we believe
the United Nations must focus its efforts on providing
the most appropriate forms of technical assistance to
restore a national justice system and law-enforcement
bodies destroyed by conflict. In this process, the United
Nations must be an actor that provides examples of good
practices and proposes solutions rather than creating
problems. In this connection, it is not always acceptable
for unconditional demands to be made by the United
Nations, such as the unacceptability of amnesty or the
primary role of an international component in mixed
judiciary and investigative bodies.
It is important to openly discuss cases of the abuse
of transitional justice. In United Nations documents, it
is common for such mechanisms to be written about
only in the most superlative terms. The only criticism
we hear relates to the lack of political support, the lack
of financing or the fact that the victims of crime do not
have an appropriately active role.
At the same time, mechanisms of transitional
justice should not be used to consolidate the victory of
24/31

13/02/2020

one party to a conflict over the other or to settle political
accounts, neither should they be used to elicit foreign
interference in the internal affairs of a State weakened
by conflict.
In addition, transitional justice must be
distinguished from direct political manipulation
in the guise of fighting impunity, a practice that,
unfortunately, is taking root in our Organization. A sad
example is the illegitimate International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011.
The way to genuinely contribute to ensuring the
accountability of foreign terrorist fighters, including
those active in Syria, would be to repatriate them and
try them in courts of national jurisdiction, in accordance
with counter-terrorism conventions, in keeping with
the obligation, under those conventions, to extradite
or prosecute them. Of course, that would be based on
the principle of the inevitability of punishment and its
proportionality to the crime committed.
We are convinced that the issues of transitional
justice in the work of the Security Council should not
be reduced to the search for a universal formula, but
rather should reflect country-specific realities and the
mandates of peacekeeping and political missions. The
United Nations should not dictate but should encourage
and complement national initiatives.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Delegations with longer
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing and to deliver a summarized version when
speaking in the Chamber. The red light on the collar of
the microphone will begin to flash after four minutes
have elapsed. I also wish to inform all concerned that
we will suspend this open debate at 1 p.m. and resume
it at 3 p.m.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Guatemala.
Mr. Brolo Vila (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me to congratulate Belgium on its presidency of
the Security Council, and particularly Minister Goffin
for convening this open debate, which reminds us
that, in any peacebuilding process, transitional justice
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

mechanisms are critical to achieving a firm and lasting
peace with a view to reconciling people in conflict.
I appear before the Council for the first time, as
the Foreign Minister of the Republic of Guatemala,
because of the importance that the new Guatemalan
Administration attaches to this issue and to the various
organs of the United Nations. I take this opportunity
to represent the Government of President Alejandro
Giammatei Falla, who is determined to provide security
and welfare to its citizens and has prioritized human
dignity and the common good through the application
of justice. One of the strategic pillars of the Government
policy plan for the period 2020 to 2024 recognizes the
vital role of multilateralism, in particular the role of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security
Our Government is making efforts to achieve a true
national reconciliation that will allow us to reduce social
polarization and build the confidence, governance and
legal stability that will attract investment and promote
the economic and comprehensive development of
society so as to guarantee that the Guatemalan people
are never again pitted against one another. Moreover,
we believe that it is vital to look ahead, build a future
and find spaces for dialogue and negotiation in the
search for common objectives that will benefit the
entire population.
Following the signing of the peace agreements
in Guatemala in 1996, the Peace Secretariat was
created as an entity that advises and coordinates the
implementation of those agreements at the national
level. That model institution has contributed to
peacebuilding efforts.
Guatemala has made efforts to strengthen its
justice system. Now, at the beginning of President
Giammatei’s Administration, the Government will
continue to prioritize ensuring access to justice and
strengthening the relevant institutions in an effective
and responsible manner.
Regarding its role and international commitment
to peace, the State of Guatemala has historically
contributed military personnel to peacekeeping
operations as a special component of its foreign
policy and currently has Blue Helmets deployed in
seven peacekeeping missions. Guatemala reiterates its
commitment to the Council to continue sending troops,
as such missions are one of the Organization’s noble
tasks to help those in extremely adverse circumstances.

S/PV. 8723

Global challenges, such as the maintenance of
peace and security and respect for human rights, must
be addressed in this forum, as they require the united
political will of the international community. Seventyfive years after the creation of this Organization, we
believe in the critical role of the United Nations in
resolving conflicts and promoting the rule of law.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, European Union and
Cooperation of Spain.
Ms. González Laya (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I address the Security Council for the first time as
Minister for Foreign Affairs, European Union and
Cooperation of Spain — a country that is today a robust
democracy, a State governed by the rule of law and
scrupulous respect for human rights. However, Spain is
also aware that, barely one generation ago, it suffered
a bloody civil war that led to a long dictatorship. Even
after it became a democracy, the country suffered the
ravages of terrorism.
We firmly believe in our model, which is based
on democratic transition and is embodied in the 1978
Constitution. It was a true experiment in transitional
justice put into practice. However, we recognize that
we must continue to respond to the demands of citizens
and civil society. Our experience shows us that no
country is immune to the enormous risk of hate speech
and fearmongering, which can easily degenerate into
human rights violations, the rejection of the principles
and values of democracy and, ultimately, conflict.
That is why Spain’s transitional justice efforts are
both internal and international. At the national level, we
adopted the Historical Memory Law in 2007 in order to
leave no one behind by listening to the testimony of
victims and preserving their memory so that they are
not forgotten.
At the international level, Spain is firmly committed
to transitional justice processes around the world. In
the 1980s, Spain supported the efforts of the Contadora
Group that led to the Esquipulas I and II Agreements.
Today Spain works with the United Nations to support
the transitional justice process in Colombia.
We must repeatedly affirm that peace and justice are
not contradictory realities. There can be no sustainable
peace without justice, while justice cannot be achieved
without truth, accountability and recognition for the

20-0378625/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

dignity of victims and reparations for them. In that
connection, I would like to highlight three elements.
The first is the fight against impunity. The
international community has developed a valuable
instrument to achieve that objective — the Rome
Statute. That is why we believe that the members of the
Council must cooperate with the International Criminal
Court. We must strengthen the Court, revitalize it to
make it more efficient and broaden its base — the
number of States parties — if we are to enshrine the
universality of justice. The process beginning this year
to elect the new prosecutor and six judges gives us a
perfect opportunity to do so.
Secondly, the dignity of victims must be respected.
Caring for the victims of terrorism and of repression
against the defenders of democracy is a priority for
my Government. Not only do they deserve recognition
and reparation, but their testimony is also an extremely
effective preventive tool. That is why we believe that
the Council should take into account the synergies
among the agendas on the protection of civilians, on
children and armed conflict and on women and peace
and security. The role of women is essential in any
transitional process. Their inclusion must be crosscutting and applied to decision-making centres. In
that connection, Spain, together with Finland, has
undertaken to achieve that objective by 2025 through
Commitment 2025.
Thirdly and lastly, the truth and guarantees of
non-repetition are key. I urge the members of the
Council to bear that in mind in defining the mandates
of peace missions or of Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General. This year our Organization,
which strives to achieve universal peace and which
Spain supports unwaveringly, turns 75. Much remains
to be done, but we know the way. We must continue
to believe in multilateralism because it alone can
consolidate peace in those countries where that has yet
to be achieved.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Facing the past and seeking
a better future — that is the spirit at the centre of
international transitional justice. Successful transitional
justice initiatives contribute to building and sustaining
peace and, in the long term, to achieving Sustainable
Development Goal 16 by strengthening institutions and
establishing the rule of law, which are crucial to making
26/31

13/02/2020

lasting peace possible. It is important to make sure that
transitional justice initiatives do not harm peace but
rather help sustain it.
I believe that trust is what makes a peaceful
society — trust among people and trust of the people
in their Government. A society that has endured
conflict often lacks the foundation for trust or has seen
that foundation destroyed in the course of conflict.
In such moments, people are full of fear, uncertainty
and grievances and are deprived of access to justice.
That is exactly why the human security approach is
so important in the implementation of transitional
justice initiatives. What we should aim for is not solely
to punish perpetrators through a top-down approach
but also to support the transformation of our society
into a State where people can lead an empowered life
free from fear. The building of strong, effective and
trustworthy institutions is an integral part of building
and sustaining peace and should remain a crucial part
of transitional justice as well.
Here I would like to emphasize that legitimacy,
inclusivity and local ownership are key to the successful
implementation of transitional justice, particularly with
regard to institutional reforms. There is no one-size-fitsall approach. Rather, the local context, history and
culture in each case need to be taken into account.
Transitional justice processes and mechanisms must
be considered legitimate and inclusive and be based
on local ownership if they are to gain the trust of the
population. International support must aim at helping
countries engaged in a transitional justice process in
their endeavour to stand on their own feet.
Japan is committed to supporting the development
and improvement of judicial and security systems
and institutions. We have continuously supported
conflict-affected countries, such as Côte d’Ivoire, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, Afghanistan
and Iraq, by providing capacity-building and
supporting judicial and security-sector reform. Japan
is also actively involved in United Nations efforts for
building and sustaining peace and is a proud advocate
of the importance of institution-building, including
in the context of transitional justice. Last month,
Japan was appointed one of two vice-Chairs of the
Peacebuilding Commission for 2020. Japan looks
forward to working closely with Canada as Chair and
Colombia as co-Vice-Chair. We would like to take that
opportunity to further strengthen cooperation between
the Commission and the Security Council.
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

S/PV. 8723

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Norway.

preventing, investigating and prosecuting sexual and
gender-based violence.

Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank you, Mr. President, for
having convened this important meeting. We welcome
the crucial input from the briefers, including the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Let me mention four measures that the United
Nations can take to strengthen our work. First, the
mandate of United Nations peace operations should
include support for nationally owned transitional justice
initiatives. Here we can draw lessons from the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Secondly, United Nations envoys and special
representatives should be encouraged to promote
transitional justice initiatives and inclusion at all
levels of peace processes. Thirdly, the Council must
strengthen its partnership with regional organizations,
including the African Union, which last year adopted
a transitional justice policy to support reconciliation.
Finally, the advisory role of the Peacebuilding
Commission to the Council could be better utilized.
There are valuable lessons learned from countries that
have gone through transitional justice processes.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Nordic
countries, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country, Norway.
Transitional justice exposes the human dimension
of a conflict by putting the rights of victims first.
In societies emerging from conflict, inclusive and
effective responses are an investment in peace, stability,
justice and democracy. Transitional justice consists of
a broad set of measures, from ensuring accountability
for international crimes, honouring victims’ right to
truth and acknowledging their suffering to providing
reparation for damage done. Effective and inclusive
institutions at all levels have a vital role. The whole
of society must come to terms with the past and work
towards reconciliation. Yet this is not easy. Transitional
justice measures are set up in complex and sensitive
political circumstances. We have experienced in peace
negotiations that one of the most difficult questions is
impunity. Those with the most power to end conflicts
are often the least likely to submit to justice for
their crimes.
As we have heard this morning, the Colombian
peace agreement showed that the goals of peace and
justice for victims could be mutually reinforcing.
Today, three years into the agreement’s implementation,
the Truth Commission, the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace and the Search Unit for Missing Persons are
fully operational. Support from the Security Council
played a crucial role. While not without challenges and
controversies, Colombia’s experience with transitional
justice, though crucial in its own regard, also provides
us with important lessons for other peace processes.
Civil society, in particular women, should be
included, from the design to the implementation of
transitional justice mechanisms. Women must be seen
as peacebuilders rather than victims. By integrating a
gender equality perspective, conditions are improved
for inclusive and democratic societies where human
rights are respected. One Nordic example is the
specialized police teams to the United Nations mission
in South Sudan. They support the national police in

When done right, transitional justice is
transformative, providing local institutions with
legitimacy for the challenging path towards
lasting peace. When war-torn societies take decisive
steps towards peace, we, the international community,
should support those efforts in every possible way. The
victims of conflict deserve nothing less.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): At the heart of our
discussion today is the question of how peace and justice
correlate to each other. The Council has answered that
question by stating that a comprehensive approach to
transitional justice, including the promotion of healing
and reconciliation, is critical to the consolidation of
peace and stability. That is a clear and strong statement,
and we fully agree with it. Such a comprehensive
approach encompasses the dimensions of truth, justice,
reparation and guarantee of non-recurrence — that
is, prevention.
The overall purpose of transitional justice is indeed
to help societies overcome a difficult, often painful,
past, promote reconciliation and support a common
way forward towards sustainable peace. Transitional
justice is therefore also a key component of conflict
prevention and the implementation of Sustainable
Development Goal 16. National ownership of such

20-0378627/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

processes is essential. But in many cases, in particular
where atrocity crimes were committed on a large scale,
international or regional assistance may be not only
helpful but, indeed, necessary.
There are various examples where truth and
reconciliation commissions have played a supportive
role in post-conflict situations. A commitment to the
right to truth is indispensable. Anyone who has suffered
atrocities has the right to know who is responsible;
anyone whose family members have disappeared has
the right to know their fate and whereabouts. Every
society where such crimes have taken place has the
right to learn about its history, without lies or denial.
They are inevitably painful processes, but they form
the basis for moving forward together and for taking
the measures necessary to ensure that the same does not
happen again. Those processes also give victims their
rightful place in the discussion — a place that they are
too often denied. We heard in yesterday’s discussions
(see S/PV.8721) how often children’s grievances and
calls for justice are neglected in peace processes,
with devastating results for sustainable peace. Similar
things can be said with respect to the women and peace
and security agenda. In addition to securing justice
for individual violations, transitional justice has to
address, in particular, the context of gender inequality
and injustice, which gives rise to conflict.
If the Council has a strong conceptual basis from
which to work, its practical record is a different story.
To begin with, there is no collective political will in the
Council’s membership to translate thematic agreements
on justice into practice. In the case of Myanmar, it has
not even seriously considered, let alone acknowledged,
the unanimous decision of the International Court
of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the United
Nations, on the provisional measures to be taken by the
authorities of Myanmar on the basis of the Convention
on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of
Genocide. In so doing, the Council misses a unique
opportunity to help guarantee non-recurrence.
In the ongoing conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic,
it has essentially ignored the accountability and justice
dimension and passed the ball to the General Assembly,
which established the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in
the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, as a result.
But, in fairness, there is also a conceptual difficulty
28/31

13/02/2020

with giving transitional justice tasks to the Council.
Of course, there are peacekeeping operations — and
the very useful concept note (S/2020/98, annex) has
listed those operations where the Council has included
relevant elements in their respective mandates. But
for the most part, the Council will not stay engaged
for the long years that are often required to provide
transitional justice.
The United Nations body most underutilized
in that respect appears to be the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), which has the mandate “to support
the development of integrated strategies in order to
lay the foundation for sustainable development”, of
which transitional justice is a key ingredient. Ongoing
discussions on the PBC should therefore place strong
emphasis on that dimension. The United Nations
system should be equipped to assist all States that do
not have a PBC configuration but still face transitional
justice challenges.
It is a convenient talking point to say that there can
be no peace without justice, although it is less in vogue
today than it was a few years ago. In practice, however,
we often prioritize peace over justice — certainly the
Council does. How often have we heard in this Chamber
that the involvement of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) in Darfur — ironically, mandated by the
Council — was not only unwarranted but, in fact,
harmful to peace and stability in the Sudan? As it turns
out, the authorities in the Sudan seem to have come to
a different conclusion. We are following very closely
reports concerning a possible transfer of those indicted
by the ICC, in connection with the crimes committed in
Darfur. The mere fact that those discussions are taking
place is the strongest possible statement in support of
the relevance of justice for sustainable peace. We hope,
of course, that we will witness those transfers. Trials in
The Hague would be a late and partial form of relief for
the suffering of the victims of the genocide in Darfur.
They would illustrate how short-sighted the approach
of the Council to the challenge of peace and justice
remains, 75 years after its creation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Mrs. Baghirova (Azerbaijan): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
At the outset, we would like to congratulate
Belgium on its assumption of the presidency of the
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Security Council and pay tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Philippe Goffin, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
Defence of Belgium.
We should also like to welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Michelle Bachelet, United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, and other briefers to
today’s open debate.
Promoting and sustaining international peace
is a key issue for the Non-Aligned Movement. The
Movement and its member States have historically
opposed war and supported peace, fought against
colonialism and neocolonialism, rejected all forms of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and struggled to suppress slavery and the
slave trade.
The Movement reaffirms and underscores its
principled position and commitment with regard to
the promotion of the pacific settlement of disputes,
in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions, including those adopted by the Security
Council. The strengthening of the role of the United
Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict
prevention and resolution, confidence-building,
national reconciliation, and post-conflict peacebuilding,
rehabilitation,
reconstruction
and
development
contributes to the strengthening of international peace
and security and to saving future generations from the
scourge of war and armed conflict.
The States members of the Movement stand ready
to take effective measures for the suppression of acts
of aggression or other breaches of the peace to defend,
promote and encourage the settlement of international
disputes by peaceful means in such a manner that
international peace and security and justice are
not endangered.
The Movement also stresses that the root causes
of conflict should be addressed in a coherent, wellplanned, coordinated and comprehensive manner, with
other political, social, economic and developmental
instruments. During their eighteenth summit, held
in Baku in October 2019, the Heads of State and
Government of the Non-Aligned Movement took note
of the importance and merit of the concept of sustaining
peace, as understood in the resolutions adopted by the
General Assembly (resolution 70/262) and the Security
Council (resolution 2282 (2016)), and reaffirmed the
primary responsibility of national Governments and

S/PV. 8723

their leadership and ownership in identifying, driving
and directing priorities, strategies and activities.
The Non-Aligned Movement also emphasizes the
need for the involvement of all segments of society in
peace processes, including women and youth, who can
play an important role in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, as well as in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts and in building peaceful and resilient societies.
Inclusivity is key to advancing national peacebuilding
processes and objectives in order to ensure that the
needs of all segments of society are taken into account.
The Non-Aligned Movement proceeds from the
strict belief that the observance of the principles of
international law and the fulfilment in good faith of
the obligations assumed by States, in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations, are of the greatest
importance for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Based on that premise, in cases
in which violations of international law take place,
those responsible must be held accountable in order to
prevent their recurrence and seek sustainable peace,
justice, truth and reconciliation. Otherwise, impunity
would run rampant and perpetrators would be de facto
encouraged to continue committing their crimes.
In conclusion, the Non-Aligned Movement
underscores that there can be no development without
peace, and no peace without development. Therefore,
we should redouble our collective efforts to enhance the
synergies created by peacekeeping and peacebuilding
activities, as appropriate, and attain the overall objective
of sustaining peace, thereby fulfilling the commitments
made when our Heads of State and Government adopted
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): Let me first commend Belgium
for having organized this open debate and the briefers
for their insightful presentations. Coming to terms with
the past to work towards a just and peaceful future is
at the core of transitional justice strategies and should
inform the Security Council’s discussions on postconflict strategies.
Brazil would like to highlight four main points in
today’s debate.
First, there are no universal recipes for transitional
justice processes. In order to be effective, transitional
justice strategies should not only take into account

20-0378629/31

S/PV.8723

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

the local context, but also be based on widespread
consultations among different sectors of societies
emerging from armed conflict. Moreover, national
and local actors, especially women and youth,
should be directly involved in the implementation
of transitional justice programmes in order to ensure
their sustainability. Developing an approach that is
sensitive to the situation of the most vulnerable groups
in post-conflict settings is crucial to guaranteeing an
inclusive, locally owned transitional process while
avoiding stigmatization. In that regard, international
efforts should aim at assisting countries to develop the
necessary national capacity to spearhead the process.
Secondly, despite the uniqueness of each process,
they all share basic values. Aspirational goals from
early experiences gradually moved into binding legal
rules, consolidating the parameters for current and
future exercises. As the guidance note of the SecretaryGeneral on the United Nations approach to transitional
justice of March 2010 points out, international legal
obligations frame transitional justice measures.
International law envisages guarantees of the
non-repetition of violations and sets the basis to fight
impunity for international crimes, even in times of
political transition. Most important, the axiological
foundations and legal grounds of transitional justice
make it not a matter of whether but of how and when to
implement it, which leads to our third point.
Transitional justice is a constant balancing exercise.
The imperatives of peace, justice, law and politics
may be hard to reconcile in practice. The common
answer that they are complementary to one another is
a useful guideline, although not a concrete or detailed
one. Transitional justice strategies should encompass
potential tensions between peace and justice and
find ways to overcome them. Criminal prosecution
for the most serious crimes can be combined with
acts of reconciliation by the perpetrators of minor
offenses and a fair programme of reparations for the
victims. Calibrating the variety of transitional justice
mechanisms is key to achieving balance among
seemingly contradictory goals.
Fourthly, the combination of different mechanisms
only partially addresses the challenges of building
peace. Transitional justice should be integrated
into broader peacebuilding efforts. Both securitysector reform and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes may benefit from
well-planned transitional justice strategies. Vetting
30/31

13/02/2020

programmes may gather information and, at the same
time, contribute to non-recurrence.
However, if poorly designed, those tools may
undermine one another. The prospect of criminal
prosecution might negatively impact DDR, whereas
reintegration might generate resentment if not
accompanied by reparations for victims. All those
initiatives must be mutually supportive in order to build
resilient, peaceful and just societies.
Transitional justice is a multidimensional
endeavour. Significant aspects of the matter fall outside
the mandate of the Security Council, particularly in
situations that do not amount to armed conflict. While
recognizing the limitations of the Council with regard
to this particular issue, we consider that it can make an
important contribution to transitional justice processes
in post-conflict societies, including by encouraging the
incorporation of transitional justice mechanisms into
peace agreements and designing the mandate of United
Nations missions in support of the implementation of
transitional justice processes.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
Mr. Mardini: After the guns go silent, transitional
justice creates a space for truth, accountability and
reconciliation. It helps break the cycles of violence and
atrocities. Equally important, it plays a humanitarian
role. It recognizes wounds and addresses the suffering
of individuals, families and communities whose lives
were fundamentally changed by the conflict. One
humanitarian issue that intersects with transitional
justice is the situation of missing persons and their
families. If one speaks to families, one hears that
their suffering is both acute and haunting. It is the last
open wound.
As the Security Council meets today to discuss
how to improve transitional justice mechanisms, the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) would
like to make the following three recommendations.
First, it is important to include a stated objective
on the clarification of the fate of missing persons and
support for families for all cases of missing persons,
without discrimination. Such mechanisms must involve
the families and have due regard for their emotional wellbeing and security. We encourage the Security Council
and United Nations Member States and missions to see
20-03786

13/02/2020

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

transitional justice processes as an important avenue to
implement resolution 2474 (2019), on missing persons
in armed conflict, adopted last year.
Secondly, all families looking for a missing relative
must be provided an individualized answer and support.
That applies even if the case is not part of a judicial
investigation under a transitional justice mechanism.
People can also go missing in circumstances that
might fall outside the scope of the judicial pillar of a
transitional justice mechanism. For instance, combatants
can go missing in action, or civilians can go missing
during displacement or intercommunal violence. Even
families in such cases have a right to know the fate and
whereabouts of their missing relatives.
Thirdly, there must be no impunity for war crimes.
In all types of armed conflicts, States have the obligation
under international humanitarian law to investigate and
prosecute suspects of alleged war crimes, some of which
may include violations that have led to people going
missing, including cases of enforced disappearances.

S/PV. 8723

The ICRC stands ready to provide expert advice
and to support States, United Nations missions and
transitional justice mechanisms on ways to: first,
include the issue of missing persons and their families
in transitional justice processes, whether in truthseeking, reparations or judicial pillars; secondly,
guarantee complementarity between transitional justice
processes and any other mechanism set up to clarify
the fate and whereabouts of missing persons; and,
thirdly, ensure consistency between transitional justice
processes and States’ obligations under international
humanitarian law.
The President (spoke in French): There are still
a number of speakers remaining on my list for this
meeting, and I intend, with the concurrence of the
members of the Council, to suspend the meeting until
3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1 p.m.

20-0378631/31
