UNITED NATloNS

COUN
OFFICIAL

ECORDS

THIRTY-NINTH

YEAR

st

1

MEETING:

7 NOVEMBER

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2561) ,.....,,*...................*.........

I

Tribute to the memory of Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India . . . . , .

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President .............................

I

Adoption of the agenda .................................................

1

Election of five members of the International Court of Justice (S/16676,
Rev.1 and Add. I, S/16681 and Add.11 ..................................

S/16680/

1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
.%
Documents of the Security Council (symbol 9. . .) are normally published in
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
quarterly

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered, in accdrdance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new sysiem, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1January 1%5. became fully operative
on that date.

*.
:
,

. .

1 .
. .,
.

‘II!.
.

iv’

President:

Mr. LING Qing (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Burkina Faso, China, Egypt, France, India, Malta,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zimbabwe.

Provisional agenda (S/AgendP/2561)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. Election of five members of the International Court
of Justice (S/16676. S/1668O/Rev.l and Add.1,
S/16681 and Add.1)
The meeting

was called to order at I i.IQ a.m.

Tribute to the memory of Mrs. Indira Gandhi,
Prime Minister of India
I. The PRESIDENT (interpretarionjiom
Chinese): It
is with deep shock and sorrow that we have all learned
of the death of an outstanding stateswoman, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of the Republic of India.
2. It is fitting for the Security Council, as the principal
organ of the United Nations, on which the Members
have conferred primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, to pay tribute
to Mrs. Indira Gandhi’s deep commitment to the cause
of world peace, both as Prime Minister of India and as
leader of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
3. Permit me, as President of the Council, and on
behalf of the other members of the Council, to convey
to the representative of India and, through him, lo the
Government of India, to the Indian people and to the
bereaved family our sincere condolences.

5. Since this tragic and sudden blow struck our nation, the spontaneous outpouring of sympathy, solace
and support from all parts of the world has been a
source of great comfort and encouragement to our peapie. Our democratic polity has been able to withstand
this rude shock, and, thanks to the wisdom and resilience of our people, India, under the leadership ofour
Prime Minister, Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, is returning to normalcy.
6. 1 should like to reaffirm on this occasion our commitment to non-alignment, to the United Nations and
to the historical continuity in our policies in favour of
world peace, freedom, justice and economic ~IKI social
development through international co-operation.
I wish to take this opportunity, Sir, to congratulate
you on your assumption of the high office of the presidency of the Council for this month. We highiy appreciate your diplomatic skills and experience, as weti
as your dedication and objectivity. I look forward to
fruitful activity by the Council under your stewardship
and assure you of my full co-operation.
7.

8. 1 should like also to pay tribute to the admirable
manner in which your predecessor, Mr. Bass&, rep
resentalive of Burkina Faso, guided the affairs of the
Council during the month of October.

9. The PRESIDENT (inrerprerarion from CkneseK
I should like. on behalfofthecouncil, topaya tribute to
Mr. L&mdre Bassole. representative of Butkina Faso,
for his services as President of the Council in October.
Mr. Bassole earned our profound gratitude for the dip
lomatic skill and unfailing courtesy with which he
guided the Council’s deliberations last month.

The agenda was adopted.
On the proposal
Security Council,

lcnce .

of the President, the members
standing, observed a minute

of the
of si-

4. Mr. KRISHNAN (India): Mr. President, my colleagues in the Indian delegation and I are deeply
touched by the kind sentiments you have expressed on
behalf of the members of the Council and yourself.
These will be duly conveyed to the Government and the
people of India and to the bereaved family.

EkctIoudRvemembersdtlleIntcnntloMlcamrtd
Jtiy!$/$i676,
s1166WRev.l and A&l,

SW681

.

IO. The PRESIDENT (inrerprercrionfim
Chinese):
The Council will now proceed to the election.of five
members of the International Court of Justice. in
accordance with the Statute of the International COW
of Justice. to fill the five seatswhich will hccome vacant

..-.....

on 5 February 1985on the expiry of the terms of offtce
of the following five Judges: Mr. Taslim Olawale Elias,
Mr. Manfred Laths, Mr. Hermann Mosler, Mr. Shigeru
Oda and Mr. Abdallah Fikri El-Khani.
11. The updated list of candidates nominated by the
national groups is contained in document S/16680/
Rev. 1. Documents S/16681and Add.1 contain the curricula vitae of all the candidates. Document S/16680/
Rev. l/Add. 1 indicates that the Law Society of Kenya,
the nominating national group of Kenya, has decided to
withdraw the candidature of The Honourable Justice
C. H. E. Miller. Consequently, his name does not ap
pear on the ballot papers.
12. The Council also has before it a memorandum by
the Secretary-General, in document S/16676, setting
out the procedure to be followed in the conduct of the
election. I should like to remind the Council that, under
Article 10, paragraph 1, of the Statute of the Court,
*‘Those candidates who obtain an absolute majority of
votes in the General Assembly and in the Security
Council shall be considered as elected.” The required
majority in the Council is eight votes. If more than five
candidates obtain the required majority, according to
the procedure which has been followed in the past and
which is set forth in paragraph 14 of the SecretaryGeneral’s memorandum, a new vote wiI be held on all
the candidates. If, on the other hand, in the first ballot
the number of candidates obtaining the absolute majority is less tharrfive, the Council will proceed to a second
ballot on the remaining vacancies, and balloting will
continue until five of the candidates have obtained the
required majority of votes.
13. Voting shall be held by secret ballot. When we
proceed to the vote, members of the Council will receive a ballot containing the names of all the candidates. Members of the Council are requested to place
an “x” next to the names of the live candidates for
whom they wish to vote. Votes may be cast only for
those candidates whose names appear on the ballot
paper. Otherwise, the ballot will be considered invalid.
14.’ I should like to remind members of paragraph 11
of the Secretary-General’s memorandum, which specifies that “‘Each elector may vote for no more than five
candidates on the first ballot”. Any ballot containing
votes for more than five names will be considered invalid. When five candidates have obtained the required
majority of votes, I shall communicate the result to the
President of the General Assembly, and I shall request
the Council to remain in session pending the receipt
from the President of the General Assembly of the
result of the voting in the Assembly.
15. The Council will now proceed to draw lots to
select the two delegations to act as tellers.
16. The names of the delegations of the United Kingdom and the United States have been drawn, and
I therefore request each of them to appoint one of its
members to serve as teller.

At the invitation of the President. Mr. Berman
(United Kingdom) and Mr. Rosenstock (United States
of America) acted as tellers.
17. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinese!
I take it that the Council is now ready to proceedwith
the election of five members of the International Ce~rt
of Justice.
18. I have now been informed that the ballot papers
have been collected in the General Assembly.
19. The counting of the ballots in the Security Council
will now begin. The tellers will now count the ballots.
As agreed in our consultations, there will be two it&
pendent countings of ballots: one by each of the tellers,
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Required majority:

IS
0
IS

a

Number of votes obtained:
Mr. Jens Evensen (Norway) . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Mr. Ni Zhengyu (China). . . . . . . . . . -. . . . 14
Mr. ManFred Laths (Poland). . . . . . . . . . . 13
Mr. Taslim Olawale Elias (Nigeria) . . . . . 12
Mr. Shigeru Oda (Japan) . . , . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Mr. Abdallah Fikri EI-Khani (Syrian Arab
7
Republic) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I......
Mr. C. G. Weeramantry (Sri Lanka). . . . I
20. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Chinesel:
The following five candidates have received the required m@ority of votes in the Council: Mr. Jens Eveusen, Mr. Ni Zhengyu, Mr. Madied Laths, Mr. Tardim
Olawale Elias and Mr. Shigeru Oda. I shall commtmicate the results to the President of the General Assentbly. I request the Council to remain in session while WC
wait for the President of the Assembly to inform the
Council of the results of the voting in the Assembly.
*
*

*

21I The PRESIDENT (interpretation fivlm ChineseI:
I should like to inform the members of the Council that
I have just received from the President of the Getrend
Assembly the following letter:
“I have the honour to inform you that, at the S&d
plenary meeting of the General Assembly. held tadey
for the purpose of electing five members of the Internadonal Court OFJustice, the f&owing five car&
dates obtained an absolute majority of votes in
the General Assembly: Mr. Taslim Olawak El&

. NC

&"---A *-l

-

--

HOW TO OBTAIN UNITED NATIONS PUBLlCATlONS
United Nations publications may bc obtained from bookstores and diitributors throughout lc
world. Consult your bookstore or write IO: United Nations, Sales Scaion. New York or Gcncva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER LES PUBLlCATlONS

DES NAllONS

UNIES

lxs publications dcs Nations Unies son\ en vcnte darts Ies libmiria ct la sgmca &p&aim
du
mondc cntier. Informer-vous aup& de votrc librairc ou adrcsscz-vous 4 : Nations Unica. Section
drs vcntcs. New York ou &n&c.

COMO CONSECUIR PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS

Las publicacioncs de las Naciona Unidas es& en vita en l~bmbs y mamadistribuidoms en
todas partas del mundo. Consultc a su librwu o ditijasc a: Naciuncs Unidas,Saxi&n de Ventas,
Nuwa York o Ginebra.
