United Nations

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

Security Council

Provisional

Sixtieth year

5187

th meeting
Thursday, 26 May 2005, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Møller/Ms. Løj . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Djacta
Mr. García Moritán
Mr. Zinsou
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Poirier
Mrs. Papadopoulou
Mr. Kawakami
Mr. Montealegre
Mr. Dumitru
Mr. Leplinskiy
Mr. Lloyd
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Olson

Agenda
Post-conflict peacebuilding
Letter dated 16 May 2005 from the Permanent Representative of Denmark to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2005/316)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

05-36171 (E)

*0536171*

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

The meeting resumed at 3.15 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers, as
my Foreign Minister indicated this morning, to limit
their statements to no more than five minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the text in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
The next speaker is the representative of
Morocco, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Bennouna (Morocco) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the Moroccan delegation, I wish at the outset
to thank you, Madam President, for your initiative to
convene this debate on a question of such importance
to the international community: peacebuilding. My
delegation is pleased to note that peacebuilding
remains a central concern of the United Nations
system. Moreover, we are very pleased that, under your
presidency, Madam, the Security Council will be
making a major contribution to the reform of the
United Nations.
This question was indeed given special attention
this year, during the consideration of the report of the
Secretary-General entitled “In larger freedom: towards
development, security and human rights for all”
(A/59/2005). As we all know, the report contains a
proposal
to
establish
an
intergovernmental
Peacebuilding Commission. Many among us believe
that the proposal could well become the object of
consensus.
The nature of most post-cold-war conflicts —
which more often than not are based on ethnic, cultural
or religious confrontation — means, even if those
conflicts are subsequently internationalized, that they
can have a devastating effect on the societies
concerned. Hence, once United Nations efforts have
succeeded in stabilizing a situation and putting a
complete end to hostilities, it is very often necessary to
tackle the daunting job of peacebuilding, in which
former combatants must learn how to behave as new
partners. They have to learn to join political parties or
bodies working for human development.
To achieve that, the short-term and medium-term
support of the international community is essential in
order to ensure the success of that delicate transitional
period from the cessation of hostilities to the building

2

of social consensus with the participation of all, with
everyone assuming his or her rightful role. Rebuilding
takes time, and it must take account of a series of often
complex and interdependent factors such as
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation; security-sector reform; establishment of
the rule of law; and good management of natural
resources.
When a country emerges from conflict, the first
challenge relates to the rule of law: formulating
appropriate, coherent norms and providing the
resources needed to implement them; establishing
procedures for the settlement of disputes; and putting
in place the appropriate judicial structures. If the
conflict had been a theatre of serious crimes against
human peace and security, it is essential that the
perpetrators of such crimes not go unpunished. Here
again, the international community must provide
assistance to ensure due process, either through
international, joint or national tribunals, and with the
possibility of establishing what have come to be called
truth and reconciliation bodies provided with the
necessary guarantees. By “necessary guarantees” we
mean that certain guarantees should be attached to any
amnesty that may be offered, apart from the
compensation provided to victims. In our view, the
right mix of those elements to combat impunity would
make it possible to deal with crimes committed on a
massive scale.
Another challenge in any peacebuilding process
lies in the area of democratization and good
governance. Although we now agree on the goal of
democratization, without which there can be no true
sustainable development, we must take account of
historical and cultural factors when determining the
pace of democratization in any given society. We all
have our historical baggage to carry.
Unfortunately, many conflicts also revolve
around the control of or access to natural resources.
Accordingly, the main effort during the reconstruction
phase or the peacebuilding phase has to be focused on
dismantling war economies and on managing natural
resources in the best interests of all of the people.
In the relationship between the State concerned and
its neighbours — we have many examples of this and the
Council has tackled the most important examples, such as
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo — the
certification of certain precious commodities can be

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

established. Monitoring mechanisms can be established in
the United Nations in order to put an end to major
transnational trafficking in these commodities.
In recent years, the United Nations has, it is true,
acquired a wealth of experience in peacebuilding,
through a number of difficult undertakings, particularly
in Africa. The majority of peacekeeping operations,
decided on by the Security Council, today increasingly
include a peacebuilding component. The multitude and
diversity of stakeholders, however, make it difficult to
elaborate a real strategy here. Interventions by various
United Nations institutions — the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund, bilateral donors and
other non-governmental organizations — each acting in
its area of competence, very often lack coherence.
Peacebuilding activities are not coordinated with
development cooperation activities, and this is an area
where we believe that the United Nations can do better
in terms of being effective at a time when many are
talking about the need to improve the management of
the Organization.
However, this is a complex task, because none of
the bodies within the United Nations system has an
exclusive peacebuilding mandate. Governments that
emerge from peace agreements need some time, and
they need support properly to play their role of
interlocutor vis-à-vis the international community —
quite simply, to become legitimate.
Peacekeeping operations decided on by the
Council are given the necessary funding from assessed
contributions, but this is not the case when it comes to
peacebuilding activities, where resources are neither
stable nor predictable. Furthermore, the pace of
fundraising for peacebuilding programmes is often
slow and is not in keeping with the urgency felt on the
ground. The delays that we have seen in disbursements
by financial institutions have often been a major
obstacle to rapid action, notwithstanding the often very
generous pledges made at various fundraising
conferences. There are many examples — Sierra
Leone, Liberia or Haiti, in particular, which the
Council was discussing just yesterday. These problems
must be resolved by designing better strategies
whereby all stakeholders can participate right at the
beginning of the peacebuilding effort, in particular as
soon as the date has been set for the holding of
elections, as in the case of Côte d’Ivoire or in Haiti.
Financial and technical assistance should also be
planned for, so that the structures that emerge from the

elections can function normally and live up to the
expectations of the people.
Otherwise, there will be democracy, but there
may also be a failure of democracy. Frequent regular
meetings between the major donors, troop-contributing
countries, financial institutions and the Governments
concerned must take place in order to assess the
situation and to elaborate strategies.
Very modestly, my country, pursuant to its
commitment to South-South cooperation, is entirely
prepared to make a contribution in terms of the
necessary technical assistance to be provided, for
example by sending experts to help countries in the
South and enabling them to benefit from our
experience in development. Of course, the mandates of
peacekeeping operations need to be more ambitious.
They should include more peacebuilding activities,
particularly during protracted conflicts.
We are aware that there is no clear line of
separation between peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
This is the doctrine of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations. Rather, we are witnessing a gradual
process where, for some time, peacekeeping and
peacebuilding will coexist.
The Secretary-General’s proposal to establish a
Peacebuilding Commission is an initial response to this
question inasmuch as it provides an institutional
framework to enable the various stakeholders to act
together, target their activities and make them
complementary. The peacebuilding fund, the shape of
which is still vague, will, if it is set up, provide an
appropriate response to the question of the
unpredictability of resources.
We all know that there is broad consensus to
establish this Peacebuilding Commission which,
according to Morocco, should be attached to the
Security Council and to the Economic and Social
Council. And why not also to the General Assembly, if
the international community so decides? In that body,
donors, financial institutions and experts should
cooperate to make a success of the transitional process
in countries emerging from conflict.
When I say cooperate, it is not just the rich that
cooperate; it is the rich and poor working together,
achieving unity to help the poorest among us in the
international community.

3

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

Morocco hopes that our Heads of State and
Government will give their agreement to the principles
that will govern the future Commission, which will be
a symbol of a chain of solidarity among countries and
between generations.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Iceland, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Hannesson (Iceland): Let me begin by
thanking the Foreign Minister of Denmark for taking
part in and presiding over the open debate this morning
on post-conflict peacebuilding. I would also like to
thank the Danish presidency for the useful discussion
paper on this important subject.
A year ago, when James Wolfensohn, President of
the World Bank, addressed the Security Council, he
reminded us that the first question of conflict
prevention is to have a growing economy in which
people share. He also referred to the remarkable World
Bank study, Voices of the Poor, which made it clear
that people in poor and conflict-ridden countries want
to live in peace. They want opportunity and
empowerment, not charity.
The complex links between conflict, peace,
development and security call for a multidimensional
and multisectoral approach to peacebuilding. By
addressing the root causes of conflict through
reconciliation, institution-building and both political
and economic transformation, durable peace can be
established and the recurrence of conflict prevented.
Local ownership, coordination of international
efforts and harmonization of procedures are all essential
for results. Additionally, regional organizations can play
an instrumental role in bringing about long-term peace.
The discussion paper provides an excellent
overview of the key elements of peacebuilding efforts.
I would like to focus my comments on one issue: the
importance of the rapid and targeted deployment of
civilian experts for a successful transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding and subsequently
building the foundations for long-term development.
For a number of years, the Government of
Iceland has operated a programme for the rapid
deployment of civilian personnel to peacekeeping and
peacebuilding missions. The programme, called the
Icelandic Crisis Response Unit, maintains a roster of
civilian experts who can join international missions on
short notice.

4

Our experience shows that there are many wellqualified civilian experts who are willing to be
deployed on short notice to areas in which conditions
are extremely challenging and for which, in the past,
the international community has deemed military
missions to be the only feasible option.
We therefore believe that there is significant
potential for further developing that approach, and we
are pleased to see the idea of developing such a
mechanism for the United Nations raised in the
discussion paper. We are also aware that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations has been
exploring that approach, and we strongly encourage the
United Nations to continue that work actively.
Experience in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Afghanistan, Kosovo and Sri Lanka has taught the
Icelandic authorities the importance of finding a niche
where we have a comparative advantage. As a smaller
Member State, we seek out projects where we can
bring special expertise to bear.
In addition, allow me to mention five basic
principles that we have drawn from our experience in
the field. First, a mission must be well defined, with a
clear strategy and clear objectives. Secondly, the
involvement of the local population in both the
planning and the implementation phases is highly
desirable and in most cases is a prerequisite for a
successful outcome. Thirdly, the prospects of
sustainability must be emphasized at all stages, and
civilian experts must demonstrate a strong will,
motivation and the ability to transfer their technical
expertise and practical know-how to their counterparts.
Fourthly, partners must coordinate and cooperate at all
levels to avoid the inherent failures of approaches that
are insufficiently coordinated. Finally, a long-term
perspective is important, because efforts should always
be made to outline an exit strategy from the very
beginning of a peacebuilding operation.
The termination of a conflict does not guarantee
sustainable peace. A comprehensive and long-term
peacebuilding operation is a necessary continuation of
a successful peacekeeping process. I am certain that the
discussion here today will cast valuable light on how
the United Nations can continue to improve its
approach to peacebuilding.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming what we
have already said in the General Assembly: Iceland

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

fully supports the proposal of the Secretary-General to
establish a Peacebuilding Commission.

term development,
sustainable peace.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.

Over the past several years, both the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council have
come to recognize the importance of comprehensive
and long-term strategies for peacebuilding. The
establishment of the Economic and Social Council’s ad
hoc advisory groups on countries emerging from
conflict, designed initially for Burundi and GuineaBissau and, more recently, Haiti, bear testimony to that
awareness. We also note with appreciation that the
Secretariat has tried to exert efforts to ensure a
common approach to the work of United Nations
agencies, particularly those operating in conflict
countries.

Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Allow me to
congratulate you, Madam, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of May.
This debate is certainly timely in the context of
our ongoing collective effort to strengthen the
capacities of the United Nations to assist countries
emerging from conflict to attain lasting and durable
peace. There is general agreement that addressing the
long-term needs of countries emerging from conflict
requires a high degree of coordination and coherence
among the various international actors supporting
peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding
goes
beyond
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and beyond giving the
necessary assistance to refugees. It also involves
longer-term needs such as reviving the economy,
rebuilding infrastructure, strengthening the rule of law
and establishing democratic institutions. Addressing
those long-term needs is vital if we are to prevent a
recurrence or a slide back into conflict. In other words,
if the United Nations is to be successful, there needs to
be a focal point that deals with peacebuilding in a
comprehensive manner.
In his report entitled “In larger freedom”
(A/59/2005), the Secretary-General too acknowledges
that significant deficits remain in the planning,
financing and implementation capacities of the United
Nations system. As a result, he has proposed the
establishment of a Peacebuilding Commission.
When a conflict is at its peak, there is usually a
myriad of interventions, starting with the involvement
of the Security Council in carrying out its mandate for
maintaining international peace and security. Once the
conflict subsides, all the interventions gradually
disappear. Yet, experience has taught us that this is the
most critical stage of conflict resolution since it is a
stage when peace agreements are most fragile and need
to be consolidated.
The challenge we face in our own African-led
peace initiatives is gaining the necessary political,
moral and material support from the international
community to ensure an effective transition from
immediate security and humanitarian needs to long-

which

is

a

prerequisite

for

However, as we have learned in both Burundi and
Guinea-Bissau, for conflict resolution to be effective,
there is a need to engage other role players, such as
international donors and the Bretton Woods
institutions, which already have their own programmes
in support of peacebuilding. The challenge is to
harness the efforts of all role players early enough to
ensure coordination from the start. Because it often
takes donors a long time to give critical support to
countries that have just emerged from conflict,
particularly in the context of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, it would be important
for the United Nations to take responsibility by
financing that important step from assessed
contributions until such time as other resources are
secured.
We believe that the establishment of a
Peacebuilding Commission would go a long way
towards bridging those gaps, and we have therefore
supported the Secretary-General’s proposal for the
creation of such a mechanism. Countries in postconflict situations face significant challenges to the
establishment of lasting peace. Failure to properly
address those challenges could precipitate further
conflict or result in a sharp decline in social and
economic progress. If strategies to deal with those
challenges are to be effective and successful, they have
to be comprehensive in nature and address the root
causes and negative consequences of the conflict.
We wish to reaffirm that the United Nations has a
vital and fundamental role to play in post-conflict
situations. It is the only organization that has the
unique experience of helping people rebuild their

5

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

countries after the ruin of armed conflict. We believe
that the proposed Peacebuilding Commission can
provide the much-needed coordination.
We welcome you, Mr. Minister, to New York.
Your presence indicates how important this issue is.
The President: I thank the representative of
South Africa for his kind words.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Egypt.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to welcome you, Mr. Minister, in
our midst here in New York as you preside over this
meeting. The delegation of Egypt appreciates your
timely initiative to convene this meeting, which will
help strengthen constructive dialogue on the proposals
for enhancing the United Nations role in peacebuilding
and in addressing institutional gaps in the multilateral
mechanisms that are needed following a peace
agreement and during the transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding.
It is our view that the Secretary-General’s proposal
in the context of United Nations reform to establish an
intergovernmental Peacebuilding Commission reflects the
realities and results of and changes in armed conflict,
especially in Africa. In that respect, I should like to offer
certain thoughts as our contribution to this discussion on
the dimensions and framework of the peacebuilding issue,
particularly in its institutional manifestations.
First, the United Nations has had notable
successes in conflict situations, such as in Angola,
Mozambique and Guatemala, not to mention its ever
greater success in addressing such delicate and
complex situations as those in Sierra Leone, Kosovo
and Timor-Leste. That reflects the need for common
political will among all parties to a conflict, the
international community and regional Powers to
overcome crises and meet the challenges of
establishing peace and stability.
Secondly, a peacebuilding contract is based on the
fact that security and political cooperation in the
post-conflict phase cannot be successful without a
comprehensive framework for addressing the social and
economic dimensions of the conflict. The establishment
of such a comprehensive framework must begin at an
early stage of a peacekeeping mission so as to allow the
implementation of all its components and elements in a
timely manner, as soon as relative security has been

6

ensured, and with continuity and sustainability when the
mission has fulfilled its mandate. It is therefore necessary
to identify the coordinating role of the United Nations
agencies and regional Powers concerned and to agree on a
schedule for drawing down a peacekeeping mission and
moving on to the phase of social and economic
development.
Thirdly, experience has exposed the limitations of
the Security Council’s vital role in the maintenance of
international peace and security. Those limitations have
become apparent in situations in which conflict has
resumed, most notably in Liberia and Haiti. Although
the Council invested much time and effort in those
conflicts, it was unable to provide sustained
international attention and support for the work of
rebuilding the State and addressing the social and
economic root causes of the crises. Indeed, we cannot
imagine how the Security Council could find the time,
energy or even the capacity to coordinate the roles of
all the relevant United Nations political and
development bodies, mechanisms and agencies, nor can
we conceive its assuming the functions of the
Economic and Social Council, the General Assembly
and other bodies endowed with special mandates under
the Charter.
Most of the United Nations inability to deal with
post-conflict situations is due to the blurring of the
lines between peacebuilding and peacekeeping and
between the mandates of the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council, not to mention the roles of the international
financial institutions and donor countries. The proposal
to establish the intergovernmental Peacebuilding
Commission is important in that respect, as it would be
a focal point for coordinating the roles of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council pursuant to their respective mandates
and the Charter, as well as the roles of the specialized
agencies and the international donor community. In
that context, I would stress the importance of the
proposal to developing countries in particular, given
that Africa, inter alia, is looking to the United Nations
to play a central role in peacebuilding. In that context,
I would emphasize the following criteria.
First, the Commission should act at the official
request of the concerned State or interim authorities for
its assistance. Second, the nature, timing and scope of
assistance should be determined in accordance with the
specific needs of any given State. Third, the

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

Commission’s mandate should be limited to postconflict situations, and especially to meeting direct and
urgent needs in the areas of rehabilitation,
reintegration, reconstruction, national reconciliation,
and in particular the strengthening of institutional and
human capacities. Fourth, the Commission should
make every effort to avoid duplication and to distribute
its resources equitably. Fifth, criteria and conditions
should be identified for determining the end of a
Commission mission in any given State. Sixth, the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council should be entrusted with
monitoring the Commission’s work, pursuant to their
respective mandates. Seventh, representatives of the
Secretariat, the United Nations agencies and
programmes, international and regional financial
institutions, national and interim State authorities, and
regional and subregional organizations should be
invited to attend the Commission’s meetings in order to
coordinate their roles and avoid duplication.
The delegation of Egypt has distributed integrated
proposals to all Members of the Organization in relation
to the implementation of the idea of establishing the
Commission, based on the United Nations peacebuilding
activities. The Egyptian delegation is motivated by its
dedication to the idea of genuine reform of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the Security
Council and the Secretariat. The High-level Meeting in
September will adopt many institutional reforms, and that
endeavour should be accompanied by the extensive
reform of all agencies and organizations whose work is
linked to that of the United Nations in addressing
multilateral challenges in all fields and in meeting
collective security requirements in their broadest possible
definition and in all their political, security, economic and
social dimensions, taking into consideration existing
mandates and the need for complementarity in their
implementation.
The President: I now call on the representative
of Ukraine.
Mr. Kuchinsky (Ukraine): Ukraine fully aligns
itself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union.
We welcome today’s debate as a logical
continuation of a number of discussions held by the
Security Council over the past several years on
subjects related to peacebuilding. We also recognize

the additional relevance and value of this discussion in
the light of the ongoing deliberations in the General
Assembly and elsewhere on the creation of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
My delegation would like to thank the Danish
presidency for convening this timely and very
important meeting and for the submission of the
focused discussion paper for today’s debate. We are
also grateful to the Deputy Secretary-General and the
President of the World Bank for their important and
thought-provoking statements today, and to the high
dignitaries taking part in today’s discussion.
Ukraine welcomes the fact that the issue of
peacebuilding is becoming increasingly topical for the
United Nations. Indeed, the United Nations peacebuilding
efforts are in great demand all over the world. It is a wellknown fact that almost half of all countries that emerge
from war lapse back into violence within a few years.
Rebuilding the State and its institutions,
establishing effective and democratic governance and
the rule of law, as well as ensuring an environment of
security to help countries in transition from war to
lasting peace requires a comprehensive approach to
peacebuilding.
In our view, such an approach should take into
account the existing links among conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, peacemaking and peacebuilding and
should thus be aimed at preserving the results achieved
and preventing the recurrence of armed conflict. It
should also be based on an understanding of the
interdependence among sustainable peace, security and
development. Obviously, the implementation of such a
comprehensive strategy requires effective interaction,
cooperation and division of labour among all
international partners including the relevant United
Nations bodies, Member States, international financial
institutions, non-governmental organizations, local
stakeholders and other players.
The Security Council undoubtedly has an
outstanding role to play in peacebuilding efforts,
especially in the immediate aftermath of a conflict. The
Council has already undertaken to include peacebuilding
elements in the mandates of peacekeeping operations in
order to ensure a smooth transition to a successful postconflict phase. At the same time, we believe that when a
country approaches the phase of moving from transitional
recovery towards long-term development, it is the
Economic and Social Council that should take over the

7

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

leading role in coordinating the relevant activities of the
international community.
I would also like to acknowledge the important
role of the General Assembly in mapping out general
peacebuilding strategies, as well as that of the
Secretary-General. Considering the complexity of
peacebuilding activities, there can be no one-size-fitsall recipe. Each given situation requires dialogue and
cooperation among a number of actors, including local
stakeholders. Fostering local ownership is an important
element of ensuring the sustainability of peacebuilding
efforts. Early involvement, where necessary, of
regional and subregional organizations would also
contribute to the goals of peacekeeping.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate Ukraine’s support
for the creation of a Peacebuilding Commission. In our
view, the Commission could fill the institutional gap in
the United Nations and help to overcome many existing
challenges in the United Nations peacebuilding
machinery. Ukraine supports, in principle, the SecretaryGeneral’s proposals and ideas as to the functions and
modalities of that body and hopes that the decision to
establish the Commission will be among the major
outcomes of the United Nations summit in September
2005.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Rastam (Malaysia): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on presiding over today’s meeting and to
congratulate your delegation on its assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. I should
like to thank your delegation for taking this timely
initiative to consider issues of post-conflict
peacebuilding in an open debate of the Council with
the participation of the larger membership of the
United Nations.
My delegation has taken note with keen interest
of the statements of the Deputy Secretary-General and
the President of the World Bank.
My delegation extends its sincere appreciation to
Denmark for the non-paper on post-conflict peacebuilding
(S/2005/316, annex), which provides a sound basis for
today’s discussion. We are particularly impressed by the
comprehensive and thought-provoking approach in the
non-paper highlighting very important and relevant
questions related to current policy, institutional and
financial challenges in post-conflict peacebuilding.

8

My delegation fully subscribes to the view that
the United Nations should play a key role in postconflict peacebuilding in order to prevent the
resurgence of conflict, help countries put back in place
the foundations of normal life, and move societies
towards sustainable peace. That normally involves a
multifaceted process and a multidimensional mandate
covering a full range of issues and activities.
Clearly, there are major policy, institutional and
financial challenges that need to be addressed. That
would require policy coherence and better coordination
involving the United Nations, the parties emerging
from conflict, local stakeholders, international
institutions, donors and other actors. It is important to
ensure that there exists an adequate and conducive
enabling and supporting environment. In that regard,
we welcome the consideration of possible regional
approaches to meeting the challenges of post-conflict
peacebuilding.
Malaysia concurs with the view that each postconflict situation generates its own unique set of
circumstances. There is no single peacebuilding model
that can fit all situations. The United Nations has to tailor
its activities to specific situations on a case-by-case basis.
We agree with the view that ways must be found to ensure
greater ownership and capacity among local actors to
ensure a more acceptable, implementable and sustainable
post-conflict peacebuilding programme.
In that regard, due attention must be given to
local norms and values, cultural and religious traditions
and capacity to respond. By now, the United Nations
and the international community have had sufficient
experience to put together best practices from past
situations to deal with future challenges. We would
support consideration of establishing a civilian rapid
deployment mechanism consisting of judges,
administrators, police and election observers on a
stand-by basis for United Nations missions.
Malaysia is fully cognizant of the need for a
comprehensive strategy in promoting peacebuilding
efforts. Currently, however, there is no clear
institutional mechanism for the formulation of such a
comprehensive strategy. We think that the ongoing
deliberations in the General Assembly on the possible
modalities of a Peacebuilding Commission and other
reform proposals can help clarify and redress the
institutional deficit.

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

Malaysia welcomes and supports the establishment
of a Peacebuilding Commission. However, I wish to
reiterate our view that, without any prejudice to the
competence and roles of the other principal organs of the
United Nations in post-conflict peacebuilding activities,
the General Assembly must also have the key role in the
formulation of post-conflict peacebuilding activities. The
implementation of post-conflict peacebuilding activities
requires full consultation with and the consent of the
parties concerned and should be based on the principles
of international law and the United Nations Charter.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Løvald (Norway): My delegation welcomes
Denmark’s initiative to hold this very important open
debate. In our view, there are four broad gaps in
current peacebuilding doctrine and practice. These are:
the lack of coherent planning of broad peacebuilding
operations; the lack of sufficient clarity of the activities
and cooperation among all actors in the field; the lack
of coherence among actors involved in peacekeeping,
humanitarian and long-term development efforts; and
finally, the lack of adequate coordination within the
United Nations system.
The proposed Peacebuilding Commission and the
corresponding Peacebuilding Support Office will go a
long way in addressing the aforementioned shortcomings.
We also believe that the Peacebuilding Commission could
serve as a most useful tool for enhanced donor
coordination and interaction.
In order to forge stronger cooperation among the
United Nations actors involved, key leadership and
management issues need to be addressed. As far as the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General are
concerned, their mandates need to be clarified. Also,
roles, functions and modalities for cooperation among
the various United Nations actors in the field must be
more clearly specified.
Finally, the need for a more integrated United
Nations at the country level must be combined with the
need to reflect the conceptual and operational divisions
among military, political, humanitarian and developmentoriented action.
The United Nations has both a comparative
advantage and a clear role to play in peacebuilding. Its
experience in conflict areas and its technical expertise
are unique.

Furthermore, the United Nations is present
before, during and after a conflict and is thus well
placed to provide assessments of, and strategic
planning for, peacebuilding efforts. For the United
Nations to play that role, close and continuous
cooperation between all relevant parts of the system is
necessary.
A sound division of labour, based on comparative
advantage, among Secretariat units, funds and
programmes, and agencies is the only viable approach.
However, the various aspects of peacebuilding are
interrelated, and competencies and relative advantages
may vary from country to country. Thus, a clearer
division of labour cannot replace the need for close and
flexible cooperation among the various United Nations
actors.
It is our view that we also have to look beyond
the United Nations itself. It is neither realistic nor
desirable for the United Nations to be the only provider
of technical expertise to broad peacebuilding
operations. Regional organizations should be given
important roles. The division of labour between the
United Nations and regional organizations should be
based on the principle of subsidiarity. In that context,
donors should also revisit their funding formats to
facilitate long-term cooperation at the regional level.
Assistance is often negligible during the most
critical period after a peace settlement. That persistent
funding gap needs to be addressed as an integral part of
the overall response to post-conflict peacebuilding. It
is our view that all activities included in the mandates
should be financed by assessed contributions.
In addition to the limitation of funds, the funding
rules and regulations of agencies do not support the
flexibility that complex peacebuilding efforts demand.
A standing fund for peacebuilding, as proposed by the
Secretary-General, could, if properly designed and
adequately funded, help substantially in addressing that
problem.
There is little chance of institutionalizing
democracy if peacebuilding itself is not democratically
organized and accountable to local partners. The
involvement of local actors in peacebuilding policymaking is also crucial to assist in ensuring a better
match between assistance and local absorptive
capacity. Swift assistance in establishing key State
functions and institutions is crucial in that regard. This
has to be supplemented by support for civil society at

9

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

an early stage of the post-conflict phase. Externally
funded community projects supporting socio-economic
development are necessary in order to provide a sense
of purpose to communities divided by conflict.
Finally, we need to be more creative in
identifying ways and means to implement Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). True local ownership
implies the involvement of entire populations. Efforts
to build peace are less likely to succeed if women do
not play their rightful role. Nearly five years after the
adoption of that resolution, women are still scarce
around negotiating tables, in constitution-making
bodies and in political councils.
As we continue this debate, we need to recognize
that, despite the comparative advantages of the United
Nations in peacebuilding, there are limitations as to
what the Organization can achieve. Success and
progress must be judged against a realistic standard.
The President: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Ghana, to whom I give the floor.
Mr. Tachie-Menson (Ghana): Mr. President, I
would like to commend you at the outset for having
convened this meeting, which offers the Council an
invaluable opportunity to undertake an assessment of
the agenda item under consideration, and for your
effective steering of the affairs of the Council this
month.
The Security Council, in conformity with its
Charter mandate, has considered and authorized United
Nations peacekeeping operations. That responsibility
has been discharged commendably, given the United
Nations success story in such operations. Despite the
accomplishments registered, there is no doubt that the
peacekeeping story has not been wholly glorious — a
manifestation of the fact that this organ has on certain
occasions failed to carry out its responsibilities
effectively.
It is in this regard that my delegation welcomed
the reports of the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change and the report of the SecretaryGeneral and their identification of the fact that there is
a fundamental institutional gap within the United
Nations system with respect to forestalling a State in
crisis from plunging into war or to assisting it in
ensuring that the transition is made from war to peace.
My delegation also concurs, in principle, with the
Panel and with the Secretary-General’s recommendation

10

that a Peacebuilding Commission be established to
effectively address that gap. It is heart-warming to
recognize that the proposal enjoys widespread support
among Member States. That positive reaction is a clear
testimony of Member States’ recognition of the need to
address the shortfalls in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, particularly during the post-conflict period.
Peacebuilding has in recent years emerged as an
increasingly indispensable aspect of the various
elements that constitute international peace operations.
It is now widely acknowledged that, to achieve genuine
closure of violent conflict situations, concerted efforts
need to be made to put in place structures that would
effectively dissipate lingering tensions. In this
connection, it has been rightly observed that there is a
need to ensure, right from the outset of peace
initiatives, effective coordination, coherence and
continuity among the various elements of the overall
strategy of such operations — in particular between
peacekeeping operations on the one hand and possible
transitions into peacebuilding operations on the other.
Since attempts to secure a lasting peace in the
aftermath of most violent conflicts around the globe
necessarily requires sustained support from the United
Nations and its development and humanitarian partners,
efforts should be enhanced to encourage closer
cooperation among all relevant United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, regional and subregional
organizations and the private sector to achieve the desired
objectives.
In our opinion, the idea of the creation of an
authoritative intergovernmental mechanism capable of
establishing a substantive link between security and
development and of ensuring the development of an
integrated mission plan, with adequate coordination
among the various intergovernmental and national
donor agencies, warrants universal support, as it would
buttress efforts towards optimizing synergies for
recovery and reconstruction.
The intricate link between development and
security has been generally acknowledged. In that
connection, given the development and security
components of all post-conflict peacebuilding efforts,
we cannot but concur with the proposal to place the
Peacebuilding Commission under the joint authority of
the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council but to establish it by the authority of the
General Assembly. For us, whatever decision is taken

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

on the location of such a body should take into account
all of the development and security elements, as well
as the need for inclusiveness, maximum participation,
genuine partnership and a balanced assessment of the
security and humanitarian dimensions of post-conflict
situations. In that connection, we support the
Secretary-General’s view that the mandate of the
proposed Commission should be mainly focused on
post-conflict peacebuilding. Also, for the Commission
to achieve general acceptance, it should be of an
advisory nature and not have decision-making powers.
Furthermore, my delegation endorses the
Secretary-General’s proposal that, in the event of the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, the
Commission should report to the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council sequentially, and not
jointly, to avoid duplication and confusion.
In terms of the Commission’s composition, my
delegation would prefer equal regional representation
from the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council. In addition, officials from the relevant United
Nations departments, agencies, funds and programmes, as
well as representatives of national authorities and regional
or subregional organizations could be invited to
participate in its meetings and activities. Given the
developmental role of the Commission, the involvement
of regional and international financial institutions is also
an imperative.
In fairness, we would like to note that the
acknowledged gap between relief and development has
been to a degree narrowed down, albeit modestly, by
the recent inclusion of funds for disarmament and
demobilization as part of the assessed budget. That
notwithstanding, serious gaps continue to impede
efforts aimed at the reintegration of ex-combatants and
displaced persons, the training and deployment of
indigenous police forces, judicial reform, and other
essential elements of peacebuilding.
Thus, in view of the fact that it usually takes
some time before resources can be mobilized for
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration (DDR)
programmes at the end of a conflict, the proposed
institution of a peacebuilding fund could play a crucial
role in post-conflict peacebuilding and assist in the
implementation of DDR programmes.
My delegation would further like to recognize the
gender perspective in peacebuilding. The vital
contribution of women in promoting peace, and their

role in peacebuilding processes in particular, should
not be overlooked. We wish to encourage all relevant
initiatives geared towards the full participation of
women in all stages of peace operations as part of the
requisite gender mainstreaming. This would ensure that
all policies and programmes adopted in peacebuilding
would promote the full interests and participation of
women, gender equality and respect for women’s
human rights.
I would like to recall that our experiences in West
Africa reveal that certain sister States such as Liberia,
Sierra Leone and Guinea-Bissau could have benefited
from the existence of an effective institutionalized
peacebuilding mechanism. We share the Council’s
belief,
stated
in
its
presidential
statement
(S/PRST/2005/9) of 25 February 2005 in connection
with its consideration of the agenda item entitled
“Cross-border issues in West Africa”, that action on
cross-border and subregional issues should take place
as part of a wider strategy of conflict prevention, crisis
management and peacebuilding in the subregion. We
add our voice to that of the Council in calling for the
further promotion of an integrated approach in that
regard with the Economic Community of West African
States and the African Union, as well as other key
international partners and civil society organizations.
The establishment of a Peacebuilding Commission is,
therefore, of paramount importance to Africa. Ghana’s
strong support of the proposed Commission was
reflected in its decision to jointly host, with the Danish
Government, a recent meeting in Accra to deliberate on
the concept.
We cannot overemphasize the need for concerted
international action to strengthen the enfeebled
capacity of Governments and ensuring security sector
reforms aimed at improving civil-military relations in
countries emerging from conflict situations, with a
view to creating a culture of peace and stability and
promoting the rule of law. In this regard, another issue
which merits serious consideration by the proposed
Peacebuilding Commission is the need for the
expeditious granting of assistance for reconstruction
processes to meet the immediate requirements of
deprived populations. A major inhibiting factor over
the years has been the lack of early access to
substantial development aid, with its attendant adverse
effect on long-term reconstruction and development.
Such situations invariably undermine the objective of
promoting sustainable security.

11

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

Against that backdrop of an imperative need for
concrete peacebuilding measures in contemporary
peace operations so as to mitigate costly relapses into
cycles of conflict, my delegation associates itself with
the emerging consensus within this Organization to
effectively and coherently put in place an institutional
remedy to assist in ensuring a seamless transition from
war to lasting peace. The ultimate goal should be to
move beyond the simple extension of temporary relief
to traumatized populations to meeting their expectation
of an enabling environment for the attainment of
sustainable peace.
The President: The next speaker is
representative of Chile, to whom I give the floor.

the

Mr. Muñoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank the Danish presidency for having chosen
the subject of post-conflict peacebuilding for the
Council’s thematic debate this month.
The international community has taken note of
the enormous growth in United Nations peace
operations over the past two decades. In the case of
every such operation, once hostilities ceased, the
United Nations set in motion an operation that was as
just difficult, if not more so: post-conflict
peacebuilding. This is an enormously complex
challenge that is necessary because of the trauma
inflicted on societies as a result of the often protracted
armed conflicts that have torn them apart.
Peacebuilding demands, first of all, that we take a
multidimensional approach to the search for a solution
to the causes of conflict, generating minimum security
conditions while making it possible to restore law and
order and to lay the foundations for political, social
and economic rehabilitation.
That is why we believe it essential that peace
missions should have a comprehensive, multidimensional,
long-term mandate that provides them with the tools and
resources they need to assist transitional Governments in
the task of institutional and economic reconstruction of
States emerging from conflict. In the context of that
holistic view of a peacebuilding mission, it is of
fundamental importance that we seek inclusive political
processes, involving all sectors of society that are
prepared to renounce violence, so as to achieve a social
contract that makes it possible to generate a sustainable
climate of peace and security. To that end, it is essential to
ensure the creation of a wide-ranging national dialogue
that brings together all the relevant political forces.

12

Often, the root causes of conflict are poverty,
hunger and underdevelopment. Thus, security and
development are essential components that are mutually
reinforcing. Once a conflict is over, it is vital that the
international community, while helping to create political
stability and a safe environment, provide a level of
resources that makes it possible to tackle the most urgent
needs of the population and help transitional
Governments to prepare quick-impact strategies and
develop
mediumand
long-term
development
programmes and projects. We believe that the Economic
and Social Council, through its ad hoc advisory groups,
can make a substantial long-term contribution to that
effort.
The United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) provides a clear example of such a
situation. The United Nations operation in Haiti is
clearly a fourth-generation peace mission, whose goal
is not merely the suppression of violence. Its task is a
complex one, ranging from creating or strengthening
democratic institutions and ensuring full respect for
human rights to the modernization of legislation, the
consolidation of political parties, the reform of the
judicial and penal systems and, last but not least, the
restructuring and professionalization of the national
police. Such situations can be found elsewhere, too.
Although I do not intend to speak at length on the
Secretary-General’s recommendations in the context of
the United Nations reform process, we must point to
the desirability of creating a Peacebuilding
Commission designed to help countries go beyond the
transitional phase between armed conflict and the
restoration of national institutions and to help them
overcome the trauma of conflict. In addition, the
initiative to create within the Secretariat a Rule of Law
Assistance Unit to cooperate with national initiatives to
restore the rule of law in societies that have been or are
still in conflict is a very positive one that will make it
possible to enhance our approach to issues of the rule
of law and reconciliation in the post-conflict phase.
We also believe that involving local people in the
elaboration and implementation of post-conflict
strategies at an early stage is decisive in making such
strategies more acceptable, viable and sustainable. That
not only achieves the vital goal of involving the
beneficiaries themselves in the process, but also
optimizes its implementation, since this depends on
local experience and knowledge.

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

We also believe that we must keep in mind the
regional context of a conflict. Thus, from its inception,
a mission must factor regional synergies into the
peacebuilding process. In this context, we should bear
in mind the increasingly important complementary
contribution that various regional organizations can
make in ensuring stable solutions.
Along with those elements, it is essential to be
able to rely on sufficient financial and human resources
to carry out the peace missions mandated by the
Security Council. Those resources are all the more
necessary in the first phases of a mission, when there is
especially urgent need among the population. That
initial encounter will determine the level of trust
between the members of the peace mission and the
population as regards the task ahead. Once the
emergency phase is over, it is sometimes difficult to
rely on the resources pledged by the international
community to implement ongoing projects; such a
situation can ultimately undermine the timely and
successful outcome of those projects.
It is precisely because we are convinced about the
tremendous importance of post-conflict peacebuilding
missions that we believe that we must continue to do
all we can to improve them, starting with the planning,
deployment and execution phases. Each success helps
lay the foundations for the political, economic and
social development of peoples, for the establishment of
the rule of law and for respect for human rights; this
paves the road for long-desired peace and stability in
countries and regions previously torn by violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.

global peace and security. Slovakia stands ready to
share all the expertise and experience it has gained
with its partners, States Members of the United
Nations.
Not a great deal of time has passed since Europe,
especially its eastern part, underwent major political
changes connected, at least in some cases, with
difficult security challenges. Although not all the
problematic issues have yet been entirely overcome,
the final outcomes, luckily, have been mostly positive.
That has been so. Thanks in large part to the positive
role played by regional formations and regional
organizations. In addition to the European Union and
NATO, I have in mind the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and its active role
in a wide range of areas, such as free elections, the
building of democratic institutions, the reform of
public administration, et cetera. We argue for the
further widening and strengthening of United Nations
cooperation with regional organizations such as the
European Union, NATO, the OSCE and the Council of
Europe in the area of building stability and peace.
Their ample expertise, experience and proven and
established best practices could be of great benefit
wherever necessary.
Also, I would like to particularly emphasize the
role of civil society and non-governmental
organizations in post-conflict peacebuilding. As our
own experience has well proven, they are the ones who
can ensure greater ownership and capacity-building at
the local level, and who can make a great contribution
to the implementation of strategies and to the proper
delivery of tasks.

My country has been playing an active role in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts in various parts
of the world for many years, and has thus assumed its
share of responsibility for the strengthening and
protection of values and principles that the United
Nations stands for.

In that regard, Slovakia has in recent years been
particularly active in the western Balkans. We have had
wide experience in providing good offices to the
countries of the western Balkans. Just this past
weekend, Bratislava hosted another international
conference on development in the western Balkans. In
his speech at the conference, His Excellency
Mr. Eduard Kukan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Slovak Republic and former Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Balkans, said, “The future of
the western Balkans region lies, above all else, in
deepening collaboration and building trust”.

Ample experience in peacekeeping has provided
us with a whole new dimension of understanding of the
depth and complexity of the challenges and threats to

In that respect, we think it appropriate to point
out another positive role played by a regional
formation — the Visegrad Four, comprising the Czech

Mr. Burian (Slovakia): Slovakia fully associates
itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent
Representative of Luxembourg on behalf of the
European Union. My delegation wishes to add several
observations and comments in its national capacity.

13

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia. Throughout
the 1990s and in the first years of this century,
especially during the processes of the accession of its
four members into the European and transatlantic
structures, and to the present day, the Visegrad Four
has been tremendously helpful in enhancing political
dialogue and the atmosphere of mutual trust,
cooperation and good-neighbourly relations. That has
been the case in spite of the Visegrad Four being only
an informal formation, with no institutional framework
necessary. As our experience shows, the development
of this kind of regional cooperation can be an
important factor in peacebuilding and in strengthening
regional stability.
We have learned this lesson ourselves; that is why
we have been advising our friends, especially those
from the western Balkans, that areas such as the
intensification of political dialogue in the broadest
sense of the word, the development of economic
cooperation, exchanges of students and teachers and
cultural cooperation are the motive forces for further
democratic change in individual countries.
Still speaking of the western Balkans, we see the
greatest dangers to the building of a democratic society
in the region, including that of slipping back into
conflict, above all in the underdeveloped state of civil
society, the lack of development of the rule of law and
the difficult economic situation. The latter provides
fertile ground for corruption, extremism and organized
crime. Stability is an important prerequisite for the
building of a democratic society. Tomorrow the
Security Council will hold an open debate on the
situation in Kosovo. We believe that many of those
factors need to be taken into account in the peaceful
resolution of Kosovo’s future status, too. Slovakia
stands ready to continue playing an active and
instructive role in this important process in whatever
way necessary.
As an added value, my country could now, among
other things, offer its experts and their recent
professional experience gained from the successful
reform of our armed and security forces and the rapid
re-establishment of the fundamental principles of the
rule of law. Also, we have recently invested a great
deal of financial resources and energy in enabling our
armed and security forces to better address areas such
as organized crime, the vulnerability of the information
and communication systems and the role of non-State
actors in possible acts of terrorism and in the threat of

14

the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. We
regard the concept of the armed forces being an
integral part of democratic institutions and processes
and falling under proper civilian and parliamentary
control as a significant element of sustainable
peacebuilding efforts.
We are also making every effort to be able to
contribute further civilian and police capacities. We are
hopeful that such personnel will be able to live up to
the very positive reputation, earned in recent years,
especially by our military engineers, deminers and
paramedics. We are currently closely looking at ways
and means to widen or enhance our offer of expert and
training capacities — governmental as well as nongovernmental — in fields such as accountable and
transparent
disarmament,
demobilization
and
reintegration (DDR) programmes, reform of public
administration, free elections, good governance,
building of democratic institutions, economic and
social reform, and so forth. We would welcome the
creation of a United Nations standing list of such
institutional and personnel capacities to be used
whenever and wherever there is a need. Slovakia is
ready to contribute appropriately to such a list.
Substantial and lasting progress in the overall
peace and security situation of any conflict can hardly
be achieved without tangible improvement of the
economic and social situation of ordinary people and
without their feeling the benefits of the rule of law. By
adopting effective measures in those areas, Slovakia
has gradually moved from being a recipient of
development assistance in the early 1990s into the
present situation of being an emerging donor country
now providing official development assistance to 14
partner countries in Europe, Asia and Africa. We have
been supporting those countries’ institutional
capacities, infrastructure and living conditions and
sharing our own experience from the ongoing
transformation of our economic and social system.
That is undoubtedly an indispensable part of the entire
concept of peacebuilding.
As we have done on previous occasions, we wish to
express our strong support for the creation of a
Peacebuilding Commission and for its four main purposes
as proposed by the Secretary-General. We see that step as
a prerequisite for abolishing the existing institutional gap.
The urgent need to maintain peace and security in postconflict situations and achieve long-term sustainable

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

social and economic development must be addressed
appropriately.
In conclusion, let me thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate and for presenting us
with an excellent discussion paper (S/2005/316,
annex). We would welcome it if this kind of valuable
discussion were to continue and if it were to be
followed up by further concrete, practical steps. In that
connection, we think it would be worthwhile to
consider, for instance, the organization of a United
Nations conference on peacebuilding, transformation
and stabilization to discuss best practices in the area of
building peace and stability. I wish to assure the
Council of my Government’s keen support for all the
peacebuilding efforts and endeavours of the United
Nations. We are strongly committed to achieving the
best possible results in all their aspects.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Sierra Leone, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): The delegation of
Sierra Leone wishes to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May 2005. We extend to you and to the
other members of the Council our deep appreciation for
selecting for public debate a subject that is closer to our
heart than we can express. The choice of post-conflict
peacebuilding as the subject of this debate is an indication
of the significance that your delegation and the Council
attach to that critical aspect of the peace process. We view
this debate as a prelude to an opportunity for more
exhaustive discussion of the Secretary-General’s
proposed Peacebuilding Commission.
As all are aware, Sierra Leone is a post-conflict
country. Naturally, we are delighted to participate in
this debate, and we are doing so from the perspective
of our practical experience and our expectations.
The post-conflict phase of a peace process is
supposed to address the issues that generated the conflict
and to lay the foundation for lasting peace and
development. It is a period for reconciliation, confidencebuilding and the rebuilding of institutions, especially
those for the administration of justice, democracy, human
rights and accountable governance. It is a period for a
country in war-to-peace transition to reflect on the past
and to cultivate attitudes that will facilitate the avoidance
of the mistakes that culminated in the conflict.

But it is also a phase that is characterized by
expectations for a better standard of living, justice,
human rights, freedom, rapid development, social
services and, of course, participatory governance. After
all, it is the lack of access to these that generates most
conflicts in the world today. The fear and anxiety of
post-conflict countries stem from a failure to deliver on
those expectations, and, often, many post-conflict
countries have neither the resources nor the capacity to
deliver on them.
Unfortunately, moreover, post-conflict peace
management or consolidation has never been a priority
of the international community. Making sure that the
guns are silent, but not making sure that they are silent
forever, has been erroneously interpreted as peace.
Hence the bitter experience of frequent reverses in
peace efforts.
The problem of abandoning post-conflict
countries to struggle with their own fate has been aptly
described by the Secretary-General as “a gaping hole in
the
United
Nations
institutional
machinery”
(A/59/2005, para. 114). That is why Sierra Leone
welcomes — and with great expectations — the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to create a
Peacebuilding Commission
charged with the
responsibility of promoting assistance for post-conflict
countries to transit from war to lasting peace.
Naturally, we look forward to the establishment and
operationalization of the Commission, particularly in
the light of the withdrawal from my country of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL).
It is common knowledge that the United Nations
has scored major successes in Sierra Leone and that
UNAMSIL is on the verge of completing its
withdrawal. We appreciate the role of the United
Nations organs and agencies in our post-conflict
recovery, but we wish that no “gaping hole” existed
and that the United Nations were more involved in this
phase. In spite of that, and in spite of many difficulties,
Sierra Leone is proud of its rapid progress in many
areas, including rebuilding the justice system and
strengthening the rule of law; raising new, better,
trained, disciplined and efficient security forces;
restoring social services; rehabilitating the road
infrastructure; capacity-building; governance reforms;
reviving the economy; reintegrating ex-combatants;
and resettling the displaced population. We owe those
developments to the generosity of the international
community and our bilateral friends. We thank them

15

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

all. But we need more — much more — to sustain the
momentum for achieving lasting peace and stability.
That is the most reliable guarantee against sliding back
into conflict.
In conclusion, it is fair to say that the United
Nations is at a crossroads, poised for fundamental
reform in response to identified weaknesses and
strengths and to challenges imposed by its ever
expanding functions. One of those challenges is armed
conflict in all its aspects and manifestations. Now we
have the unprecedented opportunity to take decisions
on reforms and on the creation of new institutions for
the elimination of armed conflict and, more urgently,
for helping countries emerging from conflict to achieve
lasting peace and stability. It is much better and much
cheaper to invest in post-conflict peacebuilding, which
is also preventive in nature, than to expend scarce
resources on relapses that can be prevented.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Côte d’Ivoire, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Djangoné-Bi (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): I wish at the outset, on behalf of my
delegation, to congratulate you sincerely, Sir, on
Denmark’s assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. You are
presiding over the work of the Council at a time when
the United Nations is discussing the great challenges
facing the world: collective security, development and
respect for human rights. I can assure you that my
delegation supports all your initiatives. I wish also to
thank you for having organized this debate on a topical
theme, to which my country, Côte d’Ivoire — which
has been at war since 19 September 2002 — attaches
great importance.
Further, I salute the Secretary-General’s
determination constantly to reassert the role of the
Organization in peacebuilding and the maintenance of
peace in the post-conflict phase.
All the steps the Council has already taken in the
sphere of post-conflict peacebuilding in countries
emerging from conflict have proven to be extremely
effective. These relate to restoring the rule of law and
confidence in the impartiality of the judicial, security
and penal systems; to arms embargoes; to the process
of certifying the origin of natural resources in countries
being assisted; to subregional efforts to monitor the
movements of ex-combatants and the trafficking in

16

women and children. Such measures have been useful
for the long-term maintenance of peace wherever they
have been implemented.
The same applies to the commitment to quickimpact projects during peacekeeping and the linking of
crisis resolution and peacebuilding measures.
The emphasis must now be on enhancing overall
coherence and constantly making sure that the
stakeholders’ work is consistent and that there is
complementarity, as well as close cooperation among
all national and international actors.
Any peacekeeping programme needs to include a
priority component of arms control. The proliferation
of small arms and their uncontrolled circulation is
without any doubt an important fact or that complicates
and prolongs conflicts, particularly in Africa. The
resurgence of rebel movements and the rise in
organized crime in our countries have been made
possible because of the proliferation of and illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, and the
eradication of these weapons requires the support of
the international community.
Given the multitude of conflicts and their
complexity, it is more necessary than ever before that
States combine their efforts to deal with this
phenomenon. Success will not be assured or lasting
unless the embargo on importing weapons is
strengthened by identifying, on the one hand, the licit
and illicit supply lines of weapons and resources that
fuel conflicts, and, on the other, all national and
external interests in the conflict.
We all recall the recommendations on the threat
of conflict between States and the threat of conflict
within States, as contained in the report of the Highlevel Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change; in
recent months those recommendations were the subject
of broad-based consultation and discussion. There is no
doubt that the strategy to be formulated at the
September summit which we all eagerly await will
make it possible to strengthen the consensus that
should guide our action. Pending those conclusions, we
must continue to think about various ways to give new
momentum to the work of the United Nations in the
areas of peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
Côte d’Ivoire, exhausted and shaken by war, has
clearly embarked resolutely on restoring domestic
peace. This fortunate process, which we owe to the

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

mediation of the African Union, led by President
Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, would benefit if it were
assisted and strengthened by measures that are being
discussed in the Security Council right now. Côte
d’Ivoire is counting on the international community to
support us in our difficult post-conflict reconstruction.
Unless there is major investment in post-disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration — unless there is bold
action to help out development — it is obvious that
there is a risk of relapsing into crisis. It is by making
these investments that peace may be built on a lasting
basis.
Clearly, peacekeeping operations, although very
useful, are not enough in themselves to guarantee a
return to peace and future peacebuilding. These
operations have to go hand in hand with development
activities, which should be tailored by the specialized
agencies and the United Nations programmes to
support the efforts of the authorities of the country
concerned.
It is with this in mind that my delegation supports
the welcome proposal of the Secretary-General to
establish a Peacebuilding Commission.
I cannot conclude my statement without
reaffirming the fervent desire of Côte d’Ivoire to
continue to receive assistance from the United Nations
in organizing and holding the upcoming general
elections, particularly the presidential election to be
held in October of this year. I should also like to
convey once again to the United Nations and, in
particular, to the Security Council the gratitude of my
country for steps already taken and those being
envisaged with perfect complementarity of action by
the various stakeholders in resolving the crisis in Côte
d’Ivoire to guarantee that these elections will be free
and transparent.
Furthermore, I would be grateful to you,
Mr. President, if you could relay the message of Côte
d’Ivoire to countries that contribute troops and other
resources to bring about a return of peace to my
country.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): I wish to thank the
presidency for organizing this open debate on the
subject of post-conflict peacebuilding and the
opportunity for the Nigerian delegation to participate

therein. This is most timely, considering the attention
that the subject has received in recent discussions
among member States on how best our Organization
can address the challenges that flow from conflict
situations once the United Nations peacekeeping
missions have fulfilled their mandates in the specific
countries concerned.
It is not my intention to re-state the SecretaryGeneral’s well-grounded concerns on this subject,
which have led to his recommendation for the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission for the
Organization. Suffice it to say that, through its long
involvement in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, Nigeria, as an important troop-contributing
country, has come to the conclusion that post-conflict
peacebuilding constitutes an integral, though not fully
addressed, phase of peace management efforts of the
international community. Statistics of relapse abound
in countries emerging from conflict. The potential of
such relapses has grown in the proportion that conflicts
have multiplied. It has brought to the fore commitment
to peace agreements by parties to the conflicts, a
number of whom have found it convenient to take up
their arms again to fight for causes that they believe
could only be won on the battlefield. Such situations, if
allowed to go unchecked, would set at naught the
heroic efforts of our valiant United Nations
peacekeepers. Besides the loss of vital and scarce
resources, both for our Organization and the countries
concerned, neighbouring countries have almost
invariably been sucked into such renewed hostilities
with far-reaching consequences for peace, security and
stability in the subregion.
In Africa, which has a disproportionately large
share of conflict situations in the world, the challenges
of post-conflict peacebuilding are particularly
daunting. The porous nature of our borders, the
advances and ease in communication, and the mobility
of populations have challenged traditional notions of
conflict, in which attempts at resolution have focused
on peace agreements between belligerents in the
national territories. Considerable resources have also
been devoted to immediate problems of disarmament
and demobilization of erstwhile combatants.
However, it is evident that the reintegration or
rehabilitation components of conflict resolution have to
be given more attention than has hitherto been the case. It
is our assessment that the efforts of the international
community in this area perhaps hold the key to lasting

17

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

peace. For populations, especially women and vulnerable
groups brutalized by conflicts, an effective and wellfunded reintegration and rehabilitation programme would
constitute an assurance that conflicts are indeed over and
that people can resume their normal lives. Current steps
that have been taken to reintegrate ex-combatants in the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
process, for example, through the creation of job
opportunities for the large population of restive youths, as
part of strategies to wean them from conflicts, should be
consolidated.
Nigeria
believes
that,
for
post-conflict
peacebuilding to be effective, it must focus on some
key groups and areas in conflict environments. The key
groups would include professional soldiers who have
fought on the side of non-State actors; rebel or
mercenary soldiers; and child soldiers. Account must
also be taken of vulnerable groups — namely, women
and children. The key areas deserving the international
community’s attention in all peacebuilding efforts
include the provision of employment opportunities,
training of ex-combatants, in particular to give them
skills enabling them to live normal lives, resuscitation
and strengthening of the judicial system, protection and
promotion of human rights, including measures to
punish human rights offenders, and reconciliation and
the healing process.
In all that, it is essential that we resist the
temptation to apply one solution designed to fit all
situations. Rather, our efforts should take full account
of the specific local situation by ensuring national
ownership. Close collaboration with local and national
entities, including civil society groups, would also be
invaluable. That would ensure that long after the
peacekeepers depart, the process of rebuilding
shattered societies and lives continues. Thus, the fruits
of the investments in peace are reaped.
Nigeria believes that subregional and regional
organizations should have a complementary role to
play in post-conflict peacebuilding. Some of those
organizations, including in particular the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union, have proved that they can be relied on as
effective partners in both conflict resolution and the
peacebuilding process. Thus, enhancing the capacity of
those organizations would enable them to perform even
better. In that regard, it is desirable for the Council to
address the special needs of Africa.

18

Finally, one cannot overemphasize the need to
mobilize the support of the international financial
institutions to make a worthwhile investment in peace.
That calls for a genuine partnership and understanding
between the United Nations and those institutions.
In conclusion, I wish to state that it is the
expectation of the Nigerian delegation that our debate
today will enable the Council to devote greater
attention to post-conflict peacebuilding and thereby
reinforce the confidence of affected populations —
and, indeed, the international community — in the
Council’s primary role of maintaining international
peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Shin Kak-soo (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, let me join previous speakers in thanking you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
peacebuilding. Given the emerging consensus on the
proposed
establishment
of
a
Peacebuilding
Commission, the subject of today’s debate is especially
timely.
The cessation of armed conflict does not always
instantly bring peace on the ground. Rather, it is only the
first step in the long, hard peacebuilding process.
Peacebuilding comprises all efforts to assist countries and
regions in their transition from war to peace,
encompassing a wide range of political, development,
humanitarian and human rights programmes and
mechanisms. In particular, peacebuilding is all the more
important in the light of the fragile and vulnerable
situation that exists following the restoration of peace, as
almost 50 per cent of armed conflicts recur within five
years of their cessation.
It is our firm conviction that conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding are so closely
interlinked that it would be more effective to pursue
them simultaneously rather than sequentially.
Concerted efforts to build durable peace in countries
and regions in a post-conflict situation are critical to
establishing the conditions for sustainable long-term
development and thus preventing the resurgence of
conflict.
My Government is pleased to note that the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to create a
Peacebuilding Commission has the broad support of
the general membership of the United Nations. This

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

innovative proposal would fill an institutional gap
within the United Nations system, allowing the
Organization to provide coordinated assistance to postconflict societies, which must traverse the difficult and
often treacherous path from violent conflict to
sustainable peace and economic development.
Member States have discussed the major issues
with respect to a Peacebuilding Commission at great
length, including its mandate, reporting structure,
composition and funding. Reaffirming our strong
commitment to the creation of a Peacebuilding
Commission, I would like to take this opportunity to
focus on two outstanding issues: its reporting structure
and composition.
Post-conflict peacebuilding will require close
coordination and collaboration between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. Indeed,
owing to the mixed nature of peacebuilding functions,
it is difficult to make a clear delineation between the
mandates of the two organs. Furthermore,
peacebuilding efforts do not always unfold in a linear,
step-by-step fashion; the simultaneous involvement of
both the Security Council and the Economic and Social
Council is thus required. Hence, it is imperative to
ensure close coordination between those two principal
organs throughout the whole process of peacebuilding.
Another important consideration is that the
expertise of the Economic and Social Council in the
social and economic arenas should be deployed at an
early stage of the peacebuilding process in order to
optimize the outcome of peacebuilding efforts in the
long-term perspective. In its reporting, a Peacebuilding
Commission should make recommendations, taking
into account the medium- and long-term development
needs of the countries in transition.
Regarding the composition of a Peacebuilding
Commission, we have proposed one possible model,
which includes two permanent and three non-permanent
members of the Security Council and six members of the
Economic and Social Council, ensuring an adequate
balance between the two bodies. It is also crucial that a
Peacebuilding Commission establish close links with two
important stakeholders, the funds and programmes of the
United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions and
regional development banks, by allowing for their
representatives’ participation as observers in its
deliberations.

The Republic of Korea attaches great importance
to peacebuilding as a vital instrument of the United
Nations in the maintenance of international peace and
security. We note with satisfaction that peacebuilding
has now become an ongoing mainstream activity
integrated into the Secretariat’s daily operations, with
10 peacebuilding missions currently in the field.
Let me conclude with the hope that with the
establishment of a Peacebuilding Commission at an
early date, the United Nations will become more
efficient and effective in its comprehensive efforts to
promote peacebuilding.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): Let me join others in
felicitating the Danish presidency on its excellent
handling of the Council’s work during this month. We
also congratulate Ambassador Wang Guangya for the
successful Chinese presidency in April.
We welcome this important debate on postconflict peacebuilding and appreciate the personal
participation of Foreign Minister Mr. Møller. The
Presidency’s discussion paper has been useful in
guiding the debate. We also appreciate the
contributions made by the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Fréchette, the President of the World Bank,
Mr. Wolfensohn, and other speakers.
The subject of peacebuilding has received
increasing attention since the High-level Panel’s report
(A/59/565) last December. The Secretary-General later
offered his reflections in his report entitled “In larger
freedom” (A/59/2005) and in a subsequent non-paper.
The proposal for a Peacebuilding Commission is now
under active consideration in the General Assembly.
The proposal has particular relevance and appeal for
countries emerging from conflict, especially in Africa.
I would like to make a few points. First, the
increased focus on peacebuilding during the last couple
of years has its roots in the now well-recognized
interlinkage between peace and development. Indeed,
sustainable peace can be built only on a foundation of
sustainable development.
Secondly, peacebuilding is complex. It embraces
many facets, including the security, political,
economic, social and humanitarian facets. It often
involves assistance for institutional capacity-building,
economic recovery, good governance, reconciliation,

19

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

rule of law, human rights and the organization of
elections, among other things. It is clear that no single
United Nations organ has an exclusive mandate over
those issues. Successful peacebuilding strategies have
to be based on a comprehensive and integrated
approach, greater systemwide coherence, increased
inter-organ coordination and the engagement of all
relevant actors.
Thirdly, though peacebuilding is associated
mainly with post-conflict situations, in which one of
the main concerns is to help prevent a relapse into
conflict, it is equally important to prevent conflicts in
the first place. Apart from preventive diplomacy and
the pacific settlement of disputes, development should
be promoted as the best means to prevent conflict.
Assistance in economic, humanitarian or other fields
may be provided at the request of a country to avoid
slipping towards conflict.
Fourthly, at the policy level, a primary challenge is
to recognize and respect the respective competencies of
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council with regard to
peacebuilding. Besides, the integration of peacebuilding
activities in the field and at the country level logically
necessitates coordination between the relevant organs and
other actors at Headquarters. We believe that
complementarity in the work of the three principal organs
should be used to promote synergy in peacebuilding
efforts. Interaction between the Security Council and the
ad hoc advisory groups of the Economic and Social
Council on countries emerging from conflict is a good
basis upon which to build. Another challenge is to
preserve and promote national ownership of the
peacebuilding programmes and activities and to ensure
that the priorities of the country concerned have
precedence.
Fifthly, it is widely acknowledged that we need an
institutional mechanism dedicated to peacebuilding. It
may not be merely a gap-filling mechanism, but should
promote and coordinate a comprehensive approach. It
should be an intergovernmental body with the flexibility
to bring together all relevant actors in specific situations,
including United Nations agencies and the international
financial institutions, as appropriate.
Sixthly, experience from various specific situations,
Guinea-Bissau for example, shows that the major
challenge remains the provision of adequate, timely and
sustained assistance for peacebuilding activities. The

20

special circumstances of countries emerging from conflict
should be kept in mind while recommending policy
changes and negotiating aid packages. The international
financial institutions should show some operational
flexibility. Debt write-offs should be considered in the
first instance. While the recipient countries are expected
to meet some minimum requirements, there should be no
shifting of the goalposts by the donors. The proposal for a
standing fund for peacebuilding has merit.
All of us are trying to find answers to many of
those and other questions in the Secretary-General’s
proposal for the establishment of a Peacebuilding
Commission. We hope that the various ideas advanced
today by Member States will feed into the rich array of
proposals already made on peacebuilding in general,
and the Peacebuilding Commission in particular.
I should like to recall that, in 2003, Pakistan first
proposed the idea of ad hoc composite committees,
comprised of members drawn from the three principal
organs of the United Nations, to effectively address
complex crises in all their phases, including postconflict peacebuilding. In May 2004, during Pakistan’s
presidency of the Security Council, we circulated a
non-paper on ad hoc composite committees during a
public meeting on complex crises and the United
Nations response.
During the discussions in the General Assembly,
Pakistan has circulated its specific proposal on the
proposed Peacebuilding Commission. Pakistan has a
special interest and a sense of ownership in the
proposed Commission, which basically follows the
same concept of a composite approach we proposed
long ago. We are working with other Member States to
further crystallize the proposal and we are hopeful that
the General Assembly will be in a position to establish
the Commission at its forthcoming session.
The President: I call on the representative of
Indonesia.
Ms. Asmady (Indonesia): Allow me at the outset
to thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Denmark,
Mr. Per Stig Møller, for his initiative of convening this
debate on the subject of post-conflict peacebuilding. I
commend the very helpful non-paper distributed by the
Danish Permanent Mission on that important issue. I
would also like to acknowledge the presence among us
of Deputy Secretary-General Louise Fréchette and of
Mr. James Wolfensohn, President of the World Bank.

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

One cannot justifiably participate in a debate of
this nature without taking at least a quick look at what
the Security Council, as the body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, has
done so far. In the wake of the demand for
peacekeeping in the recent past, as well as the tendency
of some cultures to slip back into conflict soon after a
peacekeeping mission or the cessation of hostilities,
peacebuilding has become an increasingly important
burden for the Council and for the United Nations in
general.

It is not debatable that, if peacebuilding is to
succeed, there must be a deep sense of ownership and
capacity among local actors. Indeed, no matter what
else is attempted or provided, it is only the investment
of local participation, ideas and energy that can imbue
a peacebuilding effort not only with legitimacy, but
with “building” tools as well. Programme planners
must determine from the beginning what means might
best be used to ensure such local ownership, and
advantage must be taken of available time to advance a
clear, realistic and inclusive peacebuilding strategy.

As we all now know, one of the most talkedabout proposals in the Organization in recent times,
originating from the Secretary-General’s report “In
larger freedom: towards development, security and
human rights for all”, is that of establishing a
Peacebuilding Commission. Not surprisingly, the
proposal has received wide support throughout the
United Nations. It is the belief of the delegation of
Indonesia that discussions such as this not only
underline the importance of peacebuilding, but will
strengthen the international effort to mobilize the ideas
and structures that will be needed to implement it.

With reference to the issue of content, therefore,
my delegation is of the view that peacebuilding
should be structured as part of a broader development
agenda. In the best-case scheme, that agenda would
include the provision of such elements as physical
infrastructure and education that would continue from
where such peacekeeping programmes as disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration may have left off. A
well-grounded approach of that nature, tied into the
expectations of peace and stability, would convey the
important message that the international community is
determined to see that the peacebuilding process is an
investment in the future.

It is obvious that, as difficult as peacekeeping is, it
does not hold the subtleties and challenges that
peacebuilding entails. We cannot mandate peacebuilding
in the same sense as the Council might mandate a
peacekeeping mission, or impose regulations of peace in
the same sense as we might rules of engagement.
Peacebuilding is a political exigency that must be finetuned and implemented as an art. Just as the practice of
peacekeeping emerged with complex multidimensional
mandates, peacebuilding can succeed only if it proceeds
from a multidimensional and comprehensive perspective.
In our view, therefore, the first and most important factor
for such success is serious institutional planning.
While there will always be variations in local
cultures and environments that must be taken into
consideration in particular mandates, peacebuilding has
one luxury that peacekeeping does not. That factor is
time. Since peacebuilding would usually follow a
period of peacekeeping, it should benefit from the time
lag that the cessation of hostilities or a peacekeeping
mission provides. This means that, for that particular
country or environment, peacebuilding preparation, at
its most multidimensional and comprehensive best,
ought to commence once peacekeeping is under way.

In the view of my delegation, a significant
component of that broader agenda is the rule of law. It
is of the utmost importance that provision be made for
the structures of a viable legal and judicial order and
the protection of human rights. Those structures are
crucial towards ensuring that all social, political and
economic processes are governed by the rule of law. It
is obvious that a scenario such as that involves timely,
sustained and well-targeted resources. We share the
view that, while high levels of aid do not guarantee
success, the absence or inadequacy of aid would make
post-conflict peacebuilding efforts a time-wasting
charade.
Similarly, it is increasingly recognized that focusing
narrowly on country-level peacebuilding efforts is
unlikely to yield significant changes in peacebuilding
outcomes, especially in the regions where conflict has
interlocking political, security and economic dynamics.
Planning for peacebuilding must be cognizant of such
situations — as we have seen in West Africa and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — and broader
strategies must be prepared in order to respond to them.
In that connection, let me point out that there is
growing evidence that the failure to address

21

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

international trade in conflict goods helps to sustain
criminal
economic
networks
in
post-conflict
environments, thereby significantly reducing the
impact of in-country peacebuilding strategies. The
steady global trade in small arms and light weapons,
for instance, compounds the difficulties of countrybased disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) strategies. A peacebuilding strategy that does
not take those interlocking factors into account would
obviously be a tremendous waste of resources.
As I have indicated, my delegation is very much
in favour of adequate and advanced planning for
peacebuilding, but this must apply not only to funding
and material, but also to the deployment of the required
civilian personnel. To this end, my delegation would
like to see a pool of such trained personnel made
available and a comprehensive database of
peacebuilding experts maintained by the Secretariat.
Finally, let me reiterate my hope that this
welcome debate will enrich peacebuilding thinking at
the United Nations in general, and in the Peacebuilding
Commission in particular.
The President:
representative of Peru.

I

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. De Rivero (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): It is
very significant that the Security Council should
dedicate this open meeting to the topic of
peacebuilding. We appreciate the initiative of the
Danish delegation in that respect.
It is very important for my delegation that the
efforts and resources of the international community
also be mobilized on a preventive basis to help States
that are undergoing stress — in other words, countries
that run the risk of imploding into civil war and turning
into chaotic, ungovernable entities that are showcases
for massive violations of human rights, ethnic
cleansing and even genocide. By failing, at the
international level, to provide intensive preventive care
to many States undergoing stress, in the post-cold-war
era we ended up producing more than 30 civil conflicts
that resulted in more than 5 million deaths and 17
million refugees.
Recent experience has shown that death,
destruction, chaos and the plague of hatred left by
those conflicts make the task of reconciliation and
reconstruction of those States more complex. Many of
those so affected have been abandoned to their fate and

22

remain in a collapsed and ungovernable state. Many of
the tools used today for peacebuilding in collapsed
States are the same tools that could have been used to
prevent conflict. But what is different is the cost in
human lives and the destruction of property. For that
reason, peacebuilding strategies must also include
conflict prevention. That is the inescapable
responsibility of the United Nations.
Having spoken about prevention, now I will
address today’s topic of post-conflict peacebuilding.
One of the main goals of the peacebuilding
process in post-conflict situations is to develop a viable
economy. What does a viable economy signify? It
means that reconstruction should not replicate the
dysfunctional economy that had caused the State to
fail. In other words, we should not rebuild a primary
economy that is based on a single crop or that exports
low-tech products that do not generate sufficient
resources for collapsed States with growing urban
populations.
The building of a new economy that is viable in
the global economy implies, first, the provision of
financial and economic intensive care for the collapsed
State. That means emergency measures designed to
write off a sizeable proportion of the debt, provide new
credits, massively increase assistance to meet the most
urgent social needs and, in particular, to increase
access to food, water and energy. Once intensive initial
care has been provided, structural measures will be
required to modernize and diversify the technological
component of exports, in order to release those
countries from the trap of primary production that
cannot compete in today’s global economy.
That could be achieved with the help of
entrepreneurs and executives from the private sector,
members of the Global Compact created by the
Secretary-General. Those executives have global
experience in trade in transnational goods and services.
They could thus play a more creative and more realistic
part in modernizing non-viable economies than could
many technocrats in the international financial
institutions.
To create businesses that can produce competitive
goods and services in collapsed States, instead of
economists from the financial bureaucracies, we need
entrepreneurs with transnational experience, members
of the Global Compact. What we must not do is rebuild
a non-viable primary economy that is incapable of

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

producing enough resources in the context of a global
economy that increasingly demands goods and services
with a high degree of technological advancement.
Entrepreneurs and transnational businesses
participating in reconstruction policies should continue
to honour the Ten Principles they accepted in the
Global Compact, including respect for human rights,
decent working conditions, protection of the
environment and anti-corruption efforts.
The need to not recreate the backward, non-viable
primary economy and to create a new competitive
economy should also guide the institutions of the
international financial system, which up to the present
have focused more on economic adjustment than on
modernizing economies that are dysfunctional within
today’s competitive global economy.
We have to understand that today’s conflicts are the
product of non-competitive, dysfunctional economies
marginalized by globalization, leading to tremendous
social exclusion and environmental degradation, to the
extent that the entire national market system becomes
non-functional and leads to the collapse of the State.
Many ethnic, religious and cultural conflicts have been
aggravated by the social marginalization produced by
non-viable economies, sometimes reaching levels of
violence that lead to genocide, ethnic cleansing and other
crimes against humanity.
It is not by chance that most of the civil conflicts
being addressed nowadays by the Security Council are
occurring in countries where primary production has
not increased sufficiently, where there has been
explosive growth in the urban population, and where
personal income has grown no more than 2 per cent in
the last 28 years. Such countries, victims of the
perverse interplay between population growth and
primary production, have been marginalized in terms
of investment flows, trade and technological research.
They have had to go further and further into debt to
purchase the technology that they cannot produce on
their own, to the extent that they can no longer honour
their debts. In order to continue to obtain credit, they
have to undergo structural adjustment, which, instead
of modernizing them, only makes them more unstable
politically.
While modernizing the non-viable economies of
collapsed States, we must also set in motion a process
of political reconstruction. In other words, while

building a viable economy, we also have to create an
effective institutional democracy.
In building such democratic institutions, the
commitment of the international community is
required. That is why Peru has consistently advocated
that all Security Council peacekeeping missions
incorporate institutional reconstruction programmes
that will lay the foundation for a solid democracy.
The first thing to be done is to promote national
agreement — in other words, arrive at an effective
social contract within the collapsed country. That
social contract has to be secured by United Nations
peacekeeping forces, which must ensure that power is
gradually transferred to the people through national
democratic institutions.
Reconstruction should also lead to a revitalized
national civil administration capable of providing basic
public services such as water, energy, health care,
education and infrastructure. It is also crucial that such
a civil administration be created on the basis of
democratic principles that will strengthen the rule of
law.
What is most important, however, is for such a
democratic civil reconstruction to start at the local
level. First priority has to be accorded to setting up
local democratic governments. Democracy must spread
from the local level to the regional level, and from the
regional level to the State. Thus democracy spreads
from the citizenry to the State.
These thoughts on the democratic reconstruction
of collapsed States are based on important sociopolitical studies that have been carried out with respect
to specific cases, in particular Kosovo, Timor-Leste,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. I am thinking in particular of
the research done by the International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance, which now has
observer status with the General Assembly.
Up to now, the greatest constraints on
peacebuilding have been a lack of strategies aimed at
preventing conflict, and then, in the post-conflict stage,
a lack of strategies aimed at creating a modern, viable
economy and at building democracy, starting from
small local communities and working up to the national
level.
Post-conflict peacebuilding must evolve into an
economic and political process that simultaneously
creates viable economies and democratic institutions.

23

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

Such a process must be innovative and be led by the
United Nations, with the participation of, and fresh
input by, Global Compact transnational companies as
well as institutions and civil society.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Papua New Guinea in which he
requests to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aisi (Papua
New Guinea) took a seat at the Council table.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Papua New Guinea, to whom I give
the floor.
Mr. Aisi (Papua New Guinea): I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for allowing me to speak at the
last minute. But as all the discussions have been about
peacebuilding, I would like to tell the Council a little
bit about what is happening in my country in terms of
the process that is taking place.
First, however, allow me, Madam President, to take
this opportunity to extend the appreciation of my
delegation for the convening of this meeting in
connection with the subject of post-conflict
peacebuilding. Papua New Guinea is one of the countries
that has experienced post-conflict peacebuilding on the
island of Bougainville, in Papua New Guinea, for more
than a decade now.
My delegation is pleased to report on the progress
in the peace process in Bougainville.
The island had been wrecked by a bloody civil
conflict. It is believed that about 20,000 people died in
the turmoil, while thousands more were injured.
However, major steps were taken towards a peaceful
solution following the signing of the Bougainville
Peace Agreement in August 2001 — one of the 26
agreements signed in the pursuit of peace, normalcy
and a political settlement on Bougainville since 1989.
A ceasefire agreement between the warring
parties — the Bougainville Revolutionary Army and

24

Papua New Guinea — was signed in 1998, followed
three years later by a peace agreement. During those
years, a regional group composed of representatives
from all over the Pacific region was sent to monitor the
peace in Bougainville — first a Truce Monitoring
Group, followed by a Peace Monitoring Group. The
Group was unarmed, unlike in other post-conflict
peacebuilding processes around the world.
Within the span of those years, the Peace Process
Consultative Committee was formed, which also
included the Bougainville Constitutional Commission
and the Interim Joint Supervisory Body, all in the name
of peace and normalcy.
Papua New Guinea remained committed to a
peaceful solution through every available means. My
Government therefore continued to give the people of
Bougainville every opportunity to participate fully in
the reconciliation process, which led to the Peace
Agreement signed in August 2001 and finally to the
election of the autonomous Bougainville Government,
which is continuing today.
The Agreement was then given the force of the
highest law in the land as a result of the Papua New
Guinea Parliament’s decision to amend our national
Constitution by adding the new part XIV and passing
the Organic Law on Peacebuilding in Bougainville.
The deal guaranteed a referendum on independence in
10 to 15 years, promised more autonomy in the
interim, and set out a plan for weapons disposal.
In December 2004, the Papua New Guinea
Government approved the Bougainville Constitution,
laying the ground for elections. That decision, in many
respects, was the culmination of longstanding dreams
and of a commitment made real through years of
protracted struggle and negotiations leading up to the
Bougainville Peace Agreement.
The way in which that decision was made — on a
bipartisan basis, with overwhelming support and
without any votes against it — showed how important
issues and principles can bring together leaders and
people from all parts of a country — in our case, Papua
New Guinea — with otherwise diverse interests and
opinions.
The spirit and detailed provisions of the national
constitutional laws have been further developed
through the making and implementation of the

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

Constitution for
Bougainville.

the

Autonomous

Region

of

Like our national Constitution, the Bougainville
Constitution is also “homegrown” — made and adopted
by leaders following close consultations with people in all
parts of Bougainville, as well as Bougainvilleans in other
parts of Papua New Guinea, within the framework of our
national Constitution, as amended to give legal effect to
the Bougainville Peace Agreement.
The first general election for the Autonomous
Bougainville Government, to be established under the
Bougainville Constitution, is currently under way and
is the next critical stage in giving substance to the
Agreement. The election marks a new beginning for
the people of Bougainville as candidates compete for
public support, as the public takes part in voting and as
officials gear up for the inauguration of the first
Autonomous Bougainville Government next month.
Leaders now in the race for the province’s top
post played many significant roles and risked their
lives in the search for peace and normalcy for the
people of Bougainville. Now that the conflict is over,
the Bougainville Peace Agreement has been completed
and given the force of law and arrangements for the
first elections are under way, Bougainvilleans are
keenly participating in choosing the leaders who will
be responsible for ensuring that normalcy returns and
for setting priorities for future development in
Bougainville. The general elections are under way
right at this moment.
We believe that the election is a good example of
a United Nations-brokered peace deal. I think that is
well reflected in the subject of today’s meeting. The
people of Bougainville have been waiting patiently for
this opportunity and are now going out in their
numbers to polling stations to cast their votes for
candidates of their choice. The voting system is firstpast-the-post.
There is very high public enthusiasm to see the
Autonomous Bougainville Government take office in
the middle of June — next month. The atmosphere on
the ground is generally calm and strongly in favour of
the election. As might be expected, there have been
two incidents, but the situation is otherwise peaceful
and orderly. The electoral process is moving ahead
according to plan. The calm and purposeful way in
which the election is being held shows how thoroughly
preparations have been made. More importantly, it

underlines how eager people around Bougainville are
to play their part in choosing Bougainville’s future
political leaders and to get on with their lives.
The Bougainville election should be seen as the
model for others who have been experiencing similar
conflicts. It took real commitment by the leaders and
people of Bougainville to achieve peace and to choose
the type of government that they believe will bring
about development and prosperity.
The election would not be running smoothly
without necessary and generous funding from friendly
nations. There have been a lot of friendly nations in
this Council Chamber over the last couple of years who
have helped us. The funds made possible the purchase
of communications equipment to link the three main
centres where votes will be counted when voting
concludes on June 2. The results will be officially
declared on 9 June. Our Prime Minister has been
invited to officially open the Bougainville House of
Representatives, which is scheduled to meet on
25 June.
The assistance provided demonstrates practical
support for the parties’ commitment and the progress
being made in implementing the Bougainville Peace
Agreement and the laws that give it legal effect. The
assistance also signifies the interest the international
community is taking in the first general election for the
Autonomous Bougainville Government.
In conclusion, I wish to record here — and I will
record it again next month, when the mandate ends —
on behalf of my Government and the people of Papua
New Guinea our deep appreciation for the contribution
of the United Nations in ensuring that the peace
process was maintained and the weapons disposal
process completed before the election commenced on
20 May 2005. I thank all members for allowing me to
speak today.
The President: Following consultations among
members of the Security Council, I have been
authorized to make the following statement on behalf
of the Council.
“The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations
and recalls its primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
The Security Council considers post-conflict
peacebuilding closely linked to its primary
responsibilities.

25

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

“The Security Council recognizes that intraState conflicts and States emerging from conflict
are among the most complex challenges facing
the international community and that responding
to these challenges in most instances requires a
coherent and integrated mix of peacebuilding and
peacekeeping activities, including political,
military, civilian, humanitarian and development
activities.
“The Security Council acknowledges that
serious attention to the longer-term process of
peacebuilding in all its multiple dimensions is
critically important and that adequate support for
peacebuilding activities can help to prevent
countries from relapsing into conflict.
“The Security Council underlines that
priorities in the post-conflict environment should
include, where appropriate: protection of
civilians;
disarmament,
demobilization,
repatriation, reintegration and rehabilitation of
former combatants; security sector and economic
and social reform; the end of impunity;
establishment and re-establishment of the
institutions of government, the rule of law and
transitional justice, respect for human rights; and
economic revitalization.
“The Security Council recognizes the key
role played by the United Nations, including the
United Nations funds, programmes and
specialized agencies, in peacebuilding alongside
the international financial institutions, in
particular the World Bank, bilateral donors and
troop contributors. It also acknowledges the role
the private sector can play in countries emerging
from conflict. The Security Council underlines
that a successful outcome of post-conflict
peacebuilding activities depends on the sustained
commitment of all relevant actors to the process,
through the involvement of these actors and the
coordination of their activities in all phases from
planning through implementation. In this regard,
the Council also stresses the importance of
pursuing coherent policies and resource
allocation between these United Nations entities,
taking into account their respective mandates.
The Council recalls the report of 21 August 2000
by the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations
(A/55/305) and the recommendations therein, and
welcomes the progress made since the publication
of the report, not least as regards planning of
peacekeeping operations.

26

“The Security Council underlines that for
countries emerging from conflict significant
international assistance for economic and social
rehabilitation and reconstruction is indispensable.
In this regard the Security Council acknowledges
the role that the Economic and Social Council
plays, including in sustainable development, and
reiterates its willingness to improve cooperation
with United Nations bodies and organs directly
concerned with peacebuilding.
“The Security Council underlines the
importance of national ownership of the
transition process from the end of a conflict to the
attainment of lasting peace and sustainable
development and the need for the international
community to support nationally owned
peacebuilding priorities. The Security Council
recognizes the positive role played by local
stakeholders and encourages dialogue between
the United Nations and relevant national actors.
The Council encourages capacity-building in
order to respond to the country-specific
circumstances of each conflict situation. One goal
of this capacity-building — and of peacebuilding
generally — should be to promote the
establishment
of
self-supporting
national
authorities and thus the evolution of international
assistance from peace support to longer-term
development.
“The Security Council recognizes the
crucial role of regional and subregional
organizations in post-conflict peacebuilding and
their involvement at the earliest possible stage.
The Security Council realizes that a clear
regional perspective is necessary, as most
conflicts have interlocking political, security,
humanitarian and economic dynamics across
borders. The Council underscores in this respect
the need for enhanced cooperation and, where
appropriate, coordination between United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations in
peacebuilding, based on a more integrated
approach and with the aim of maximizing use of
available resources and capabilities.
“The Security Council stresses the
importance of a comprehensive international and
regional
approach
to
disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants that is not limited to the political and
security aspects, but also addresses its social and

S/PV.5187 (Resumption 1)

economic aspects, including special needs of
child soldiers and women.
“The Security Council stresses the special
needs of Africa in post-conflict situations and
encourages the international community to pay
particular attention to those needs. It welcomes
the ever-closer partnership between the African
Union, the African subregional organizations and
the United Nations in the area of peacemaking
and peacekeeping and stresses the importance of
extending this partnership to peacebuilding
efforts.
“The Security Council underscores the
importance of cooperation between United
Nations peacekeeping operations and the United
Nations funds, programmes and specialized
agencies. The Security Council stresses the
importance of ensuring that planning and
implementation of United Nations humanitarian,
peacekeeping, political and developmental
activities at country level are well coordinated
system-wide, including through the development
of shared strategic objectives. The Security
Council stresses that the United Nations should
function as one integrated entity at country level
under effective overall leadership in post-conflict
peacebuilding.
“The Security Council stresses the need to
ensure adequate and timely financing for
peacebuilding priorities at all stages of the peace
process, and stresses the need for sustained
financial investment in peacebuilding over the
medium to longer-term period of recovery. It
recognizes the importance of rapid initiation of
peacebuilding activities to meet immediate needs
and encourages the building of capabilities that
can be incorporated rapidly.

“The Security Council welcomes the
submission of the report of 21 March 2005 by the
Secretary-General ‘In larger freedom: towards
development, security and human rights for all’
(A/59/2005) and of the report by the High-Level
Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change ‘A
more secure world: our shared responsibility’.
The Security Council acknowledges institutional
gaps, identified in the reports, in the United
Nations institutional machinery with respect to
effectively, coherently, and comprehensively
helping countries with transition from conflict to
lasting peace and sustainable development.
“The Security Council takes note with
interest of the important proposal by the
Secretary-General to establish a Peacebuilding
Commission and shares the objective of
improving United Nations capacity to coordinate
with donors and troop contributors and to
perform peacebuilding activities, in particular
from the start of peacekeeping operations through
stabilization, reconstruction and development.
The Security Council recognizes the important
role that this body could play to bridge the gap
between maintenance of international peace and
security and the work of humanitarian and
economic development assistance.”
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2005/20.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

27
