UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

-YEA&

UN Lk5RARY

1852nd

FE8 2 9 1984

MEETING:

2 NOVEMBER

1975

us\l/sA

aLbEcfi,m

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/ 1852) .....................................

Expression of thanks to the retiring President .......
Adoption of the agenda .................................

..........

1
...........
...............

1
1

The situation concerning Western Sahara:
(a) Report by the Secretary-General in pursuance of Security Council resolution 377 (1975) relating to the situation concerning Western Sahara (S/l 1863);
(b) Letter dated 1 November 1975 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the
Permanent Mission of Spain to the United Nations addressed to the
President-of the Security Council (S/l 1864) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1852

NOTE
Symbols-of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
_, ->r.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Ofyiciul Records of the Security Council. The date
‘of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.

’

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

’
_
;
:;
.t
/

‘

-”

“.
J

I
2

1852nd MEETING
Held in New York on Sunday, 2 November 1975, at 10.30 a.m.
it was during the October presidency of Mr. Rydbeck,
and that the Council will be able to fulfil its responsibilities and carry out the tasks imposed upon it under
the Charter.

President: Mr. Yakov A. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, China, Costa
Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania,
Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.
Provisional
Adoption

2.

The situation concerning Western Sahara:
(a) Report by the Secretary-General
in pursuance
of Security Council resolution
377 (1975)
relating to the situation concerning Western
Sahara (S/l 1863);
(6) Letter dated 1 November 1975 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Spain to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/11864)

The situation concerning Western Sahara:
(a) Report by the Secretary-General
in pursuance of
Security Council resolution 377 (1975) relating to
the situation concerning Western Sahara (S/11863);
(b) Letter dated 1 November 1975 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Spain
to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/11864)

of the agenda

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
In accordance with the decisions taken by the
Security Council [1849th and 1850th meetings],
I
propose now, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives
of Spain, Morocco and
Algeria to participate, without the right to vote, in the
Council’s consideration
of the situation concerning
Western Sahara.

was called to order at II a.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

agenda (SlAgendall852)

1.

The meeting

Adoption

President

At the invitation of the President,
(Spain),
Mr. SIadui
(Morocco).
(Algeria) took seats at the Council

1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
Before we proceed to the discussion of the substance
of the question on the provisional agenda of today’s
meeting of the Security Council, I should like to pay
a tribute to my predecessor as President of the
Council, Mr. Rydbeck, for his tireless efforts and for
the magnificent
diplomatic
mastery with which he
conducted
the work of the Council
during his
presidency in the month of October. His duties were
made arduous by the extremely complex and responsible task of guiding the activities of the Council in the
solution of the thorny problem of the liquidation
of
the colonial order in Western Sahara.

Mr, Arias Salnado
and Mr. R-ahal
table.

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian):
As members of the Security Council may recall, on
22 October 1975 [1850th meeting],
the Council,
acting in accordance with Article 34 of the Charter,
adopted resolution 377 (1975), concerning the situation
in Western Sahara, by which the Secretary-General
was requested to enter into immediate consultations
with the parties concerned and interested and to
report to the Council as soon as possible on the results
of his consultations
in order to enable the Council
to adopt the appropriate measures to deal with the
current situation concerning Western Sahara.

2. I am convinced that all members of the Security
Council will agree that Mr. Rydbeck made great
efforts in the search for a just solution to this problem
in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of
the United Nations and the decisions of the General
Assembly.
I hope that the co-operation
of the
members of the Security Council with the President
for November will be just as effective and fruitful as

5. Pursuant to that request of the Security Council,
the Secretary-General
efficiently
and effectively
fulfilled the mission entrusted to him. In the shortest
possible time he conducted consultations
with the
heads of State and Government
and Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the four countries interested
and concerned-Morocco,
Mauritania,
Algeria and
1

Spain-as

detailed in his report submitted to the

Council relating to the situation
Sahara [S/ 1186.31.

concerning

Western

6. I should like to draw the attention of members of
the Security Council to paragraph 20 of that report,
in which stress is laid on the fact that “the situation
in the area remains grave-,
and therefore ?he
Secretary-General
considers
it “of the greatest
importance that any action be avoided which might
further escalate the tension*‘. It is also necessary to
draw the attention of members of the Council to the
fact that in the agenda adopted at the present meeting
there is also reference to a letter dated 1 November
1975 from the Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Spain to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Council [.S/11864].
7. Yesterday, having considered the report of the
Secretary-General
on the results of his consultations
with the parties interested
and concerned,
the
members of the Security Council conducted intensive
consultations
in which the Secretary-General
also
participated.
As a result of those consultations,
a
draft resolution [S/11865] was prepared and submitted
for consideration
at this meeting of the Council.
Pursuant to the agreement of the members of the
Council, and in keeping with past practice in the
conduct of Council meetings, I propose to members
the following procedure for the conduct of our work.
8. We shall first take a decision on draft resolution
S/l 1865. We shall then have a discussion in which the
Secretary-General
will be the first speaker. After that,
the interested and concerned parties, together with the
members of the Security Council, will be able to
give their views on’the substance of the item on the
agenda, as well as on the draft resolution on which
we will have to take a decision immediately.
As there
are no objections, I shall take it that the conduct of
business for the Council which I have proposed is
adopted. As I already informed the Security Council,
this very night, on 2 November,
at the consultative
meeting of the Council, draft resolution S/11865 was
prepared. At that consultative
meeting, agreement
was also reached to the effect that the President of the
Council would officially submit that draft resolution at
today’s meeting, and this is what I am doing.
9. Draft resolution S/l1865 was agreed upon on the
basis of the principle of consensus. This very morning
the members of the Security Council expressed the
wish that the draft resolution also be adopted by
consensus. If there is no objection, I shall take it that
the Council wishes to adopt draft resolution S/11865
by consensus.
The druft resolution

HWS adopied.

10. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
I now call on the Secretary-General.

’
from

Russian):

11. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Permit me to
make just a few remarks. The report [S/f 18631 on the
results of my consultations, on the basis of the mandate
entrusted to me by the Security Council in resolution 377 (1975), is before the Council. In that report I
have underlined the urgency of the situation and stated
that the situation in the area remains grave. Yesterday,
in tkg course of infarmal consultations of the members
of the Council, I had the opportunity
to inform the
Council of various aspects of the situation which had
not been mentioned in detail in my report. The members of the Council were thus in a position fully to
assess the situation.
12. The resolution which hasjust been adopted by the
Council urges all the parties concerned and interested
to avoid any unilateral or other action which might
further escalate the tension in the area. It further
requests me to continue and intensify my consultations with the parties. I wish to assure the Council
that I shall continue to do my best to contribute
towards a solution of this problem.
13. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
I call on the representative of Spain.
14.

Mr. ARIAS

from

Spanish):

from

Russian):

SALGADO
(Spain) (interpretation
In appearing once again before the
Security Council to continue consideration
of the
situation in Western Sahara, the Spanish delegation
would first like to thank the outgoing President,
Mr. Rydbeck of Sweden, for the effort and skill
deployed in consultations
with regard to this item
during his presidency, which resulted in the adoption
of resolution 377 (1975).

15. At the same time, I should like to express our
confidence, which has already become a cei-tainty,
that under the expert guidance of Mr. Malik ‘of the
Soviet Union, demonstrated
within the Council on
numerous occasions, we shall be able rapidly to find
a peaceful solution to the grave crisis existing , now in
Western Sahara.
16. In the statement which was made to the Security
Council by the representative of Spain, Mr. de Pin&,
on 22 October, he said that resolution 377 (1975)
and the steps which the Secretary-General
was‘ to take
in accordance with the mandate entrusted to him were
primarily
and fundamentally
aimed at restoring the
normal conditions prevailing in the area prior to the
announcement
made by the King of Morocco’that
a
march upon Western Sahara would begin. The representative of Spain added:
“If we do not manage to dissipate tension, the
consequences of the situation can in no way be
blamed on the administering
Power. It will then be
necessary for the Council to assume the functions
which States Members of the United Nations have
entrusted to it under the Charter.” [185&h meeting,
paw.

114.1

17. Unfortunately,
this fear has fully materialized.
The Government of Morocco insists on continuing the
planned march on the Sahara, refusing so far to heed
the appeal made by the Security Council in resolution 377 (1975) to exercise restraint and moderation
while the consultations
entrusted to the SecretaryGeneral are conducted. The draft resolution adopted a
few moments ago, confirms the reality which Spain
has been denouncing since the very outset as the
principal cause for the tension in the zone, when it
reiterates, in paragraph 1, that no unilateral action
should be taken in the matter. At the Security Council
meetings held on 20 October, representative of Spain
set forth the position of the Spanish Government with
regard to the march on the Sahara as follows:

the Council’s 1849th meeting held on 20 October, the
Spanish position, in so far as procedure is concerned,
was that there should be a distinction drawn between
the competence
of the Security Council and the
General Assembly on this question. The Security
Council, in accordance with the powers and functions
entrusted to it by the Charter, bears the primary
responsibility
for the maintenance
of international
peace and security. Taking into account the fact that
the situation in Western Sahara, as a result of the
decision of the Government of Morocco to invade the
Territory,
jeopardizes
the maintenance
of international peace and security, there is nothing which
could be more in line with the authority of the Council
than to take the necessary measures to dispose of the
causes of this situation. Such action by the Council,
in the view of the Spanish delegation, would in no
way impinge upon the authority
of the General
Assembly to take the necessary measures to accelerate
decolonization
of the Territory as provided in resolution 3292 (XXIX).

“The march on the Sahara announced by the
King of Morocco
constitutes
an act of force,
prepared and carried out by Moroccan subjects and
authorities
in order to jeopardize
the territorial
integrity of the Sahara and to violate an internationally recognized border. To carry out such a
march as it has been conceived would constitute an
act which is internationally
unlawful, runs counter
to the principles and purposes of the Charter, and
is in contradiction to the resolutions of the Genreal
Assembly on the decolonization
of the Sahara.”
[1849th meeting, para. 6.1

22. Therefore, it is not a question of denying any
relationship that may exist between the grave situation
created by the decision of the Government of Morocco
and the substantive problem of the peaceful decolonization of the Territory but, rather, of specifying
right now what might be the sphere of action, in
accordance with the Charter, of the organs of the
United Nations that are now dealing with this problem.
In the view of the Spanish delegation,
given the
complexity of the situation, no one could object to the
Security Council,
the Secretary-General
and the
General Assembly acting concurrently, to find, within
the framework of the United Nations, a peaceful
solution for the rapid decolonization
of the Sahara.

18. This policy of the Government
of Morocco,
pursued outside the United Nations,
continues to
be the crucial question which must be settled without
delay because it constitutes an unacceptable challenge
to international
legality with regard to decolonization
and is an obvious cause for international
friction,
which has already become a threat to international
peace and security.

23. In conclusion, my delegation believes that the
Spanish position can be summed up in the following
points. First, halting the march on the Sahara
announced by the Government of Morocco is a sine
qua lt~n for finding any peaceful solution for the
problem of decolonizing the Sahara; secondly, in the
present situation, no peaceful solution of the problem
of decolonizing the Sahara can be conceived outside
the framework of the United Nations or in contradiction of the relevant
resolutions
of the General
Assembly; the basic foundation of which is the right
of the people of the Sahara to self-determination;
thirdly, in compliance
with Council resolution 377
(1975), contacts and conversations
with Morocco,
Mauritania and Algeria were held at Madrid in order
to find a peaceful solution to the international
friction
created by the planned invasion of the Sahara by the
Government
of Morocco. These conversations have
not achieved their aim; fourthly, in view of the
complexity of the problem and the grave situation in
the area, as can be seen from the report submitted
to the Security Council by the Secretary-General
[.S/11863], it seems necessary, in order to achieve
rapid and urgent decolonization
of the Sahara along
the lines just stated, that the Council should ensure

19. Therefore, it is from every standpoint imperative
for the Council to make it understood,
through
appropriate action in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations, that this attitude of the Government of Morocco cannot be accepted as a basis for a
peaceful settlement of the problem. This being so,
the role which the Secretary-General
has been called
upon to play in Council resolution 377 (1975) is of
fundamental
importance.
This role has now been
strengthened by the resolution just adopted.
20. Thus my delegation
would like publicly
to
express, on behalf of the Spanish Government,
its
thanks to the Secretary-General
for his efforts to
promote a peaceful solution to the decolonization
of
Western Sahara, and we should like to reiterate to
him the full support of the Spanish Government
in
any initiative
which would contribute to achieving
this aim within the United Nations.
21. There is one aspect which, I believe, should be
cleared up once and for all so that we may dispel
any confusion that may exist in regard to the Spanish
position on the decolonization
of Western Sahara. At
3

that the march announced for 4 November
by the
.Government
of. Morocco. be halted ,‘and ,that the
Secretary-General
should continue consultations with
the parties concerned and interested asindicated
in
the conclusion of his report and approved in the new
resolutionr, and that the General ‘AssemblyQhat.
is,
.the Fourth Committee-should
accelerate its consideration of, the substantive problem so that a final and
urgent decision may be reached with regards to the
., decolonizatiofi
of Western Sahara in *<the. light of
the report’of the United Nations Visiting‘Mission
to
Western *Sahara* and the advisory ,opinion of the
‘:
International
Court of Justice.3
,
(.. ,/’ ,‘. /

’ progressive., and. accelerated’*&terioration
of the
.$.,iituation:in
the.area, making.it;impossible
to find any
,..: peaceful solution to the substantive problem: ‘the
. . decolonieation .of the Sahara.. :?f ;r:g
.,-.*‘I I7.Y
’ !I+,.
,‘I
.,28, In that context and in .view, ,of the foregoing
that it is of the
I considerations., my delegation,be&ves
*’ utmost importance that the Go,yerqment of Morocco
.,:acc,ede to the Security Courtcil,‘.s- request, in para‘. graph : 1 .qf. the-.fesolution,
that ,,i,t suspend the march
on the Sahara. Since that march is the basic cause
of the present tension in the area; its suspension
would necessarily have the effect,,of establishing an
.atmosphere, of, understanding and dialogue among all
’ .the parties concerned
and interested, as well as a
24. ’ Should the Government
of Morocco,
despite
actions to be
‘what has ,been said and desnite the new resolution.
‘1. solid basis.so,that the consultations:and
undertaken,now.sby
the Secretary-General
in accordnot halt the march and attempt to violate the border
ance
with
,,the.
new
mandate
,$I
the
resolution
just
of Western Sahara, an extremely-grave
situation will
adopted
may
.achieve
the
results,.that
I
am
sure
we
all
be created in the Territory ,because of the .reactions
.desire.
.,)’
s
j
,.iTi.’
that will inevitably occur. Therefore, should the new
resolution also be unable to dispel the threat already
29. Spain,.’ ,as .the admini&&&
Power of the
denounced by the Spanish Government in the Council
Territory
and as the country responsible
for its
on 20 October and should events occur that make it
defence in ,accordance with the Charter, is prepared
impossible to find any formula for a peaceful solution
to continue to., offer the Secretary-General
all the
within the United Nations, the Spanish Government,
co-operation, and support necessary for him to disaware of its duties as the administering
Power
charge that mandate, and is”open to any solution
entrusted, in accordance with the Charter of the
which, within ‘the framework of the United Nations
United Nations, with the defence of the Territory,
and with due .respect for all,, the, relevant General
its territorial.integrity
and the protection of its populaAssembly resolutions
on the Territory,
would be
tion against any abuse, states that if the march
acceptable to all the parties concerned and interested.
announced by the King of Morocco is held it will
be repelled by every means available including the
30. Mr. LAI ?a-li (China) (trurisslation from Chinese):
use of armed force.
On 22 October, at the 1850th meeting of the Security
Council,
the Chinese delegation
expounded
its
25. At dawn today my delegation learned of draft
basic position on the question of Western Sahara. To
resolution
S/11865, prepared during the informal
put it briefly: we -have always firmly stood for the
consultations
held yesterday by members of the
termination
of Spanish colonial
domination
over
Security Council.
In the light of the SecretaryWestern Sahara. In the meantime, in view of certain
General’s report and of the progressive deterioration
complicated
factors and the actual circumstances
of the situation in the region, since no measure had
surrounding
the question of Western Sahara, we
yet been taken by the Government
of Morocco to
sincerely hope that the African countries concerned
suspend the march on Western Sahara, the Spanish
and interested, together with the people of Western
delegation,
on the instructions
of its Government,
Sahara, setting store by the over-all interests of unity
requested yesterday an extremely urgent meeting of the
against colonialism
and imperialism,
will find a
council to denounce the worsening of the situation
reasonable solution to the problem existing in that
and to make clear the Spanish Government’s position.
region through friendly consultation, so as to preserve
the unity and friendship among the countries and
26. It wished also to request the Council to assume
peoples concerned and interested and avoid further
its responsibilities
under the Charter to find a peaceful
aggravation and complication
of the matter. At the
solution to the grave situation in the region. The
same time, we consider it necessary ‘to maintain
Council, as a result of the informal consultations of
particular vigilance and to prevent the super-Powers
its members, decided to adopt draft resolution S/l 1865
from seizing the opportunity to meddle in the matter.
before my delegation had been given an opportunity
In the aforementioned
spirit, the Chinese delegation
to express its views in a public meeting.
supported draft resolution S/11865.
27. My delegation would have preferred to be heard
before the decision was taken, but I should like to
make it quite clear that the problem with which we
are now faced has reached such extremely -grave
proportions ’ that procedural
questions
lose any
importance if we achieve the basic aim of eliminating
the cause of this tension which is contributing to the

SALAZAR
(Costa Rica) (interpretation
My delegation would first like to
extend its congratulations
to the President of the
Security Council for the month that began yesterday.
The fact that on the very day that you assumed that
task, Mr. President, the Council began to work at
such an extraordinarily
active pace reveals your high

4

31.

Mr.’

from

Spanish):

(

-.
s

sense of responsibility
and confirms how great and
valuable is .your experience in matters falling. within
the purview of the presidency of the Council. In
paying a tribute to you for your great talents as a
diplomat, my delegation ,wishes to offer you our full
co-operation towards the successful conclusion of the
difficult task you’ have assumed this month. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity also to
pay a tribute to and congratulate your predecessor,
Mr. Rydbeck of Sweden, for the important work that
he did when heserved as President of the Council.
. ’
32. My delegation’has
studied with great care and
attention
the Secretary-General’s,
report [S/11863].
The important criteria set forth in that report have
made it possible ,for all the members of the Council
accurately to take the pulse of the .crisis. Both the
report and other elements communicated
orally by
the Secretary-General
to the members of the Council
during the informal consultations have been gratefully
received. I should like to express my congratulations
to the Secretary-General
for his enlightened action.

reference at this stage of consideration of the matter
has been avoided, it does not mean that the Council
should not take these elements into account if the
situation does not improve.
.‘
35. My delegation has repeatedly stated’that the true
cause of the events which led to the crisis was first
the announcement
by His Majesty King Hassan II
.of Morocco,
and then the actions following that
announcement
that a march by 350,000 persons
would be undertaken for the purpose of taking over
,the Territory
of Western Sahara. Spain, as the
administering Power, requested an emergency meeting
of the Security Council, held on 22 October, at which
the Council adopted resolution 377 (1975), the fimdamental aspect of which was the .request to the.
Secretary-General
to undertake consultations
with
the parties interested
and concerned.
Since that
Council meeting, my -delegation has insisted that we
should not fail to indicate the true cause of the
problem as clearly as possible and, to achieve that
aim, submitted
its own draft resolution
[S/1/853/
Rev.f], which clearly mentioned the real cause of
the crisis threatening peace and security in the region.
In order to reconcile
that position
with other
views, the Council preferred to adopt a resolution
which would first make it possible to approach the
parties through the Secretary-General,
so that they
would be able by means of negotiation
to resolve
the crisis situation they were confronted with. The
consultations
and negotiations in implementation
of
the mandate given to him by resolution 377 (1975)
were carried out by the Secretary-General
with great
intelligence and tact, and he reported on them to the
Security Council [S/f 18631.

33. With regard to the item before us, my delegation
would like to express the, following
views. The
favourable opinion of my delegation with regard to the
resolution just adopted stems ‘fundamentally
from its
desire to join in the consensus reached in the Security
Council as a result of very delicate and lengthy
consultations in the informal meetings which went on
into the’ early hours of the morning. My delegation
believes that, with regard to such a sensitive item
which raises such conflicting opinions, it would be
unrealistic to believe that the theses one might have
wished to see prevail could be stated fully in the
resolution. The consensus was reached in. difficult
circumstances, so keyimportance
should be attributed
to the fact that the Council responded with the speed
and urgencythat the situation demanded:Perhaps‘more
important than the resolution itself is the fact that the
Council was able .to take rapid ,and timely’ action.
Its. ‘refusal to entertain any proposal to postpone
consideration
of such an extremely serious situation
is the clearest demonstration
of the Council’s concern
and of the fact that. it considers seriously its rcsponsibilities as the body entrusted with the maintenance
of international
peace and security.

36. At that new stage of our examination
of the
problem, my delegation once again emphasized that a
new resolution should not avoid explicit reference
to the Government of Morocco and the actions being
undertaken by it; which continued to constitute the
cause of friction. Once again the Security Council
preferred to avoid a specific reference to that Government and to the cause of the crisis; although the
resolutions adopted thus for by the Security Council
have avoided calling things by their proper names, no
one should be misled into thinking that this means the
Council is unaware of the real cause of the ‘crisis.
Nor can it be gainsaid that the latest resolution’
was adopted because of other developments of which
the Council had knowledge.

34. ,Not wishing to disturb the consensus finally
reached by the members of the Security Council and
because of the importance my delegation attaches to
the prompt action of the Council when it finds itself
faced with a potentially explosive situation demanding
its urgent attention, my delegation did not insist on
the fact that the resolution should have contained
other elements which would have defined and tackled
more directly the crisis situation produced in Western
Sahara. My delegation’s view was clearly expressed
in the informal consultations
and we believe that a
brief reference to the elements which we feel it would
have been useful to take into account .will not be
superfluous. We continue to believe that if such a

37. It should be clearly stated that the further action
taken by the Security Council is based on the report
of the Secretary-General
and is in accordance with
paragraph 1 of resolution 377 (1975) as action to be
taken by the Council. My delegation would like to
state that clearly, because it should not be mistakenly
thought that this new action by the Council-and
this is, of course, an assertion that my Government is
making in keeping with its own interpretation
of
matters-was
induced by the announcement
by the
5

.,

r

--

area of Western Sahara. In view of that situation,
the Council’s ‘action, today is appropiiate and timely.
T‘;
42. My delegation
examinedi‘the
report of the
Secretary-General
on the results of -his consultations
pursuant to Security Council resolution 377 (1975) on
the situation in Western Sahara,.That report is brief,
but comprehensive.
It contains’ extremely
valuable
first-hand information
which has enabled the Council
to consider what further appropriate
measures are
deemed necessary to deal with the present situation
in the area. We are highly appreciative of the SecretaryGeneral’s achievement
in implementing
the Council
resolution within such a short time. His report on his
consultations
with the four Governments
brought
home to the Council very clearly the positions of
those Governments
on the question of Western
Sahara. Thus, as the result of his visit, the Council
has obtained the useful information
on the basis of
which the Council has been able to take this action.

Government of Spain that it was ready to defend the
integrity of” Western Sahara by all means within its
power, including the use of its armed forces.
38.” My delegation, to tell the truth, was not surprised
by the Spanish announcement,
because of the responsibilities which, under the mandate of. the United
Nations, were entrusted to it ,wm regarr.to Western
Sahara. Spain, or any other administering
Power of a
.Territory which is in the process of decoloniiation
under a mandate of the General Assembly, does bear
ineluctable and clear duties, one of the most important
of which is-and
no one should be surprised at
this-protection
of the inviolability
of the Territory.
I must ask: is there no explicit threat of violation
of the territorial integrity of Western Sahara? So it was
in keeping with the most traditional norms of responsibility incumbent upon an administering
Power that
Spain stated its decision to maintain and ensure and
safeguard the territorial integrity of Western Sahara.
For anyone who might, out of error or ill-intention,
wish to look at this problem from any other angle
I think what I have said is sufficient.

43. My delegation wishes to state that its satisfaction
with the Secretary-General’s
mission derives not only
from the manner in which he expressed the Council’s
concern over the situation but also from his constructive approach and activities in expediting all
possible measures to seek an acceptable settlement
of the explosive situation. As the Secretary-General
has poir;ted out in paragraphs ‘18 and 19 of the report,
his consultations
with the parties concerned and
interested are continuing in the hope that all of them
will agree eventually
to an acceptable
solution.
Taking this into account, my delegation fully supported
the resolution just adopted, in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General
to continue and to
intensify his consultations with those Governments.

39. My delegation also cannot but feel that it is a
very positive factor that, within the cont_ext of the
resolution just adopted, specifically in two of the
preambular
paragraphs,
there is a clear and
unambiguous
reference to the continuity
of the
decolonization
process, which has been carried out in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 3292
(XXIX), a reference which can have no other meaning
than the one correctly attributed to it-that the Council
is merely considering the crisis which has occurred by
reason of the unilateral action of a nation, and that
the process of decolonization
must continue and
proceed at the rate decided upon by the Assembly.
Any thesis intended to link the substance of the
problem of Western Sahara, one we believe should
end with self-determination,
with the present crisis,
which we hope is temporary,
is a mistaken and
improper interpretation
of the resolution just adopted.

44. Despite the Secretary-General’s
visit to the
concerning
Western Sahara
region, the situation
remains grave. We continue to be concerned over a
situation
which might increase the tension. The
Council in its resolution 377 (1975) appealed to the
parties concerned and interested to exercise restraint
and moderation
and to enable the mission of the
Secretary-General
to be undertaken under satisfactory
conditions. It is a source of satisfaction to my delegation that those Governments
have given their full
co-operation to the Secretary-General
in the performance of the mission entrusted to him by the Council.
I earnestly hope that similar co-operation
will continue to be extended to him.

40. Mr. SAITO (Japan): The delegation of Japan
wishes first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your accession to the presidency of the Council
for the month of November. The Council has already
greatly benefited
from your able guidance,
as
demonstrated
during the informal consultations held
yesterday. 1 am confident
that the Council will
discharge its responsibility
in a most effective and
constructive
manner under your presidency.
My
delegation wishes also to take this opportunity to pay
its tribute to your predecessor, Mr. Rydbeck of
Sweden, for his outstanding and fruitful services to
the Council in October.

45. In conclusion, in view of the situation prevailing
in the area, my delegation sincerely hopes that all the
parties will heed resolution 377 (1975) and the resolution just adopted by exercising self-restraint and
refraining from any unilateral or other actions which
might aggravate the situation in the area pending the
achievement
of a solution acceptable to all the
parties.

41. My delegation joined in the Council’s adoption
by consensus of draft resolution S/11865. It is a great
satisfaction to my delegation that the Council has
once again fulfilled its responsibilities
promptly and
unanimously
in
order
to
meet
the
grave
situation
in the
\
6

46. Mr. BENNETT
(United
States of America):
Mr. President, let me express appreciation
for the
quick way in which’ you assumed the duties of the
presidency of the Council and moved rapidly in this
moment of crisis. The Council will have reason to
call on your long,experience
during the month, which
promises to be,a very busy one in this body. Let me
also express the appreciation
of my Government
for the distinguished,‘way
in which your predecessor,
Mr. Rydbeck of Sweden, conducted’ the affairs of
the Council during the previous month.

pay heed to the Council’s call to them to avoid any
unilateral or other action which might further increase
tension in the area. That is the immediate need.
51. The next step is for the Secretary-General
to
push ahead with urgency the consultations which ‘he
has already begun with all the parties concerned and
interested to find a peaceful and equitable solution.
In this connexion, I should like to congratulate the
Secretary-General
on the way in which he’has so far
performedthe
task which we entrusted to him in resolution 377 (1975) of 22 October and for the admirable
report which he has presented to us. Although it
is clear that’ differences remain, his report demonstrates the willingness of all parties to make use of
his good offices to find a solution to the problem.
We believe that he has made an excellent start and
that it is his continuing efforts which offer the best
hope of achieving a peaceful and equitable outcome,
acceptable to all.

47. On the question at issue, I should like to state our
admiration
for the ;manner in which the SecretaryGeneral has approached this very serious problem and
for the energy and dedication with which he has sought
a common accord. My Government
supports fully
the terms of the resolution that we have just adopted
by consensus and we encourage the Secretary-General
to continue his vigorous efforts with the parties
concerned and interested. We hope a solution can be
found that recognizes the views of the parties in
accordance with all the General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions that have a bearing on the means
by which a dependent area achieves the goal of selfdetermination.

52.

Mr.

OYONO

Republic of Cameroon)
Mr. President, may I be
allowed first of all to say how pleased I am to associate
myself with my colleagues in congratulating
you on
your accession to the presidency of the Security
Council for November. I am personally satisfied, first
of all because you are an eminent and respected
diplomat and it is always rewarding to work with
you; secondly because my delegation
appreciates
your personal contribution
as well as that of your
delegation to the promotion
and implementation
of
the ideals of peace, justice and progress which inspire
the Organization,
and finally because my country
enjoys excellent co-operative relations with the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics. I should like to take
this opportunity also to pay a tribute and express my
gratitude to your predecessor, Mr. Rydbeck, for the
competence,
authority
and ability with which he
conducted the work of the Council during October.
(interpretation

48. We also call on all the parties involved to avoid
any action that could turn this important area of the
world into a scene of confrontation and possible human
tragedy. The ties that link the peoples of the region
should make all equally aware of the necessity of
finding a peaceful and mutually acceptable solution.
49. Mr. MURRAY (United Kingdom): Mr. President,
may I begin by complimenting
you on behalf of my
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council, on your energy and skill in dealing
with the problems which we have faced over the
past two days and on leading us to the consensus
which we have just adopted. I hope that there will be
no misunderstanding
when I say that we trust that the
remaining 28 days of your presidency will be less
arduous than the first two. Nevertheless,
we have
no doubt that you have responded correctly to the
urgency of the situation and that your own personal
contribution
has been decisive
in bringing us the
results which we have jointly achieved. I should like
also to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Rydbeck
of Sweden, on the wisdom and skill with which
he guided our earlier discussions on this question and
which he showed in dealing with the other important
matters that came before the Council during October.

(United

from French):

53. The delegation
of the United
Republic
of
Cameroon was happy to form part of the consensus
in favour of draft resolution S/11865 concerning the
situation at present prevailing in Western Sahara. My
delegation was all the more prepared to do so in that it
is deeply convinced, in the light of the excellent
report of the Secretary-General,
which he was good
enough to complement
orally, that the situation is
grave. Tension keeps mounting in the region and could
at any time lead to military confrontation,
endangering
international
peace and security, as some delegations
have just stressed. It is incumbent on the Security
Council to assume its specific responsibilities
in this
respect-as
it has just done-and
to act with speed
and decision by taking preventive measures in order
to avoid the worst.

50. There is no doubt that, in spite of the efforts
made earlier in the Council to reduce tension in the
area, the situation remains grave. The information
which you and the Secretary-General
placed before
us yesterday evening gives additional
cause for
concern. We have no doubt, therefore, that it was right
for the Council to act decisively and swiftly. We
hope that all the parties concerned and interested will

54. Once again we launch a solemn appeal to all
the parties concerned and interested to abstain from
any unilateral or other action which could aggravate
the tension in that part of Africa and jeopardize intema7

._

tional peace and security. We ask these parties to
give their full assistance to the Secretary-General
in
the accomplishment
of the difficult and delicate task
with which the Council had entrusted him and to
continue the consultations
that have been taking
place since the adoption by the Council of resolution 377 (1975).
55. Finally, I should like once again to express my
gratitude to the Secretary-General
and to his associates
for the efforts which they ceaselessly deploy to
safeguard international
peace and security and, as
regards particularly this matter of Western Sahara, for
the attainment
of a just solution, acceptable to all
parties.
56. Mr. VINCI’(Italy):
In addressing myself to you,
Mr. President, I should like to start by saying that
it appears to us tha+ we are no less lucky this month
than we were in October. You have taken over where
Mr. Rydbeck left off on- Western Sahara and acted
with the same energy, skill, foresight and mastery to
which you referred. It is thanks to you-as it was to
Mr. Rydbeck-and
to the capacity and organizational
aptitude of both yourself and the members of your
delegation that we have managed, in a relatively short
time compared with previous cases, to reach agreement on the resolution we have just adopted by
consensus.
57. At the same time, we must acknowledge that the
positive outcome of our intensive consultations
of
yesterday and this morning would not have been
possible without the report of the Secretary-General.
It is an admirable
report of a no less admirable
mission. Both excel in clarity and shortness. I wish
to express to the Secretary-General
and the members
of his staff our gratitude and admiration
for their
accomplishment.
The report of the Secretary-General
was the main factor of inspiration in our work, to the
point that much of the wording used in the resolution
just adopted was taken from that document. Naturally,
each of us sitting at this table can certainly take some
pride in having made some contribution,
varying in
degree, of course, to today’s decision, working as we
did under your leadership, Sir, in a remarkable spirit
of co-operation and harmony. However, in all fairness,
each of us will certainly recognize that the main
credit must go where it belongs, namely, to the
Secretary-General.
58. There is one point in the Secretary-General’s
report which my delegation considers most encouraging. I refer to the fact that, in spite of the still
existing differences between the parties concerned
and interested, they were unanimous in acknowledging
the role that the United Nations must play in the
peaceful solution of this problem. We noted from the
first statement we heard this morning that, notwithstanding conflicting
views and positions which are
quite alarming and confirm the seriousness of the
situation, that unanimity
has, not broken down. Our

earnest hope is, therefore, that the Secretary-General
will be given and ensured enough scope and time by
all sides to bring to a successful conclusion his very
important and delicate task.
59. In the brief statement I made on 22 October
[185&h meeting],
I stressed the intricacies
and
complexities of a situation in which so many interests
and principles are involved-one
more reason, in
my view, to expect from the parties concerned and
interested enough understanding
and co-operation,
since without an improvement
of the present serious
conditions the chances of a peaceful solution would
diminish.
6t). Mr. TCHERNOUCHTCHENKO
(Byelorussian
Soviet
Socialist
Republic)
(interpretation
from
russian): Mr. President,
may our delegation
congratulate you on your accession to the high post of
President of the Security Council and express the
conviction that under your leadership the Council will
function efficiently, carrying out the responsibilities
entrusted to it under the Charter of the United Nations.
At the same time, we should like’to express our thanks
to your predecessor, the representative
of Sweden,
Mr. Rydbeck, who guided the work of the Council
with great skill and profound knowledge of his task
in the complex and crucial conditions which obtained
in October.
61. The delegation
of the Byelorussian
‘Soviet
Socialist Republic fully supported the draft resolution
on the situation concerning Western Sahara, and in
connexion with this decision of the Security Council
we should like to make the following remarks.
62. For the past 10 days the Security Council has
been considering for the second time the question of
the situation concerning Western Sahara, which clearly
indicates that there still remains a serious situation
in that area. In keeping with resolution 377.(1975),
the Secretary-General
has carried out his mission and
‘conducted consultations
with the parties concerned
and interested. Together with other members of the
Council, the delegation
of the Byelorussian
SSR
would like to express its thanks to the SecretaryGeneral for the efforts which he has deployed in the
interests of peace and the normalization
of the situation in, that .area, and for-the report which he has
submitted to the Security Council [S/11863].
63. In paragraph 20 of the report-and
this -has
already been stressed by other members of the
Council-it
‘is said that “the situation in the area
remains -grave”, and that it is “therefore
of the
greatest importance that any action be avoided which
might further escalate the tension”.
64. In these conditions,
the Security
Council
made the right decision .and took urgent and positive
adtion, which is reflected in the resolution which it
has just adopted. That resolution meets the important

objective of avoidjng.,,any unilateral or other action
which could lead to new tensions in.the area,

ducted, on this subject as well as on other no less
important matters, the work of the Council during
. r the month of October.

65. We should like & express the co&&on
that this.
70. The rapidity
and, efficacity with which the.
appeal of the Security Council will .not go unheeded
Secretary-General
carried out the mission which was
by the parties concerned and interested.. At the same
entrusted to him by the Council testifies ‘once again.
time our delegation would like to express the hope that
the important missionof the Secretary-General
and his , to his great personal authority, as well as to his devotion
consultations
with ;.the parties
concerned
and . to the cause of peace. We should like to express
interested, which will be continued and intensified in a; our thanks. to him. We are extremely pleased that in
so short a time and thanks to the.remarkable
report
accordance with ,the new resolution of’.the Council,
will be crowned, with success, and that,, the. Council : with which he provided us we have been able to get
a clear idea of the positions of the parties concerned.
will eventually have. the satisfaction .of seeing theI should also like to address the thanks of my delegaremoval of the tension in that area.
tion to the associates of the Secretary-General
who
,assisted him in his delicate mission.
66. At the same time, our delegation adheres to the
view that, at its present session, the General Assembly.
71. There is no question that the task of the Council
should pay the most serious attention .to the question.
has been greatly facilitated by the clarity of the report
of Western Sahara, which is already on its agenda.
of the Secretary-General.
As the representatives
of
Consideration
of .the ,decolonization
of this Territory
several countries have pointed out during the con-.
has obviously been~!protracted;
therefore measures
sultations, if the situation in the region under considmust be taken in order to implement the decolonization
eration remains grave, several positive elements, and
of Western Sahara and the establishment of peace and
therefore several elements of hope, have emerged.
security in the area. It is the duty of the United
It is indeed clear that none of the parties concerned
Nations to ensurethe implementation
of the provisions
and interested in the dispute with which we are
of General Assembly
resolution
1514 (XV), the
dealing rejects in advance the possible intervention of
Declaration
on the Granting
of Independence
to
the United Nations, and consultations are continuing.
Colonial
Countries and Peoples, one of the most
important documents of the United Nations, and of
72. It is on the basis of these considerations that the
other decisions of the General Assembly.
It is
Security Council was in a position to prepare the draft
necessary to ensure all the necessary conditions for
the people of Western Sahara to achieve its legal
resolution on which we have just voted. Unquestionably our consultations
have been lengthy and
right to self-determination.
relatively difficult,
but it is to the honour of the
Council that it managed to stay within the limits of
67. In conclusion, the delegation of the Byelorussian
what was acceptable to all the parties, to ,take into
SSR would like to stress once more the importance
account the complexity
of the problem. None the
and positive significance of the resolution just adopted
less, the situation in the region remains grave, and
by the Security Council and to express the conviction
that this decision of the Council will foster the
in these circumstances
the Council has a ‘heavy
responsibility.
We are all perfectly cognizant of this,
strengthening of peace and security.
and that is the reason for the appeal which, without
68. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretation
further ado, we address to all the parties concerned
and interested.
from Fcench): Mr. President, I should like at the
outset to address to you the congratulations
of the
73. Although the wording of the text adopted by the
French delegation on your accession to the presidency
of the Council. This is not a mere formality;
I am
Council today differs from that of resolution 377
(1975), the French delegation feels that the appeals to
speaking in all sincerity and in the genuine conviction
the parties forrestraint
and moderation are now more
that in less than 48 hours you have already made a
important than ever, for it is only thus that a worsening
significant contribution
to our work and to our efforts
to find a solution to a problem which very properly
of the situation can be avoided. As a Mediterranean
concerns the international
community.
You may rest
country having a kinship, through so many common
assured that the French delegation will give its full
interests, with the States of the region, France wishes
support to you for the duration of your mandate and
that peace might be maintained there and that consultations might be undertaken in order to achieve a
especially each time your important functions prompt
you to ask the Council to work towards a decrease
satisfactory solution to the problem which motivated
in tension and for the maintenance of peace.
the convening of the Council.
69. I shall not forget the valuable contribution which
your predecessor made to our work during an earlier
phase of the deliberations on the question which we
are discussing today. I extend to him the thanks of my
delegation for the remarkable way in which he con-

74. Mr. JACKSON
(Guyana): Although the Council
is meeting to consider a very grave situation-the
situation concerning Western Sahara-the
seriousness
and urgency of which is beyond doubt, I should like
none the less to begin my intervention
by congratu-

lating you, Mr. Malik, on your assumption of the
office of the presidency for the month 5of November. The fact that from the very first day of your
presidency you were called upon to superintend
discussions on this very delicate situation is not, I
hope, an omen of things to come during the remainder
of this month. Whatever problems the month of
November may have in store for n-s, however, I am
confident that ‘your many years of experience in
international
negotiations
and your well-known
diplomatic skills and talents will stand us all in good
stead. May I also, Mr. President, say a special word
of thanks to your predecessor, the representative
of
Sweden, Mr. Rydbeck. He conducted the affairs of
the Council with characteristic
skill, patience and
tact, right down to the last days of October, when we
began consideration of the serious situation concerning
Western Sahara. And it is to this situation that I now
turn.

which precisely and succinctly reflects the positions
of the parties concerned and interested, and contains
two most important observations-observations
which
appear in paragraphs 19 and 20.
:
78. My delegation notes that some of the parties
concerned and interested have viewed the circumstances relating-to the so-called “Green March” and
the decolonization
of Western Sahara as somehow
linked. While it may be true that one action may
have been conceived and promulgated with the desire
of influencing
decisions on the other issue, my
delegation firmly adheres to its previously
stated
and deeply held position that the two issues-that
is,
the decolonization
of Western Sahara, and action
likely to endanger peace and security in the area
through creation of faits accomplis-should
be kept
separate and distinct by the Council.
79. Thus, in the view of my delegation, the Security
Council quite correctly was pre-eminently
concerned
with the observations
contained in the SecretaryGeneral’s
report in paragraphs
19 and 20. The
resolution we have just adopted takes account of
those observations. The Secretary-General
has been
requested to continue and intensify his consultations
-in other words, to conclude his consultations
as
soon as possible. My delegation fully supports the
Secretary-General
in his efforts to deal with the
present grave situation. My delegation also hopes
that none of the parties concerned and interested
will approach these further contacts in a manner likely
to delay or, indeed, to frustrate the Secretary-General
in his efforts. The Council, however, as the resolution
indicates, remains ready to adopt further measures
that may be necessary.

75. The present gravity of the situation is almost
universally recognized, for there has been deterioration
since last we met. The very real danger of a serious
breach of peace and security in the area is now
revealed in bolder relief. Indeed, the seeds of armed
conflict which were earlier evident are now on the
verge of germination.
We are, I fear, almost at that
point in time when the momentum of events can take
an uncontrollable
turn.
76. When it adopted resolution 377 (1975) on 22 October, the Security Council made essentially
four
determinations:
-First,
it stated that it was acting under the provisions of Article 34 of the Charter of the United
Nations, which deals with the pacific settlement of
disputes;

80. Having regard to all the circumstances bearing
on the Council’s
consideration
of the question
properly before it, paragraph 1 of the resolution just
adopted is of paramount importance. The simplicity
and the nature of the language must not, in the view
of my delegation, be misinterpreted:
it is couched in
terms which are courteous and diplomatic,
but its
intent is clear. It goes beyond an appeal, and infers
the necessity for all the parties concerned and interested to live up, individually
and collectively, to their
obligations under the Charter in relation to the maintenance of international
peace and security.

-Secondly,
it recognized,
as specified in the
Charter, that it was the General Assembly which had
responsibility for dealing with the substantive aspects
of the question of Western Sahara;
-Thirdly,
it entrusted the Secretary-General
with
the task of entering into immediate consultations with
the parties concerned and interested, and enjoined
him to report to the Council as soon as possible in
order to enable the Council to adopt appropriate
measures to deal with the disturbing situation concerning Western Sahara;

81. It is the fervent hope of my delegation that in the
foregoing context no action, unilateral or otherwise,
will be taken by any party or parties to escalate
tension in the area. We expect the parties concerned
and interested to co-operate fully with the SecretaryGeneral and to refrain from adopting attitudes and
taking actions either likely to render his task more
difficult or which presume a capacity to pre-empt
action by the General Assembly.

-Finally,
the Council addressed an appeal to the
parties concerned and interested to exercise restraint
and moderation.
77. Pursuant to resolution 377(1975), the Security
Council received and considered the report of the
Secretary-General.
It is an admirable report, reflecting
the care, patience, dedication and skill of the SecretaryGeneral. We applaud him for his untiring efforts and
extend to him our profound appreciation for his report,

82. Mr. SALIM
(United
Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, I should like to begin my statement by
IO

i

joining my colleagues in extending our very profound
congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council. I honestly and sincerely believe that
the Council is privileged to have a personality of
your experience, eminence, talent and skill to preside
over our deliberations this month, which promises to
be quite an active month, to put it mildly.

ness-that
a halt be put to any action, unilateral or
otherwise, which might escalate tension in the area.
Regrettably, that appeal has not elicited the response
we desired and had a right to expect. And as we
express our confidence that the current decision of
the Council will be positively responded to by those
concerned in order to defuse tension and create
conditions of normalcy so that the people of Western
Sahara can exercise their right to self-determination
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514
(XV) and other relevant Assembly resolutions,
we
should like to stress again, if we must, that nothing,
absolutely nothing, should be done to tamper with
the legitimate rights of the people of the Territory
itself.

83. The fact ,that. through your leadership, which
was very clearly demonstrated in our proceedings in
the informal consultations,
the Security Council was
able this morning to adopt by consensus the draft
resolution submitted to it testifies to the talents and
experience that I alluded to earlier. It is my confidence and hope that, as we begin the deliberations
of the Council for the month of November,
you will
continue to provide the inspiring leadership and that
the Council will be in a position to take decisive
decisions with the maximum of agreement. I should
also like to pay a tribute to your predecessor, the
representative
of Sweden, not so much for having
left some leftovers for you to handle, Mr. President,
but for the excellent way that he guided our deliberations last month.

88. As the resolution clearly points out, the question
of Western Sahara is on the agenda of the General
Assembly at its thirtieth session. The Assembly has
before it the report of the Visiting Mission to the
Territory,*
the Mission to which I had occasion to
allude in my statement of 22 October, the Mission
which was led by the representative
of the Ivory
Coast, Mr. AkC, a Mission which was carried out
with maximum
seriousness and determination,
and
with the co-operation
of the parties concerned and
interested. The General Assembly also has the advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice,3 an
advisory opinion which was specifically
solicited
by the parties concerned and interested, and supported
by the Assembly, which, through its resolution 3292
(XXIX),
asked for that opinion. It is therefore only
logical that the General Assembly will in due course
pronounce its position on the processes of decolonization
of the Territory,
taking into account
both the Mission’s
report and the opinion of the
International
Court of Justice, but, above all, taking
into account the wishes of the people of Western
Sahara.

84. The Council is meeting against the background
of an escalating grave .situation in Western Sahara.
This gravity is clearly reflected in the report of the
Secretary-General.
Yet, quite clearly, the situation has
taken a turn for the worse since that report was
prepared and circulated. There is no doubt that unless
moderation
and restraint prevail, the developments
in the area could have the most tragic consequences.
85. When therefore my delegation associated itself
with the resolution which the Council has just adopted,
it did so with the clear knowledge that by that decision the Security Council had demonstrated its will to
avert a confrontation
in the area and to encourage a
peaceful solution of the decolonization
of Western
Sahara in conformity with the resolutions and decisions
of the United Nations.

89. I should like to make one last but no less important
pointbefore
concluding my statement. The resolution
which we have just adopted requests the SecretaryGeneral to continue and intensify his consultations.
This was both logical and opportune. When in resolution 377 (1975) we requested the Secretary-General
to enter into consultation with the parties concerned
and interested, my delegation had every confidence
that he would leave no stone unturned to find a solution which would defuse tension and create conditions
conducive to an eventual settlement of the problem.

86. We believe that the resolution leaves no room
for ambiguity
or misinterpretation.
The Council’s
will that the parties concerned and interested refrain
from taking any unilateral or other action is clearly
affirmed. In this connexion we wish to stress that the
fact that this position has been unanimously endorsed
by the Council eloquently demonstrates the Council’s
determination
that nothing be done to alter the status
of the Territory. My delegation wishes to underscore
this point. We appeal to all parties concerned and
interested to pay heed to this call by the Council.
We emphasize the fact that the United Nations cannot
and should not condone any attempts to create a
fait accompli.

90. The efforts exerted by the Secretary-General,
in
the hours and days after the adoption of the resolution, fully justified our confidence. We pay a tribute to
his commendable and untiring efforts. We express our
gratitude for the seriqus and profound report that he
submitted to us. Our gratitude is not only related to
his written report [S/11863], but also to his well
thought-out oral report to the Council last night when
we were having our informal consultations. We believe
that, given the co-operation of all the parties concerned

87. When the Security Council adopted resolution 377 (1975) it was certainly our hope that the appeal
it contained would be heeded. It was the Council’s
desire then, as it is now-perhaps
with greater firm11
‘

.

..

.

1._..

.

.,

. ,_

and interested, the Secretary-General’s
efforts will
bear positive ‘results in dealing with the present
grave situation. We therefore solemnly appeal to the
parties to extend fully such co-operation. .’

danger to peace and security in the area. Once again
the Security Council has entrusted .to, the SecretaryGe,neral the task of trying to. explor,e’ all avenues
towards an’ orderly solution of&thei,very
serious
problem. We owe our deepest grat$rde,for his untiring
efforts, conducted .with great skill and dedication, and
for his admirable, lucid and helpful report covering the
initial part of his m&ion.
We have .ihe fullest confidence in the Secretary-General’s
great ability to deal
with this crisis, a situation of the,utmost complexity
and delicacy: ,T,he Secretary-General:, has the unreserved support of the Swedish delegation, as I know
he has also of all other delegations.. . .;,

91. Mr. R’%DBECK
(Sweden): Mr. President,
I
should like first’ of all to extend to ‘you the’sincere
compliments
and congratulations
‘of the, delegation
of Sweden upon your as&.tmption of the. ‘office of
President of the Security Council. The. wise and
experienced leadership that we can expect’ throughout
this month has already been amply demonstrated
during our consultations yesterday and this morning.
I promise you the unreserved, co-operation ‘of the
Swedish delegation. I also wish to, thank you for the
very kind words which you addressed to’me. I wish
to thank also the other members who during their
turn to speak addressed kind words to the previous
President of the Council.

96, We appeal tdall parties concerned and interested
to give the Secretary-General their fullest co-operation
in every respect. This is a case”where the United
Nations has a specially crucial role to’ play. Our main
hope now lies with the effectiveness of United Nations
efforts to assist in defusing this, very dangerous
situation. The main thrust of the resolution which we
have just adopted is a call for an .intensitication
of
all efforts towards a peaceful solution, but it is a call
also for the realization
of fundamental
principles
governing decolonization
of dependent Territories.
Only a solution taking full account of the rights and
the wishes of the population of Western Sahara is in
keeping with those basic principles of the Charter.

92. Before proceeding
to speak briefly on the
substance of the matter before the Council, I wish
to avail myself of this opportunity
to thank, on
behalf of the Swedish delegation,
the outgoing
Secretary of the Security Council, Mr. Kurt Hemdl
for his many years of distinguished
service to the
Council. I personally had the experience last month of
observing how important his services are. I wish him
luck in his new important assignment.

97. Mr. EL HASSEN
(Mauritania)
(interpretatioh
fiorn French):
Mr. President, before briefly dealing
with the substance of the problem, I should like to
begin by discharging the pleasant duty of expressing
to you the congratulations
of my .delegation at your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. We are
convinced
that, with your competence
and your
qualities as an experienced diplomat, you will be able
to guide our work to a successful conclusion. I should
also like to express our thanks and gratitude to your
predecessor, Mr. Rydbeck, for the tact and courtesy
with which he guided our work last month.

93. My delegation joined in the consensus on -the
draft resolution just adopted. We would have preferred
a text containing
a more direct reference to the
immediate cause of the crisis situation, namely, the
proclaimed march into Western Sahara. In our view,
however, the urgency and gravity of the situation
made it imperative,
above all, that the Council act
swiftly and unanimously,
and we are pleased that
agreement could be reached and, in fact, the resolution
just adopted leaves no room for misunderstanding.
My delegation
urgently
appeals to the parties
concerned and interested to heed the consensus
decision of the Council and to avoid any unilateral
or other action which might further escalate tension
in the area.

98. The problem of the Sahara is a specific problem
which, in our view, cannot be considered in an
automatic
and programmed
way, as if it were a
matter of making a computer operate, Quite fortunately, that has never been the policy of the General
Assembly and that has never been the policy of the
Security
Council
when specifically
dealing with
problems of decolonization.

94. From reports reaching us last night and today,
the gravity of the situation in the area is in fact
continuously
increasing. Already in the SecretaryGeneral’s report of 31 October a very disturbing
picture was painted,
and the Secretary-General
underlines in his report the gravity of the situation in
words that, although measured, leave no room for
misunderstanding.
Other information has later become
available which reinforces the very serious concern
that we all must feel.

99. Indeed, the General Assembly, in its wisdom,.
has always taken into account the political circumstances and the characteristics
particular
to each
situation. I believe that the main credit of the Visiting
Mission to the Territory
was that it brought out
the specificity of the problem of the Sahara and
its indivisible character. That is why we do not think
that it is realistic to attempt to isolate one aspect
of this problem and to wish to find a solution without
taking into account the substance of .the question
itself.

95. -The dangers are centred around the intended
march by vast masses of people into Western Sahara.
The risks of serious incidents and confrontation
are
increasing. It is obvious that events can take a turn
whereby the parties lose control, with the resulting
12

100. The peaceful march envisaged by the Moroccan
Government
cannot be validly
or usefuliy and
objectively
considered
unless one ‘examines
the
fundamental
problem of decolonization
proper to
the Sahara. The’ link between this march and the
decolonization
of,the Sahara is recognized by Spain
itself, as can be seen in the report submitted to us by
the Secretary-General.

Mr. Solis, the Spanish envoy who came to Marrakesh
to propose that the King undertake with Spain a
process of decolonization
in order to find a way to
solve the problem of the decolonization
of the Sahara
that would take into account Morocco’s right to respect
for its national unity. In doing that, His Majesty King
Hassan II had in mind resolution 377 (1975), recently
adopted by’ the Security Council, which committed
the parties to direct negotiation. Mr. Solis expressed
his satisfaction at the spirit of great understanding
and the, will for peace demonstrated by his Moroccan
partners. In’ order to exhaust every possibility
for
dialogue, the Mauritanian and Moroccan Governments
agreed to send, at the invitation of the Spanish Government, an important
delegation
to discuss all the
aspects of the question, and in fact the Governments
concerned have done so without any reservations.

101. I wish to emphasize that this decolonization
will not be valid or conducive to promoting peace
and,security in the sub-region unless it takes account
of this specific characteristic, a characteristic which
basically resides in respect for the national unity and
territorial integrity of the States concerned. The haste
with which it is desired, it seems, to- deal with this
problem, avoiding an examination
of the substance,
is not in our view likely to facilitate the conclusion
of the contacts that the parties had undertaken, and
could undertake, in conformity with Security Council
resolution 377 (1975) and Article 33 of the Charter.
Nor is it likely, I believe, to facilitate the SecretaryGeneral’s consultations,
in which my country places
the greatest hopes.

107. Morocco has proved-if
there was any need to
do so-its good faith; it has neglected no peaceful
means that take account of its right, as a Member of
the United Nations, to its national existence and the
protection of its integrity. And, at the appropriate
moment, Morocco will prove that the rights of the
Moroccan
people and nation are well founded,
historically,
legally and humanly. Thus, my country
has not for a moment deviated from the path of great
moderation which it has always followed. In those
circumstances,
how great was our surprise to hear
some recent information
concerning Spain’s change
of attitude, and some threats made by one of the very
countries upon which moderation had been urged in
the Security Council’s latest resolution. How can one
speak of a L’CISIIS helli when there are negotiations
under way between the only parties concerned? Is it
a ~CISLIS helli not to undertake discussions with a
State that has not demonstrated
how it could be
concerned in the present matter? We cannot but be
extremely
concerned about these aggressive statements that could serve as a pretext for all kinds of
so-called preventive undertakings. With regard to our
relations with the administering
Power, we have
always proposed recourse to the procedures for the
peaceful settlement of the colonial dispute between
us, a dispute which, in its Order of 22 May last,4
the International
Court of Justice recognized did
indeed exist.

102. As for my country, it will continue;despite
the
difficulties,
to lend its faithful co-operation
to the
Secretary-General
in the complex task that has once
again been entrusted to him by the Security Council.
In doing that, we wish to demonstrate our continued
support for the United Nations, so that it may find a
just and equitable solution to this problem. But my
country hopes that it will not be placed in the difficult
situation of being obliged to choose between its very
existence and a prefabricated and artificial solution
having nothing to do with reality. I think it must be
very clear to everyone that, faced with such a choice,
Mauritania cannot but choose Mauritania.
103. In conclusion, I should like to pay a tribute to
the Secretary-General
for the speedy and effective
work he has done and, particularly, for the conciseness
and ‘clarity of the report he has submitted to the
Council.
104. The PRESIDENT
(inferpretation
from
Russian): I give the floor to the representative
of
Morocco.
105. Mr. SLAOUI
(Morocco) (interpretation
from
French): I should like to repeat to the Council
Morocco’s position, a position that has not changed
since the Council’s last meeting on the question. My
country states again its determination
to have recourse
to all the peaceful means for reaching a solution that
will maintain
its inalienable
right to its national
existence and the integrity of its territory.

108. Morocco solemnly proclaims that it is prepared
to continue or to engage in any negotiations for a final
settlement of the dispute. It will persevere in the
search for a peaceful solution. That is why it believes
that the announcement
of the new attitude taken by
Spain towards the “Green March”
should have
prompted the Security Council to adopt a resolution
addressed more directly, and even exclusively,
to
the administering
Power.

106. Morocco has at no time departed from that
attitude. It has not made any threats to anyone. On
the contrary, His Majesty King Hassan II, aware of
his responsibilities,
has, for example,
welcomed

109. Morocco will conti,nue to work within the framework of the peaceful path that it has definitely chosen.
It will act within the framework of the legitimacy of
its rights and will remain open, for its part, to any
13

;
.

:

initiative
towards consultation
or negotiation.
Of
course, it rejects all threats and all attempts at
provocation, of whatever kind and from whatever side
they may come. It will remain calm and will not allow
itself to be drawn into an escalation of provocation.
Acting in that way, Morocco will remain faithful to
its traditional
policy, based ‘on the maintenance
of
peaceful and friendly relations with all the Stat,es
pursuing the same aim-s.

devoid of all oratorical effect but one whose simplicity
and precision are aimed above ‘all ‘at stressing my
Government’s
high degree of awareness of the present
situation
and, ” at the same time; the unfailing
determination
with which it intends to face any future
changes in that situation.
.
115. I have already had the opportunity
of saying,
on behalf of my delegation, that ‘I did not wi-sh to take
advantage of this debate in the Security Council to
broach a problem which had not been submitted to the
attention of the Council. Members of the Council have
not been convened here in order to decide on the future
of Western Sahara. They have gathered here, and
have had the kindness to allow my delegation to
participate in this meeting, because a grave threat to
peace and security in a region which encompasses
Algeria has suddenly arisen, and it is within the
bounds
of the Council’s
responsibilities,
and
within the framework of the mission entrusted to it
under the Charter of the United Nations, that its
members have been convened here in order, first of
all, to exercise their responsibility to take the measures
necessary to put an end to that situation and then to
go beyond the difticulties presented by the situation
today and to undertake action in order to avert the
very clear and precise threats which at present hang
over our country and the future of our people. I shall
remain faithful to that attitude by limiting ‘myself to
referring to the present threat which looms, as I have
just said, over the peace of our region, but I should
merely like to say that the whole situation rests on
the definition of the sovereignty of the Territory of
Western Sahara.

110. Before concluding ‘my statement, I should like
to thank the members of the Council for their prudence
and for the efforts they have made during the consideration ‘of this question. I should also like to thank the
Secretary-General
for the integrity and the conscientiousness with which he has fulfilled his task.
111. It is a great pleasure for me to be able to
extend my congratulations
to Mr. Rydbeck on the
remarkable way in which he carried out his task last
month and to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council, a post for which your
talents and your competence make you well suited.
dun):

112.

The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
I give the floor to the representative

113.

Mr.

from

Rus-

of Algeria.

RAHAL
(Algeria) (interpretation
from
The presidency of the Security Council has
passed from the representative
of Sweden to the
representative of the Soviet Union and it is for me a
pleasant duty to express first of all to Mr. Rydbeck
the gratitude and admiration of my delegation for the
dignity with which he carried out his high responsibilities and for the great care, effort and time which
he devoted to the problem of Western Sahara, which,
as everyone knows, holds so much interest for my
Government. As the conduct of the proceedings of the
Council is entrusted to you, Mr. President, we are
convinced that the Council will continue, by devoting
its attention to this problem and attaching to it the
priority it merits, to carry out its responsibility for the
maintenance of peace and security in our region.

French):

116. This sovereignty does not belong to Spain. Spain
is the administering
Power of a Territory which it
colonized. I must recognize the fact that the Spanish
Government
has indicated with all possible clarity
that the Government of Spain wishes to put an end to
its presence in the Territory both as a colonial and as
administering
Power. But this by no means signifies
that the Spanish Government has the right to dispose of
a sovereignty which it in no way has the right to
exercise. That is to say first of all that any attempt
on the part of the Spanish Government
to dispose
on its own of the sovereignty of the Territory
of
Western Sahara must be considered,
first by my
Government,
then by the entire international
community, as an illegal attempt, null and void.

114. Mr. President,
we know your outstanding
qualities and your great competence but, above all,
we know the friendly relations which bind your country
to ours and to all the other countries of the region.
In the light of those considerations, we are convinced
that under your leadership the Security Council will
be able to take the measures that are indispensable
in order to reach a satisfactory settlement of this
problem, a settlement which we are seeking as a matter
of priority and, if we are to believe all the statements
we have heard here, all the other countries ot the
region also are seeking. I should not like to follow the
speakers who have preceded me in either their
rhetorical exercises or their juridical exegeses. The
situation which has been created in our region, in
which the people of Algeria are living at the present
time, is sufficiently grave for me to content myself
with the most sober declaration possible, a statement

117. It also means that any interpretation
of those
facts which implied that any negotiations at a bilateral
level or a trilateral level, or multilateral
level could
lead to disposal of sovereignty over the Territory
of Western Sahara would be considered by my Government, and certainly by the international community as
a, whole, as implying usurpation of property, to be
condemned as such, and absolutely inadmissible.
118. In saying this, I do not wish to attribute to the
Spanish Government any intention whatsoever; I do
14

not want a trial of intention. I merely want to explain
here, with the maximum
precision possible, the
position of the Government of Algeria on this particular
aspect of sovereignty over the Territory of Western
Sahara. Nor does ‘this sovereignty belong to the
countries bordering
on the Territory
of Western
Sahara. The claims which have been made on the
subject cannot ‘be, considered valid simply because
they are presenfed,as
being valid.
_

122. Why have I expanded on this question of
sovereignty’over
the Sahara? It is because, in the view
of my delegation, it is this question which is central
to all the events which have led us to the deplorable
situation which the Security Council is now considering. The Algerian delegation knows the obligations and the needs of diplomatic
action. It also
knows the concern we must all. show to avoid
exacerbating conflicting positions and to resolve our
difficulties, in an atmosphere of good understanding
and without hurting anybody’s sense of honour. This
has led you, to prolong, your meetings and it has
prompted the various members of the Council to seek,
sometimes in the most difficult conditions, the best
means of indicating the will of the Council by using
language that does not offend any of the parties.

119. We were told a few moments ago that in good
time arguments would be put forward, documentation
would be submitted, in order to uphold these claims.
Very well, I am prepared, as most certainly are all
the representatives ‘of the States Members of the
United Nations, to listen to this argumentation,
to
study these documents. But, to my knowledge, the
presentation of these theses has already been made,
and not only in the political body represented by the
Security Council or the political body represented by
the General Assembly.
The presentation
of these
theses, the support for them, and the setting out of
historical or other arguments in their favour, has
already taken place before the highest juridical body
of the Organization. This was done before the International Court of Justice, which gave an opinion) on this
question which was founded on the examination
precisely of those arguments and those documents.
I think that our point of view on the subject is now
clear.

123. But, leaving aside this concern, which we
understand and which we share, we should still call
things by their proper name. I have no objection to
the Security Council saying, and even thinking, that
the settlement of the present situation should involve
all the parties concerned and interested.
That is
indeed the case. But which of the parties concerned
and interested has created the situation? While I
appreciate the fact that in your statements and resolutions you do not go beyond the use of diplomatic
language, may I be allowed, at this stage of your
work and at a time when the situation has proceeded
from a situation of potential danger to one of imminent
danger, to say that not all the parties concerned and
interested created the situation. This situation was
created by the Government of Morocco. It was created
by the Government
of Morocco when that Govemment decided, after the report of the United Nations
Visiting Mission and after the opinion of the Intemational Court of Justice, to organize a massive and
peaceful popular march of 350,000 Moroccans to go
and take possession of the Sahara Territory,
which
-it considered-is
Moroccan territory.

120. It is not a question for us of a tendentious
interpretation
of history. It is not a question for us of
embodying our claims or our intentions in a political
attitude which apparently has a legal basis. It is a
question of a precise and clear reading of a decision
which is equally clear and precise in its wording.
No one at this stage after the consultative
opinion
on this question handed down by the International
Court of Justice can claim that sovereignty over the
Territory of Western Sahara belongs in whole or in
part to one or more States bordering on that Territory.

124. I hesitate to use an argument which is as
elementary as the one I am now going to develop,
but members of the Security Council will surely
agree with me that the peaceful character of a measure
does not simply result from the character which is
attached to it and that it does not suffice to be told
that this is only a peaceful march to deduce automatically that, yes indeed, it is a measure which has
no hostile character, which respects the normal rules
of peace and security and which, furthermore, should
not be condemned
or stopped but perhaps even
encouraged and applauded.

121. This second aspect should also be very clear
and very clearly recorded as a final position of the
Government
of Algeria.
If sovereignty
over the
Territory of Western Sahara belongs neither to Spain
nor to the countries bordering on this Territory, it is
because it belongs quite simply to the people inhabiting
that Territory. It must be recognized that this obvious
fact, which everybody
should have appreciated
immediately,
took some time to penetrate, not only
in the form of a position of principle, not only in the
form of an evocation of a period that is past, not only
in the light of prospects for the future, but in the
light of a principle which we have applied to all peoples,
which we continue to defend for all other peoples
and which in all full logic, in all justice and in all
legality must apply also for the population
of the
Sahara.

125. I was present at the last meeting of the Council
and I witnessed the verbal gymnastics of my colleague,
the representative of Morocco, who tried to define an
invasion for us and who explained that the march
envisaged by the Moroccan Government could not be
considered an invasion. Out of respect for the dignity
of the Council and in order not to prolong a statement
which I wanted to contain within very reasonable
15

bou,nds, I do not wish, as I was saying, in turn, to
give in to dialectics .of that nature but ,I. wish to say
that whatever qualifiers the Moroccan, Government
attributes to its. initiative,
the Algerian Government
considers that this march, if it crosses the borders of
the Sahara Territory, would constitute a violation of
the sovereignty of that Territory, an act contrary to
international
law, an initiative
of a nature, which
would alter the balance of this region and,. finally,
a decision, the incalculable, consequences of which
would directly affect the peace of this region ,and the
future relations of all countries bordering on the
Territory of Western Sahara.

for its claims.,, and sometimes for the support which
.would endorse ,its. decision to launch, a peaceful march
‘into the territory of Western Sahara., I am convinced
that if the delegation of Morocca, instead of limiting
itself to giving us a list of the .names of countries,
were also to communicate
to us the, terms on which
.these countries were granting their ,support to the
Moroccan initiative,
the problem would be much
clearer. But I should like to point out that, despite
this support-real
or imaginaryaf
the Moroccan
initiative, that initiative, if it were to continue, would
unquestionably
constitute one ,of the most serious
precedents that we have ever had the opportunity of
seeing. If we place this initiative in an African context
-and
I have ‘no need here to.-make assumptions
because obviously this is an initiative which is within
the framework of Africa-I
am ‘convinced that not a
single African country will fail to see the consequences,
both immediate and long-term, of the success of such
a solution if applied to the variousborder and territorial
problems .which arise on the African continent. I may
have the opportunity
of developing
these points
further but, having drawn the Council’s attention to
the assessment which the Algerian ,Government
has
made of the present situation, I come to the position
taken by the Security Council on this matter.

126. The Moroccan initiative,
if it wishes to be
based on the territorial claim which I mentioned earlier,
loses all justification the moment this claim itself loses
its validity.. It does not sufftce for a country presenting
claims to be convinced ,-whether
it is sincere or not
is of little significance-for
these claims to be entertained, even less for them to be satisfied. But these
legal considerations notwithstanding,
I must say that
the Algerian Government finds itself more sensitive
to this prospect of the implementation
of the decision
announced by the Moroccan Government
since, as
has been reported by all the press agencies represented
on the spot, this initiative was clearly marked from the
very outset by hostility towards Algeria.
.
127. It is easy to come here and say in this hall
that Morocco has no feeling of hostility against any
of its neighbours and that it does not understand the
emotion-to
say the least-which
has been shown by
those neighbouring countries in the face of that initiative. The fact is that. for some time already that
hostility has been fomented among the Moroccan
people and directed against Algeria. I said this before
and I stressed to what degree the Algerian Govemment, the Algerian people and all of the press and
information
media of Algeria have continued
to
maintain an attitude of restraint and moderation, and
how hard Algeria has endeavoured not to enter this
process of the escalation of verbal violence. This is not
simply a gratuitous assertion on the part of the representative of Algeria. I said this and I repeat it: the
whole world has been a witness to this moderation
and the whole world continues to witness this
moderation
which, unfortunately,
may have been
interpreted
not merely as a sign of weakness but
perhaps also as a sign of a lack of interest and
consequently as an encouragement to proceed with an
undertaking that is not only contrary to international
principles, but which also runs counter to the relations existing in this region and to the co-operation
which has finally made a good start between many
countries. In fact, it has transformed relations marked
by friendship into something marked by extremely
dangerous hostility.

129. The Security Council, on .22 October, adopted
resolution 377 (1975) by which it also appealed to all
the parties concerned and interested to show restraint
and moderation so as to defuse the situation created
in that region and to allow the ‘United Nations-and
more specifically,
the General Assembly-to
find
the political way to solve the problem of the decolonization of Western Sahara. At that time we said that,
whatever the wording of the resolution might be, what
was important
for us was the result that such a
decision could bring about. Ey its resolution
377
(1975), the Council entrusted to the Secretary-General
the task of establishing contact with all parties concerned and interested and of reporting to the Council
as soon as possible so that it could take the appropriate measures which you would judge necessary.
The delegation of Algeria would like first of all to say
to the Secretary-General
how much it appreciates the
speed with which he has carried out his mission and
the clarity, objectivity and accuracy of his report.
130. The Security Council met yesterday in informal
consultations during the day and late into the night,
and is meeting again today on the same question and
now also on the basis of the report of the SecretaryGeneral and of the supplementary
statement which
the Secretary-General
has made to the Council. This
to our mind illustrates
the importance
which the
Council attaches to this situation and the urgency
with which it wishes to deal with it.
13 I. The Security Council prepared its draft resolution S/11865 without giving a chance to the parties
concerned and interested to participate in that elaboration. It was the Council’s right to do so, and I do

128. For some time now the delegation of Morocco
to the United Nations has regularly informed us of the
support which the Moroccan Government has obtained
16

not say this to&&&e
its working ‘procedures; on the
136. The position of Algeria ‘is clear: we consider
that sdvereignty over the Territory’ of Western Sahara
contrary, we are>pl’eased that the Council has this
is the resp0nsibility of the,United,Nations;
we consider
concept of its re.@%ibilities.
If we had been consulted
that the * ‘OI’ganization
has duties in respect of the
and had the ‘possibility of expounding’ our point of
people of, Sahara,’ and. that is why,-.*as ‘we have
view, we would ,have asked that that ‘draft resolu.. affirmed in the past, we c0ntinue to believe that ‘the
tion, which is,now a ‘resolution,’ be’couched in,more
solutidn~to~ this‘problem
has to be fdund within, the
precise language;@
meet the true ‘iibjective of the
Council at this’sessibn.
:..
Organization and by the General Assembly, which has
, :..
.’ ; ..I.,
already”put
this question 0n‘its’ agenda and which
132. The Security Council, in &wisdom,
preferred
‘is to discuss’ it .next week. We see no need to anticipate
to use less direct, wording, more diplomatic language,
’ that’ debate. ‘We do not understand’the
haste of some
but it is clear,: no.t only in our ,mindssbut
also in “‘who try-toopress claims’which
in any case have not
the minds of all the -members of the Council who
been recognized. That haste is only an additional
have quite plainly. stated this in their, explanations
argument for the non-acceptability
of those claims.
of vote, that this de.cision has as its..main objective to
defuse the situation .,which surrounds the settlement
137. The -PRESIDENT
(intcrpkt;ation
from Rusof the Sahara problem, which means that this decision
Sian): Thelist of speakers is exhausted. Now.1 should
is directed at. t.he .initiative of the ,Moroccan Governlike to ‘speak in my capacity as the representative of
ment, and that,..when the Council urgently asks all
the UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS.
parties concerned and interested to avoid any unilateral
Before dealing with the substance of the question, I
or other action which might further aggravate tension
should like to thank all those who in their statements
in the area, it .addresses itself in, particular
and
have congratulated me and expressed kind words to me
primarily to the.Moroccan
Government.
At any rate,
personally and to my country in connexion with my
that is how we -understand this draft resolution,
as
having assumed the office of President of the Security
we also understand the fact that the Secretary-General
Council. On my part, I should like to express thanks,
is to continue and .intensify his action, not only to
mine personally and those of the delegation of the
reach, by means which he has used heretofore, a
Soviet Union, to my predecessor, the representative
solution to the problem of sovereignty over Western
of Sweden, Mr. Rydbeck;
who held the post of
Sahara, but to put.,an end to what is already more
President of the Council in October, and to congratulate
than an incident and is almost a tragic situation.
him on his tireless efforts and the magnificent
diplomatic
skill with which he guided the work of the
133. I should like td say here, without futile bragging
Council
during
his presidency.
and without dratorical flourishes, that the Algerian
Government remains faithful to the principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, that it continues to
attach the highest value to peace and security in its
region, that it continues to place in the front rank of
its concerns the friendly and fraternal relations which
it has always wished to maintain
and strengthen
with the countries of that region and that, in view of
all this, it has avoided any action which might
aggravate the situation and increase tension; however,
conscious of its responsibilities,
it will know how to
face any future changes in the situation.

138. As has been pointed out, his presidency was
burdened by a number of complicated
and difficult
problems. With the active participation
and support
of the Security Council, he discharged his duties
admirably.
Under his experienced
guidance the
Council made a number of important decisions, among
them, resolution 377 (1975) on the problem of Western
Sahara which was adopted by consensus. In that
resolution, as is known, the Council requested the
Secretary-General
to enter into immediate
consultations with the parties concerned and interested. The
Council
appealed to the parties concerned
and
interested to ‘exercise restraint and moderation
so
that no action would be taken which would lead to a
worsening of the situation in Western Sahara and
hamper the work of the Secretary-General
as entrusted
to him by the Council. A concrete result of this decision of the Council was the visit of the SecretaryGeneral to the capitals of four States and his talks to
the heads of Governments and Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the parties concerned and interested:
Morocco, Mauritania,
Algeria and Spain.

134. Alge,ria does not threaten. Algeria is a country
that knows the price of the dignity of peoples. The
Algerian people has paid dearly for the integrity of
its territory; the Algerian people has paid a high price
for the drawing of its boundaries; the Algerian people
wishes to be respected; it respects others; it respects
the principles for which. so many of its own have
paid with their lives.
135. I have been authorized by my Government
to
declare here, with all the solemnity this statement
merits, that if the Security Council and the international community are not in a position to assume their
responsibilities,
Algeria will assume its own responsibilities, and to state here in the most formal manner
that Algeria is not prepared, either today or tomorrow,
to recognize or endorse any situation of fait accompli
which could result from any kind of unilateral action.

139. I should like to express our deep gratitude to
the Secretary-General
for the great and useful work
which he carried out, in an unprecedentedly
short
period of time, in keeping with his implementation
of Security Council resolution
377 (1975) on ths
problem of Western Sahara. I assume that I shall bi;
17

expressing the general view in paying due tribute to
the effectiveness
and mastery
with which the
Secretary-General
was able to deal with the mission
entrusted to him, which was by no means simple, in
the shortest possible time, to carry out consultations.
with heads of States, Governments and Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the four parties concerned and
interested. The Secretary-General
has submitted to
the Security Council a report on this question. Yesterday, in conversations with the Secretary-General,
I
expressed my own view in respect of this report,
saying that this was a document prepared in a most
masterful way, “skilfully
elaborated”,
as they say in
English.

parties concerned and interested, and to report to the
Security Council as soon as possible on the results
of those consultations in order to enable the Council
to adopt any further appropriate measures that might
be necessary in connexion with the situation in that
region.
144. The discussion of the question of Western
Sahara in the Security Council has- shown that the
members of the Council are in favour of such a settlement of the problem, as it would ‘put an immediate
end to the colonial regime in this Territory and implement the principle of self-determination
for the
people of the Territory, in keeping with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and the decisions of the United
Nations on the question of Western Sahara.

140. Special attention was drawn by me to paragraph 20 of the report, where stress is laid on the
fact that the situation in the area remains grave,
and therefore the Secretary-General
considers it of
the greatest importance that any action be avoided
which might further escalate the tension. It is precisely
this important conclusion in the report of the SecretaryGeneral which required of us, the members of the
Security Council, and the Security Council as a whole,
an urgent consideration
of this report yesterday,
1 November, with a view to taking a decision in order
to avoid any further escalation of tension in this area.

145. As already stressed by the delegation of the
Soviet Union in its statement of 22 October in the
Security Council [/85&h meeting], the position of the
Soviet Union is that the future of Western Sahara
has to be settled by the people of that Territory.
The colonial status of the Territory must be ended.
The people of Western Sahara have every right to
determine their fate. The Soviet Union opposes any
action which would hamper the efforts of the indigenous population of Western Sahara to exercise that
right. This would be especially inadmissible now that,
as a result of the successes of the national liberation
struggle of the African peoples, the process of
decolonization
is coming to an end on the African
continent, which has suffered so much.

141. All the members of the Security Council, in
their statements
at yesterday’s
lengthy informal
consultations, drew attention to that paragraph of the
report of the Secretary-General.
They stressed the
seriousness of the situation in the area, and insistently
and resolutely spoke in favour of having the parties
concerned and interested avoid any action and, among
them, unilateral action, which could lead to the further
aggravation of tension in the area. The members of
the Council laid stress on the fact that in its consideration of this question, and taking into account the
fact that growing tension could become a threat to
peace, the Council must act swiftly and effectively
in order to avert a possible armed conflict and must
promote a peaceful settlement of the existing situation.

146. The delegation of the Soviet Union expresses
the hope that all the parties concerned and interested,
showing a profound sense of responsibility,
will
respond to the decision just adopted by the Security
Council and to the urgent and firm appeal contained
in the resolution to avoid any unilateral or other
action which might lead to aggravating tension in that
area which is already troubled and fraught with danger.
I believe that this resolution will contribute not only
to defusing tension in Western Sahara but also to
settling the problem of the Territory
on the basis
of the exercise by its people of the right to selfdetermination.

142. The delegation of the Soviet Union considers
that, in the light of further escalation of tension in
this area, and in the light of the facts which were
brought out during our discussian,
the Security
Council,
being the principal
body of the United
Nations for the maintenance
of international
peace
and security, should act quickly and resolutely in order
to remove the serious threat to peace in this area.

147. Speaking now as PRESIDENT,
I shall now call
on the representatives
of Spain and Morocco,. who
have asked to exercise their right of reply.
148. Mr. ARIAS SALGADO
(Spain) (interpretation
fiorn Spanish):
I shall be very brief. A series of
allegations were made in the statement of the representative of Morocco which my delegation believes it
necessary to clarify.

143. The delegation of the Soviet Union further
considers that the resolution just adopted by the
Council on the question of Western Sahara is directed
precisely towards achievement
of this goal. The
resolution contains an urgent appeal to all the parties
concerned and interested to avoid any unilateral or
other action which might further escalate the tension
in that area. It requests the Secretary-General
to
continue and intensify his consultations
with the

149. The official Spanish position has, I believe,
been clearly presented in the Council, not only at
this meeting, but also at the 1849th and 1850th meetings
by the representative
of Spain. The interpretation
18

given in those statements of the scope and the terms
of the resolution adopted, which, on the instructions
of my Government,
I had the honour to reiterate
at this meeting, is indeed the Spanish position in this
matter. Now that this problem has been clarified, I
should like to add in support of this affirmation
a
simple reference to the report of the SecretaryGeneral in which, with the objectivity,
clarity and
precision that charactetize that report, the Spanish
position has been reflected.

beyond the bitterness now being shown by the Algerian
delegation. That being so, I protest against the insinuations of the representative
of Algeria which might
lead the Security Council to believe that a dispute
exists between the Moroccan people and the Algerian
people, and that consequently the Moroccan Govemment was entertaining and nurturing hostility towards
Algeria. I solemnly declare that all those insinuations
are designed merely to provide reasons for, now and in
anticipation
of, interventions
of any kind in the
area for which the Algerian Government has already
made preparations.

150. Another point which is absolutely clear in the
Spanish position, and which should not lead to any
confusion, is the need for the General Assembly to
examine the substance of the matter as quickly as
possible in the light of the provisions of resolution
3292 (XXIX). It is within that framework, and in the
light of what is stipulated in paragraph 3 of that resolution, that all the discussion with regard to problems
of sove‘reignty, the interpretation
of the advisory
opinion of the International
Court of Justice and the
scope of the conclusions of the Visiting Mission to the
Territory must be considered.

155. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
sian): I now call on the representative
exercise of his right of reply.

from Rusof Algeria in.

156. Mr. RAHAL
(Algeria) (inferpretation
from
French): I too shall not take up much of the Council’s
time. First, I should like to say that I tried to make my
statement earlier in this meeting as clear as possible
-to the point that, on behalf of my Government,
I
take full responsibility
for everything I said. There
were no insinuations in my remarks; indeed, they were
very precise. We attach all the proper value, as we
have always done, to the ties existing between our
peoples-whether
it be the Algerian and Moroccan
peoples, the Algerian and Mauritanian peoples, or the
Algerian and Saharan peoples. We were the first to
say that these ties were lasting ties and could not be
put in question by the difficulties of the moment.

151. Having made these two essential points, my
delegation feels obliged to return to the root of the
problem as it existed at the beginning. Within the
Council the fundamental problem continues to be-and
I regret to say “continues to be” -the halting of the
march on Western Sahara. The context of this problem
before the Council is clear, that this situation has an
internal’ cause and effect relationship
which no one
can deny; I think that has been made sufficiently
clear during this debate.

’

157. With regard to the hostile tendencies shown by
Moroccan
public
opinion
towards Algeria,
the
Algerian people are informed of them-but
they are
not the only ones: international
opinion is also
informed. And it has not been the Algerian information media that have stressed the unwonted and
inexplicable
nature of the hostility directed against
a country simply because it does not support the
Moroccan claims-claims
that Algeria, in all good
conscience, regards’as absolutely without foundation.

152. My delegation would now like to emphasize
what we said in our statement a few moments ago.
Spain is ready to make all possible efforts to prevent
a deterioration
of the situation, but there can be no
doubt that, if the objective limits are stretched beyond
what is tolerable, this situation would reach a dimension the consequences of which are difficult to
forecast. My delegation hopes that the Government of
Morocco, bearing in mind the resolution just adopted
by the Security Council, will understand what these
limits ire’ and will act to promote peace and security
in the region.

158. As for the insinuations-for
they were indeed
insinuations-just
made by my colleague and friend
the representative of Morocco with regard to Algeria’s
intentions, they fall, I think, within the framework
of a manOeuvre so crude that I shall not take the time
to reply to them. I have said that Algeria, the.country
and the people, are prepared to defend their ideas and
their principles. Those are not insinuations. They are
statements. I hope that all the parties concerned and
interested take them to mean what they do indeed
mean.

._.

153. hir. SLAOUI
(Morocco) (interpretation
from
Frenchjf I should like to say a few words regarding
the statement made by the representative of Algeria.
It would not be difficult to take up the representative
of Algeria on the points which he developed in his
statement and which are obviously extraneous to the
problem being considered by the Security Council
today. However, I believe that neither the place nor
the time is propitious for this, and I reserve the right
to do so on the appropriate occasion.

159. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Russian): Before I adjourn this meeting, I should like to
request the Secretary-General
to send urgent cablegrams containing the complete text of the resolution

154. None the less, I wish to assert the fact that the
Moroccan and Algerian peoples have links which go
19

,

adopted at today’s meeting of the Security Council
to the Governments of all the parties concerned and
interested.

any further appropriate measure that may be required,
as is provided for in the resolution adopted today,
The meeting rose at 2.15 p.m.
Notes

160. In conclusion, I deem it necessary to state that
the Security Council will of course continue carefully
to watch the development of events in the situation
concerning Western Sahara and will meet immediately
if the need should arise for the possible adoption of

8 See resolution 379 (1975).
2 OfJiciai
Supplement
3 Western
4 Western

p. 6.

Records

of the General

Sahara,
Sahara,

Advisory
Order

Assembly,

NO.23, vol. III, chap.XIII, annex.
Opinion,

of 22 May

Thirtieth

Session,

I.C.I. Reports
1975. p. 12.
Reports
1975.
1975, I.C.J.

_-

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore
or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informer-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
?+: Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou G&ve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consuite a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Secci6n de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New Y ork

00400

82-61202-December

1983-2,200
