United Nations

A/RES/59/177

General Assembly

Distr.: General
2 March 2005

Fifty-ninth session
Agenda item 103

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2004
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/59/501)]

59/177. Global efforts for the total elimination of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 58/160 of 22 December 2003, in which it decided to
place emphasis on the concrete implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South Africa,
from 31 August to 8 September 2001, 1 as a solid foundation for a broad-based
consensus for further actions and initiatives towards the total elimination of the
scourge of racism,
Recalling also its resolution 57/195 of 18 December 2002, in which it outlined
the important roles and responsibilities of the various organs of the United Nations
and other stakeholders at the international, regional and national levels, including,
in particular, the Commission on Human Rights,
Recalling further its resolution 56/266 of 27 March 2002, in which it endorsed
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action as constituting a solid foundation
for further action and initiatives towards the total elimination of the scourge of
racism,
Reiterating that all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights
and have the potential to contribute constructively to the development and
well-being of their societies, and that any doctrine of racial superiority is
scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous and must
be rejected, together with theories that attempt to determine the existence of
separate human races,
Convinced that racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance manifest themselves in a differentiated manner for women and girls and
may be among the factors leading to a deterioration in their living conditions,
poverty, violence, multiple forms of discrimination and the limitation or denial of
_______________
1

04-48688

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

A/RES/59/177

their human rights, and recognizing the need to integrate a gender perspective
into relevant policies, strategies and programmes of action against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in order to address multiple
forms of discrimination,
Taking note of Commission on Human Rights resolutions 2002/68 of
25 April 2002, 2 2003/30 of 23 April 2003 3 and 2004/88 of 22 April 2004, 4 by
which the international community put into effect mechanisms for the effective
implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action,
Reaffirming its commitment to a global drive for the total elimination of
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Reaffirming that universal adherence to and full implementation of the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination 5 are of paramount importance for the promotion of equality and
non-discrimination in the world,
Underlining the primacy of political will, international cooperation and
adequate funding at the national, regional and international levels for the
successful implementation of the Durban Programme of Action,
Alarmed at the increase in racist violence and xenophobic ideas in many
parts of the world, in political circles, in the sphere of public opinion and in
society at large, inter alia, as a result of the resurgent activities of associations
established on the basis of racist and xenophobic platforms and charters, and the
persistent use of those platforms and charters to promote or incite racist
ideologies,
Underlining the importance of urgently eliminating continuing and violent
trends involving racism and racial discrimination, and conscious that any form
of impunity for crimes motivated by racist and xenophobic attitudes plays a role
in weakening the rule of law and democracy, tends to encourage the recurrence
of such crimes and requires resolute action and cooperation for its eradication,
Welcoming all the regional initiatives being undertaken to implement the
Durban commitments and, in this context, expressing its appreciation to the
Governments of Mexico, Kenya, the Czech Republic and Belgium for hosting
the regional expert seminars with a view to the implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action within their respective regions, and
encouraging the remaining region to take the necessary action in this regard,
Welcoming also the determination of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights to profile and increase the visibility of the struggle against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and her
intention to make this a cross-cutting issue in the activities and programmes of
her Office,

_______________
2
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2002, Supplement No. 3 (E/2002/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
3
Ibid., 2003, Supplement No. 3 (E/2003/23), chap. II, sect. A.
4
Ibid., 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II, sect. A.
5
Resolution 2106 A (XX), annex.

2

A/RES/59/177

I
Basic general principles
1.
Acknowledges that no derogation from the prohibition of racial
discrimination, genocide, the crime of apartheid or slavery is permitted, as
defined in the obligations under the relevant human rights instruments;
Expresses its profound concern about and its unequivocal
2.
condemnation of all forms of racism and racial discrimination, including related
acts of racially motivated violence, xenophobia and intolerance, as well as
propaganda activities and organizations that attempt to justify or promote
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance in any form;
Stresses that States and international organizations have a
3.
responsibility to ensure that measures taken in the struggle against terrorism do
not discriminate in purpose or effect on grounds of race, colour, descent or
national or ethnic origin, and urges all States to rescind or refrain from all forms
of racial profiling;
Recognizes that States should implement and enforce appropriate and
4.
effective legislative, judicial, regulatory and administrative measures to prevent
and protect against acts of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, thereby contributing to the prevention of human rights violations;
Emphasizes that it is the responsibility of States to adopt effective
5.
measures to combat criminal acts motivated by racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance, including measures to ensure that such
motivations are considered an aggravating factor for the purposes of sentencing,
to prevent those crimes from going unpunished and to ensure the rule of law;
Urges all States to review and, where necessary, revise their
6.
immigration laws, policies and practices so that they are free of racial
discrimination and compatible with their obligations under international human
rights instruments;
Condemns the misuse of print, audio-visual and electronic media and
7.
new communication technologies, including the Internet, to incite violence
motivated by racial hatred, and calls upon States to take all necessary measures
to combat this form of racism in accordance with the commitments that they
have undertaken under the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action, 1 in
particular paragraph 147 of the Programme of Action, in accordance with
existing international and regional standards of freedom of expression and
taking all necessary measures to guarantee the right to freedom of opinion and
expression;
Encourages all States to include in their educational curricula and
8.
social programmes at all levels, as appropriate, knowledge of and tolerance and
respect for foreign cultures, peoples and countries;
Stresses the responsibility of States to mainstream a gender
9.
perspective in the design and development of prevention, education and
protection measures aimed at the eradication of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance at all levels, to ensure that they effectively
target the distinct situations of women and men;

3

A/RES/59/177

II
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination
10. Reiterates the call made by the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in paragraph 75 of the Durban
Programme of Action1 to achieve universal ratification of the International
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination5 by 2005 and
for all States to consider making the declaration envisaged under article 14 of the
Convention, and endorses the concern expressed by the Commission on Human
Rights in its resolution 2004/884 to the effect that, at the current pace, with one
hundred and seventy ratifications and only forty-five declarations, the deadline of
2005 for universal ratification decided by the World Conference will, regrettably,
not be realized;
11. Urges, in that context, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to maintain and issue regular updates on its web
site of a list of countries that have not yet ratified the Convention, and to encourage
such countries to demonstrate their practical commitment to meet the deadline for
universal ratification as decided upon by the World Conference;
12. Invites States parties to the Convention to ratify the amendment to
article 8 of the Convention, on the financing of the Committee on the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination, and calls for adequate additional resources from the regular
budget of the United Nations to enable the Committee to discharge its mandate
fully;
13. Urges all States parties to the Convention to intensify their efforts to
implement the obligations that they have accepted under article 4 of the Convention,
with due regard to the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 6 and
article 5 of the Convention;
14. Notes that the Committee holds that the prohibition of the dissemination
of ideas based on racial superiority or racial hatred is compatible with the right to
freedom of opinion and expression as outlined in article 19 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and in article 5 of the Convention;
15. Welcomes the emphasis placed by the Committee on the importance of
follow-up to the World Conference and the measures recommended to strengthen
the implementation of the Convention as well as the functioning of the Committee; 7
III
Comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
16. Emphasizes that the basic responsibility for effectively combating
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance lies with States,
and to this end stresses that States have the primary responsibility to ensure full and
effective implementation of all commitments and recommendations contained in the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;1
_______________
6

Resolution 217 A (III).
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 18 (A/57/18),
chap. XI.
7

4

A/RES/59/177

17. Also emphasizes, in that context, the fundamental and complementary
role of national human rights institutions, regional bodies or centres and civil
society, working jointly with States towards the achievement of the objectives of the
Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
18. Calls upon States to elaborate action plans, in consultation with
national human rights institutions, other institutions created by law to combat
racism, and civil society, and to provide the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights with such action plans and other relevant materials on measures
taken to implement the provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action;
19. Calls upon all States to formulate and implement without delay, at the
national, regional and international levels, policies and plans of action to combat
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, including their
gender-based manifestations;
20. Urges States to support the activities of existing regional bodies or
centres that combat racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance in their respective regions, and recommends the establishment of such
bodies or centres in all regions where they do not exist;
21. Recognizes the fundamental role of civil society in the fight against
racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular in
assisting States to develop regulations and strategies, in taking measures and action
against such forms of discrimination and through follow-up implementation;
22. Emphasizes that, in accordance with the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, States have a shared responsibility, at the international level
and within the framework of the United Nations system, to determine modalities for
the overall review of the implementation of the Declaration and Programme of
Action;
23. Decides that the General Assembly, through its role in policy
formulation, the Economic and Social Council, through its role in overall guidance
and coordination, in accordance with their respective roles under the Charter of the
United Nations and Assembly resolution 50/227 of 24 May 1996, and the
Commission on Human Rights shall constitute a three-tiered intergovernmental
process for the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action;
24. Stresses and reaffirms its role as the highest intergovernmental
mechanism for the formulation and appraisal of policy on matters related to the
economic, social and related fields, in accordance with Chapter IX of the Charter,
including in the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the goals and
targets set at all the major United Nations conferences, summits and special
sessions;
25. Acknowledges that the outcome of the World Conference against Racism,
Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance is on an equal footing
with the outcomes of all the major United Nations conferences, summits and special
sessions in the human rights and social fields;
26. Decides that the Economic and Social Council shall oversee system-wide
coordination of the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action;

5

A/RES/59/177

27. Also decides that the Commission on Human Rights, as a functional
commission of the Economic and Social Council, shall have a central role in the
monitoring of the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action within the United Nations system and in advising the Council thereon;
28. Expresses its appreciation for the continuing work of the
Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action and the Working Group of Experts on
People of African Descent, and looks forward to the consideration of the outcomes
of their third sessions by the Commission on Human Rights at its sixty-first
session;
29. Acknowledges that the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, held in Durban, South
Africa, from 31 August to 8 September 2001, which was the third world
conference against racism, was significantly different from the previous two
conferences, as evidenced by the inclusion in its title of two important
components relating to contemporary forms of racism, namely, xenophobia and
related intolerance;
30. Welcomes the work of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination in applying the International Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Racial Discrimination 5 to the new and contemporary forms of racism and
racial discrimination;
31. Underlines the importance of the elaboration of complementary
standards with a view to strengthening and updating international instruments
against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, taking
into account issues discussed during the previous sessions of the
Intergovernmental Working Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action, as well as issues identified by the
high-level seminar to be convened during the next session of the
Intergovernmental Working Group;
32. Underlines also the importance of considering progress made in the
implementation of the provisions of the Durban Declaration and Programme of
Action related to the media and racism, including the use of the Internet, with the
participation of all stakeholders, inter alia, States, the World Summit on the
Information Society, international and regional organizations, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector and the media;
33. Takes note of the recommendation of the Intergovernmental Working
Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme
of Action, in that context, to request the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights to convene a high-level seminar, the format of
which should be agreed among Member States, assisted by the Office of the High
Commissioner, and which could include, but would not necessarily be limited to, a
core group of ministers responsible for human rights and/or equivalent
participants from all regions as panellists; 8
34. Strongly recommends that no intersessional meetings of the working
groups of the Commission on Human Rights in follow-up to the World Conference
_______________
8

6

See E/CN.4/2005/20, sect. VI, para. 73.

A/RES/59/177

and the implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action be
scheduled in a manner that clashes or overlaps with the sessions of the General
Assembly, and in this regard calls upon the Commission to address this issue and
to ensure that the future sessions of the Working Group of Experts on People of
African Descent are scheduled to precede those of the Intergovernmental
Working Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action;
35. Requests the Secretary-General to reflect the outcome of the
high-level seminar in his report to the General Assembly at its sixty-first session
on the follow-up to the World Conference;
36. Acknowledges the centrality of resource mobilization, effective global
partnership and international cooperation in the context of paragraphs 157 and
158 of the Durban Programme of Action for the successful realization of
commitments undertaken at the World Conference, and to this end emphasizes
the central role to be played by the group of independent eminent experts on the
implementation of the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action in
mobilizing the necessary political will required for the successful
implementation of the Declaration and Programme of Action;
37. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the necessary resources for
the effective fulfilment of the mandates of the Intergovernmental Working
Group on the Effective Implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action, the Working Group of Experts on People of African
Descent and the group of independent eminent experts on the implementation of
the Durban Declaration and Programme of Action;
38. Condemns the resurgence of xenophobia, and underlines the fact that,
while anchoring human rights in legal instruments is a fundamental way of
expressing their universality, it is no longer capable of eliminating the
underlying causes of discriminatory culture and mentalities, and that action on
human rights must henceforth include discussion of the deep cultural roots of
racism;
39. Expresses its concern at the increasing incidence of racism in various
sporting events, while noting with appreciation the efforts made by some
sporting governing bodies to combat racism;
40. Invites Member States to adopt measures to counter the dissemination
of discriminatory, racist and xenophobic messages on the Internet, in accordance
with paragraphs 144 to 147 of the Durban Programme of Action, and to promote
a positive use of the Internet to foster social harmony and to combat racism;
41. Requests the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights to convene the second meeting of the group of independent
eminent experts on the implementation of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action before the sixty-first session of the Commission on
Human Rights to produce a concrete programme of action related to their
mandate, based on the core values of racial equality and dignity as elaborated in
the outcome document of their first meeting, held in Geneva from 16 to
18 September 2003; 9
_______________
9

See E/CN.4/2004/112.

7

A/RES/59/177

IV
Special Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms
of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance
and follow-up to his visits
42. Expresses its full support and appreciation for the work of the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, and encourages its
continuation;
43. Reiterates its call to all Member States, intergovernmental organizations,
relevant organizations of the United Nations system and non-governmental
organizations to cooperate fully with the Special Rapporteur;
44. Requests the Special Rapporteur to continue his exchange of views with
Member States and relevant mechanisms and treaty bodies within the United
Nations system in order to enhance further their effectiveness and mutual
cooperation;
45. Recognizes with deep concern the increase in anti-Semitism,
Christianophobia and Islamophobia in various parts of the world, as well as the
emergence of racial and violent movements based on racism and discriminatory
ideas directed against Arab, Christian, Jewish and Muslim communities,
communities of people of African descent, communities of people of Asian descent
and other communities;
46. Requests the Special Rapporteur to collect information from all
concerned, to respond effectively to reliable information that becomes available to
him, to follow up on communications and country visits and to seek the views and
comments of Governments and reflect them, as appropriate, in his reports;
47. Calls upon States to cooperate with the Special Rapporteur and to give
serious consideration to his requests to visit their countries so as to enable him to
fulfil his mandate fully and effectively;
48. Encourages closer collaboration between the Special Rapporteur and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in particular
the Anti-Discrimination Unit;
49. Urges the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights to
provide States, at their request, with advisory services and technical assistance to
enable them to implement fully the recommendations of the Special Rapporteur;
50. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the Special Rapporteur with
all the necessary human and financial assistance to carry out his mandate efficiently,
effectively and expeditiously and to enable him to submit an interim report to the
General Assembly at its sixtieth session;
51. Takes note of the recommendations contained in the interim report of the
Special Rapporteur, 10 and encourages the continuation of his work;
52. Urges Member States to consider implementing the recommendations
contained in the reports of the Special Rapporteur, and invites other relevant
stakeholders to implement those recommendations;

_______________
10

8

See A/59/329.

A/RES/59/177

V
General
53. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation
of the present resolution to the General Assembly at its sixtieth session;
54. Decides to remain seized of this important matter at its sixtieth session
under the item entitled “Elimination of racism and racial discrimination”.
74th plenary meeting
20 December 2004

9
