United Nations

S/PV.5886

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-third year

5886th meeting
Tuesday, 6 May 2008, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Sir John Sawers/Ms. Pierce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verbeke
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Lacroix
Mr. Natalegawa
Mr. Mantovani
Mr. Ettalhi
Mr. Suescum
Mr. Churkin
Ms. Qwabe
Mr. Wolff
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung

Agenda
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the Security Council

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

08-32878 (E)

*0832878*

S/PV.5886

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Briefings by Chairmen of subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Cuba, India, Israel, Japan,
Qatar, Slovenia, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Venezuela, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reserved for them at the side of the
Council Chamber.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
At this meeting, we will hear briefings by His
Excellency Mr. Neven Jurica, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism; His
Excellency Mr. Johan Verbeke, Chairman of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities; and His
Excellency Mr. Jorge Urbina, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004).
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Neven
Jurica.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): I shall first make a joint
statement on behalf of the Chairmen of the 1267, 1373
and 1540 Committees, followed by my own statement

2

in my capacity as the Chairman of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC).
On behalf of the Chairmen of the three subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
I would like to make some introductory remarks on the
cooperation between those Committees.
As requested by the Security Council in all its
recent resolutions pertaining to the Al-Qaida and
Taliban Sanctions Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the 1540 Committee — and more
specifically in resolutions 1735 (2006), 1805 (2008)
and 1810 (2008) — we have worked on enhancing the
ongoing cooperation between our three Committees,
mostly through our expert groups.
Over the past few months, the three expert groups
have continued to jointly implement their common
strategy approved by the three Committees in 2007 to
assist non- and late-reporting States. After the first
regional workshop — which was held in Dakar at the
end of September 2007 for West and Central African
States — a second one, still in cooperation with the
Terrorism Prevention Branch of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, was organized on 29 and
30 November 2007 in Gaborone for Southern African
States. As was done after the Dakar workshop, a postworkshop briefing for all African Union missions in
New York was held on 18 December 2007. The third
subregional workshop, for Northern and Eastern
African States, is envisaged to take place in November
2008.
Those workshops provided an opportunity for the
experts of the three Committees to jointly interact with
the officials in charge of the implementation of the
measures decided by the Council, and therefore to
update them on the work of the Committees. They also
enhanced the understanding of Member States of the
different mandates and roles of the three Committees.
Progress has already been achieved as new reports and
additional information on States’ implementation have
been submitted to the three Committees.
Another concrete example of such cooperation is
the visits to Member States carried out jointly by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the experts of the 1267 Committee’s
Monitoring Team. So far, nine such visits have taken
place, the most recent one to Saudi Arabia from 22 to
29 March 2008. In order to derive common benefit

08-32878

S/PV.5886

from the CTC’s visit to Niger last February and from
the mission led by the Chairman of the 1267
Committee to Mauritania, Senegal and Mali, each
provided input and questions to the other prior to the
trips and information was subsequently exchanged
between the Committees and expert groups.
We continue to encourage our three expert groups
to share, as appropriate, information and their analyses
of the efforts by Member States to implement their
obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions. That exchange of information also includes
requests for technical assistance and other requests
made by States. Since the last briefing to the Security
Council, the Monitoring Team, CTED and the 1540
expert group have continued their regular contacts in
order to maximize the exchange of information and the
sharing of resources, as well as to avoid duplication.
We also encourage our experts to work closely together
as they develop their relationships with other relevant
international, regional and subregional organizations,
which could possibly be an avenue for even closer
cooperation.
The three expert groups are also cooperating
within the framework of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, which was established to
ensure overall coordination and coherence in the
counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations system
in the context of the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
That cooperation is not only crucial for the
effectiveness of the work of our respective
Committees; it is also essential for the coherence of the
important contribution of the Council in countering
these threats. Avoiding duplication of efforts is of
paramount importance. To that end, together with our
expert groups, a comparative table has been developed
to highlight the main aspects of the respective
mandates and areas of competence of the three
Committees and of their expert groups. We are of the
view that that will be a useful tool for Member States
to
better
understand
the
specificities
and
complementarities of our work. The table will be
issued today in a press release and will be posted on
our respective websites. It will also be used in our
various outreach activities and interactions with
Member States, with which rests the primary
responsibility to implement the obligations under the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

08-32878

Terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction pose a threat to international peace
and security, and cooperation by all remains crucial.
The Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions Committee, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), as well
as their respective expert groups, remain committed,
within their respective mandates, to their work to
contribute to the overall United Nations and
international efforts to assist States to fully implement
the respective resolutions. In that context, the three
Committees look forward to further guidance from the
Council on areas of common interest in order better to
coordinate their efforts, as indicated in resolutions
1805 (2008) and 1810 (2008).
In my capacity as the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), known
as the Counter-Terrorism Committee, it is my honour
to brief the Security Council and the wider membership
on the work of the Committee in the past six months.
As terrorism remains one of the major threats to
international peace and security, the Committee is a
crucial instrument of the international community to
address that global scourge. As the Chairman of the
Committee, I intend to abide by its guiding principles
and focus on concrete results and achieving realistic
objectives. I believe that the Committee should adopt a
pragmatic approach in order to fulfil obligations
entrusted to it by resolution 1373 (2001).
Before entering into the core of this presentation,
I would like to extend the Committee’s gratitude to
Mr. Mike Smith, Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), and his team
for their valuable assistance. I also appreciate the
constructive atmosphere in the Committee, which
greatly contributes to fulfilling its mandate.
Transparency is one of the basic principles in our
work and therefore, together with the Executive
Director, I briefed the States Member of the United
Nations on the work of the Committee and CTED on
29 April, and we intend to continue with that practice
in the future.
At the outset, I am pleased to report that, since
the last briefing in November 2007, the Committee has
initiated or accomplished several key initiatives that
have established a sound basis for our future work.

3

S/PV.5886

The first accomplishment is the adoption of the
new organizational plan of CTED. The Security
Council heard a detailed presentation of the plan by the
Executive Director at its meeting on 19 March.
Without unnecessary repetition, for the purposes of this
briefing I would like to reiterate its main elements.
The adjustments to CTED’s organization and
methods of work will have the effect of improving the
quality and consistency of its technical judgments and
will enhance the ongoing dialogue between CTED and
the Member States. It will also strengthen CTED’s
cooperation with relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations.
The plan further envisages an addition to the
existing practice of conducting full-scale assessment
missions by organizing more flexible visits tailored to
the specific circumstances and the nature of the
terrorist threat in countries belonging to all regions.
The increased flexibility should make the work of
CTED more efficient and allow it to focus on issues of
the highest priority to the Committee and to the visited
country. The organizational plan also gives greater
priority to engaging donors and matching their
capacities with the needs of recipient countries, as well
as to implementing a more proactive communications
strategy and strengthening collaboration among
Security Council expert bodies active in the counterterrorism field.
The plan charted the way forward for CTED, and
was affirmed in Security Council resolution 1805
(2008), adopted on 20 March. The resolution extended
the mandate of CTED until the end of 2010, but also
set the direction for the Committee in the next few
years. The resolution contains a provision for an
interim review by 30 June 2009 and a comprehensive
consideration of CTED’s work prior to the expiration
of its mandate.
The second major initiative is the adoption of
Preliminary Implementation Assessments (PIAs),
which are basically tools geared towards intensifying
dialogue with Member States on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). By the end of last year, 158
PIAs had been adopted, and since then the Committee
has continued to analyse, through its subcommittees
chaired by France, the Russian Federation and Viet
Nam, and adopt the remaining documents. Thus far, the
Committee has adopted some 167 PIAs, and the rest
should be formally approved by the Committee in the

4

coming months. One of the goals of the current
chairmanship is to make sure that every Member State
receives a copy of its preliminary assessment.
The Committee adopted its work programme for
the period 1 January to 30 June, and divided its
activities into several main categories. Within the first
category,
monitoring
and
promoting
the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), besides
adopting the PIAs, the Committee has commenced its
consideration of a revised version of a document
entitled “Survey of the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001) by Member States”.
That document was first discussed in the Committee in
May 2007 and was subsequently revised on the basis of
the views of Committee members and the updated
evaluations of implementation contained in the PIAs.
The survey examines the implementation of counterterrorism efforts in all regions and subregions,
pinpoints areas for further improvements and identifies
shortfalls and vulnerabilities that need to be addressed
either in particular regions or at the global level.
In that context, let me remind the Council that
resolution 1805 (2008) directs the Committee to submit
an annual report on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). While the decision on the status of the
survey is still being discussed, many delegations have
stated that the document could serve as a useful tool
for the Committee to define its priorities in its future
programmes of work.
Another important activity of the Committee is
organizing visits to Member States. Throughout this
year, the Committee is performing visits that were
approved at the end of 2006. Those visits, which are
carried out with the consent of the countries involved,
constitute a fundamental component in effectively
monitoring and promoting the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) and allow CTED to gain firsthand experience on the ground. Since our last briefing,
the Committee has concluded successful full-fledged
on-site visits to Bosnia and Herzegovina, Niger and
Saudi Arabia; as we speak the Committee is in
Cambodia, and will later visit the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic.
The visits typically include experts from CTED
and other international and regional organizations, and
result in a comprehensive assessment of all counterterrorism measures. That not only enhances the
Committee’s understanding of the counter-terrorism

08-32878

S/PV.5886

measures in place, including challenges, best practices
and technical assistance needs or programmes, but also
strengthens its cooperation with the other international
organizations involved. Furthermore, following the
proposal in the organizational plan to conduct flexible
visits, the Committee conducted a fact-finding mission
to Jamaica.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Governments of those Member States for their valuable
cooperation in the preparations for the Committee’s
visits. In addition, the Committee will continue
encouraging Member States to become party to and
implement the 16 international counter-terrorism
instruments.
Regarding the second category, facilitation of
technical assistance, the Committee and CTED in
particular are engaged in continuous dialogue with
Member States, and their role in facilitating technical
assistance is growing in importance. With that in mind,
as part of its reorganization, CTED is reviewing the
existing strategies and mechanisms for facilitating
technical assistance and for refining them with a view
to strengthening the Committee’s contribution and
recording its impact in the technical assistance field.
The challenge in the forthcoming period will be to
devise more creative approaches so that the
Committee, through CTED, can exercise its brokering
role as effectively as possible.
In its dialogue with Member States, the
Committee continued reminding them that they must
ensure that any measures taken to combat terrorism
comply with all their obligations under international
law, in particular international human rights, refugee
and humanitarian law.
The Committee also posted on its website two
helpful tools: the technical assistance matrix, which is
targeted at donors to help them guide their assistance
programmes and decision-making, and a directory of
assistance, enabling recipients to view and identify the
programmes that best suit their needs.
With respect to the implementation of resolution
1624 (2005), the Committee submitted to the Council
its second report regarding progress made by Member
States in its implementation. Likewise, in its work
programme, the Committee has agreed to initiate
discussions to explore the technical assistance needs of
States to implement the resolution, as well as to
facilitate the provision of such assistance, while

08-32878

encouraging those States that have not yet reported to
do so.
The Committee continues to play its part in the
implementation of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy, and CTED is participating actively
in the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force. The Committee is also assisting Member
States in implementing those provisions of the Strategy
that fall within its mandate. The Committee has
included in its work programme a discussion of its
contribution to the implementation of the Strategy.
The Committee continued to cooperate with other
relevant parts of the United Nations system and
specialized bodies, and in particular with the two other
Security Council committees that deal with counterterrorism, as requested by the Council in its resolution
1805 (2008). Furthermore, as the Council has just
heard in the joint message, the second workshop in the
framework of the common strategy by the three
Security Council Committees for non-reporting and
late-reporting States was organized for States of the
Southern African Development Community on 29 and
30 November 2007 in Gaborone.
Finally, as part of its cooperation and exchange of
information with counter-terrorism partners during its
meetings in New York, the Committee heard several
briefings by representatives of relevant organizations
and United Nations bodies.
The President: I thank Ambassador Jurica for his
briefing. I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Johan Verbeke.
Mr. Verbeke (Belgium): Allow me to simply
highlight the main elements contained in my more
comprehensive report prepared for the Council. That
comprehensive version has been distributed and will be
posted on the Committee’s website.
At the outset, I would like to underline that the
sanctions regime established under resolution 1267
(1999) is a powerful tool in the fight against Al-Qaidaand Taliban-related terrorism. The measures taken
against individuals and entities on the consolidated list
are universal in nature and hence can complement
measures taken at the national, regional and
subregional levels.
Improving the quality of the consolidated list
continues to be at the core of the Committee’s work. In
that regard, I would like to stress that the Committee

5

S/PV.5886

relies on the information provided by Member States.
Let me take this opportunity to emphasize that it is the
prerogative, but also the collective responsibility, of all
of us to bring to the Committee’s attention any
information that one believes should be included in or
deleted from the list. Our common objective should be
to have a dynamic list reflecting the evolution of the
threat posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. In this
respect, and given the increasingly strong links
between terrorism activities and illicit drugs, I would
like to underline once again the possibility to submit
for listing the names of drug traffickers involved in the
financing of Al-Qaida and the Taliban, as provided for
in paragraph 12 of resolution 1735 (2006).
During the last six months, most of the
Committee’s activities have been derived from its
consideration of the seventh report of the Monitoring
Team and the follow-up thereto. Different discussions
were held on the issues related to the three sanctions
measures: assets freeze, travel ban and arms embargo.
The Committee has also been exploring ways to further
improve its procedures. As a result, a standard form for
de-listing has been developed and is now available in
the de-listing section of the Committee’s website. The
Committee is also examining the procedures for
removing the names of deceased individuals and
considering the further revision of its guidelines with
regard to exemptions to the assets freeze and to the
travel ban, with a view to providing further guidance to
Member States.
Pursuant to paragraph 21 of resolution 1735
(2006), the Committee continued its discussion on the
identification of possible cases of non-compliance with
the sanctions measures. With the objective of
improving the effectiveness and implementation of the
sanctions regime, the Committee first discussed each
possible case of non-compliance mentioned by the
Monitoring Team and, secondly, derived horizontal
recommendations from this empirical analysis, aimed
at preventing the occurrence of such cases. I reported
to the Council on the Committee’s consideration of this
matter in a briefing held on 24 April 2008. Identifying
possible cases of non-compliance constitutes an
ongoing exercise, and the Committee will continuously
follow up on that.
The Committee further considered the issue of
the criminal misuse of the Internet for terrorist
purposes. The Committee shares the concerns
expressed over the fact that the Internet constitutes a

6

powerful medium and instrument for Al-Qaida, the
Taliban and their associates. Although this is a complex
issue, of which certain aspects clearly go beyond the
Committee’s mandate, it was agreed to continue the
discussion in the future.
This week, the Committee is starting its
consideration of the eighth report of the Monitoring
Team, submitted to the Committee in accordance with
resolution 1735 (2006). The report will shortly be
transmitted to the Council, and the Committee intends
to prepare a report reflecting its position on the
recommendations contained therein.
Further enhancing the dialogue with Member
States and increasing the transparency of its work
remain one of the primary concerns of the Committee.
To that end, I gave an open briefing to all interested
Member States on 18 December 2007.
Country visits are another way to interact with
Member States. As Chairman, I recently visited
Mauritania, Senegal and Mali. Several incidents that
occurred in their region during the months prior to the
trip had underlined once more that the terrorist threat
in the Sahel region is real. Whereas all three countries
had a good understanding of the sanctions regime and
demonstrated their strong commitment in the common
efforts to counter terrorism, authorities also clearly
expressed their need for assistance to further
strengthen their capacities.
Pursuant to paragraph 29 of resolution 1735
(2006), the Committee met yesterday with
representatives of Denmark, Liechtenstein, Sweden and
Switzerland for an in-depth discussion on relevant
issues. This exchange of views has been, I think, of
mutual benefit. I would like to take advantage of
today’s briefing to encourage all other interested
Member States to meet with the Committee.
I would also use this opportunity to sincerely
thank the experts of the Monitoring Team for their
invaluable support and contribution to the work of the
Committee. In addition to their visits and various
outreach activities, their input and proposals for all
issues on the Committee’s agenda have been highly
appreciated and have undoubtedly contributed to the
progress made so far.
It is clear from events in past months that the
threat from Al-Qaida and the Taliban has not
diminished. Within the United Nations efforts, the

08-32878

S/PV.5886

Committee is committed to continuing, in cooperation
with Member States, to assume its share of
responsibility in this global endeavour. To this end, the
Committee looks forward to further guidance from the
Security Council, inter alia, through the resolution to
be adopted in June.
The President: I thank Ambassador Verbeke for
his briefing and, in particular, for taking the trouble to
prepare a summary of the full report for the Council’s
deliberations. I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Jorge Urbina.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
Chairman of the Committee established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004), I am
presenting to the Security Council and the membership
of the Organization the report covering the six months
since the presentation of the most recent joint report to
the Security Council, which took place on
14 November 2007. The report summarizes the
activities that culminated in the approval of resolution
1810 (2008), relative to the continued implementation
of provisions in resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673
(2006).
(spoke in English)
Resolution 1673 (2006) called upon States not yet
reporting on progress made to implement resolution
1540 (2004) to do so without delay, and also
encouraged all previously reporting States to submit
additional information on progress made as well.
Six months before the deadline for submission of
its biennial report to the Security Council, the
Committee decided to make a special effort to
encourage States to meet the reporting requirements.
By mid-November 2007, the matrices of all Member
States-based on previously submitted information or, in
the case of non-reporting States, compiled from official
websites
of
Governments
and
international
organizations — were sent to all Member States to be
checked for accuracy and to provide a first report or
additional information on relevant measures taken or
planned to be taken.
As of 27 April 2008, more than half the Member
States have responded to the Committee’s request for
more information, bringing the number of States that
have submitted at least one report since 2004 to over
150. Within this group, the number of States submitting
additional information at least once has now reached

08-32878

100. The Committee takes this opportunity to thank all
the States that have responded promptly and to
encourage the remaining States that have not yet
reported to do so as soon as possible.
The Committee has continued to rely on outreach
activities to promote full implementation of resolution
1540 (2004). Since mid-November 2007, the Chairman
or some members of the Committee, officially
representing the Committee, and its experts
participated in 11 outreach conferences, seminars and
workshops. The purposes of that participation ranged
from raising awareness about the requirements to
achieve full implementation of the resolution and
encouraging States to submit reports on the status of
their implementation efforts to sharing experiences and
lessons learned and engaging in dialogue with
participating officials from Governments and
organizations particularly interested in the work of the
Committee.
The Committee has been engaged in three types
of outreach activities.
First, the United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs
has
organized
workshops
on
the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). A workshop
on the reporting requirements and assistance needs was
organized in Botswana on 27 and 28 November 2007
for participants from 22 African countries.
Secondly, we have held common-strategy
workshops to encourage non-responding States to
submit reports. With sponsorship by the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), another
workshop was held in Botswana on 29 and
30 November 2007, an event organized jointly with the
1540 Committee’s experts, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Monitoring Team of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities. The Committee appreciates the
cooperation extended by the UNODC in this regard.
Thirdly, we have also organized other outreach
events. Upon invitation by other bodies, the
Committee’s Chairman or some of its members,
officially representing the Committee, and several of
its experts participated in relevant meetings on subjects
ranging from the implementation of the universal
conventions against terrorism and of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy to the legal

7

S/PV.5886

aspects of international instruments countering terrorist
acts in the nuclear, chemical or biological fields and
other specific subjects such as proliferation, financing
and illicit trafficking in nuclear materials.
The Committee expresses its appreciation to the
Governments of Andorra, Belarus, Botswana, the
Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Norway, Slovakia
and the United States of America, the Commonwealth
of Independent States (CIS) and UNODA for their
sponsorship and organization of the different activities,
and the European Union for its ongoing support of the
Committee’s outreach activities.
(spoke in French)
The Committee continued to operate as an
information exchange centre on issues relating to
assistance through formal and informal contacts and
dialogue with States that might be interested in
requesting assistance and those that might be in a
position to offer it. To this end, it organized a dialogue
with participants in the outreach activities. In
December 2007, it put the final touches on a model
request for assistance adapted to each case and, taking
into account its centralizing role, sent it to all Member
States in order to better understand their needs in
specific areas and to match their requests with offers of
assistance from other States.
Since the jointly drafted common strategy paper
was presented to the Security Council in November
2007, the 1540 Committee has continued to work
closely with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
1267 Committee. Moreover, the groups of experts that
assist the three Committees have increased their
collaboration, as was seen in the subregional African
workshop mentioned previously. One important aspect
of those joint activities is the Committee’s interaction
with delegations of national officials from each of the
concerned countries, representing two or three different
competent ministries, with a view to promoting
coordination and alleviating the task of responding to
so many requests for information.
Efforts to further strengthen cooperation with the
competent regional and international organizations and
machinery continue. The exchange of information and
the reciprocal participation in outreach activities have
facilitated progress in this area. In December 2007, the
Committee sent letters to the heads of more than 30
international, regional and subregional organizations
and to authorities of the export control regimes and

8

other mechanisms, requesting them to draw to the
attention of their member States to the important links
between the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004) and the objectives of their
respective institutions. By April 2008, the Security
Council had received 12 positive replies from these
organizations.
Since January 2008, the subcommittees of the
1540 Committee have concentrated their work on
examining the information that is in the matrices of
Member States, as reviewed by experts, on the basis of
new information coming from the States and other data
from official sources. The information has provided the
factual data used as a basis for preparing the report of
the 1540 Committee that will be submitted to the
Security Council, covering the period starting on
28 April 2006. The report will be presented to Council
as soon as possible, or by 31 July 2008 at the latest.
On 25 April 2008, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1810 (2008), by which it extended the
mandate of the 1540 Committee for a three-year period
and, among other provisions, decided that the
Committee would continue to intensify its efforts to
promote complete implementation by all States of
resolution 1540 (2004).
The President: I thank Mr. Urbina for his
briefing.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among Council members, I wish to remind all speakers
from now on to limit their statements to no more than
five minutes in order to enable the Council to carry out
its work expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy
statements are kindly requested to circulate their texts
in writing and to deliver a condensed version when
speaking in the Chamber.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): First of all, I would like to thank
Ambassadors Jurica, Verbeke and Urbina for their
substantive briefings as Chairmen of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counter-terrorism, the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), respectively.

08-32878

S/PV.5886

In highlighting the struggle with the threat of
international terrorism as one of the most important
tasks confronting the United Nations and its Security
Council, Russia is giving a positive assessment of the
results of the activity of those Committees during the
six-month period just passed and is taking note of the
substantive contribution that each of them, in
accordance with its mandate, is making to the efforts of
the Council to enhance the effectiveness of
international counter-terrorism cooperation.

ready to continue to make its contribution to the
dynamic process of producing those assessments. What
lies ahead is a complex period of renewal and
clarification of those documents in the light of the
reactions of States, and the political guidance role of
the CTC at this stage will only grow stronger. In this
context we attach great importance to the organization
by the CTED of trips of various types and with various
objectives to States and monitoring the results of their
work.

We welcome the joint steps in favour of
interaction and coordination among the three
Committees and, above all, their expert groups, within
the framework of the ongoing dialogue with Member
States.

We also believe that, together with an assessment
of national potentials, the CTC very soon can also
adopt the global survey of the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). The need for such a document
is obvious to us. It could serve as a basis for a
continually updated general overview of the
achievements and shortcomings in the anti-terrorist
sphere. It would also enable the Security Council to
organize its work in this field in a more systematic
way,
including
within
the
framework
of
implementation of the objective of the Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.

The Russian Federation has taken an active part
in drawing up and reaching agreement on resolution
1805 (2008), which not only extended the mandate of
the
Counter-Terrorism
Committee
Executive
Directorate (CTED) to the end of 2010, but also made
specific adjustments to the organizational structure and
methods of work of that body.
We have already expressed our assessments
regarding the reform of the work of the CTED within
the framework of the broad discussion of this issue that
took place in March of this year. Without repeating
these issues, I should like to note the most important
thing: the CTC now has received additional significant
possibilities not only to monitor the implementation by
States of the fundamental anti-terrorist resolution 1373
(2001) but also to play a more active role in the
support required for their multifaceted efforts in coping
with the threat of terrorism.
We welcome the readiness of the CTC, acting
through the CTED, to devote priority attention to the
coordination of technical assistance and to expand
direct contact with potential donors and interested
States. We view that as an important factor in
strengthening the entire system of international antiterrorist cooperation and reaffirming the central
coordinating role of the United Nations in this sphere.
Under the leadership of the CTC, work has been
concluded for the preparation and adoption of a
preliminary assessment of the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) with regard to all Member
States. Russia fully shares the resounding positive
assessments of the achievements of the CTC and, as
Chairman of one of the subcommittees of the CTC, is

08-32878

I should like to confirm that the Russian
Federation considers that one of the most important
elements of the CTC mandate is to consider the work
with States on the implementation of resolution 1624
(2005). In this connection we welcome the decision of
the CTC to hold a discussion on the question of
possible measures to render technical assistance to
States on the implementation of the provisions of the
resolution.
We continue to consider the 1267 Committee and
the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
as one of the effective and viable mechanisms of the
Security Council in the counter-terrorist field.
Unfortunately, we are obliged to note with regret
the continuing spread of extremist ideas and of the
influence of the Taliban both in the territory of
Afghanistan and beyond its borders. Terrorists do not
sit on their hands. This has been clearly demonstrated
in their recent brazen terrorist act during the military
parade in Kabul.
We welcome the efforts of the 1267 Committee
and the Monitoring Team to support the sanctions list
in its updated form, reflecting the real nature of today’s
terrorist threat. We call upon States to submit to the
Committee requests for the inclusion on the list of
individuals and organizations linked to the Taliban and

9

S/PV.5886

Al-Qaida and also to provide any additional
information regarding such individuals previously
included on the list.

implementation of the provisions of resolution 1540
(2004) and to coordinate close international
cooperation for those ends.

We consider the strengthening of cooperation of
the Committee and the Monitoring Team with
INTERPOL and other professional regional and
international organizations to be of considerable
importance. We consider it necessary to continue the
practice of country visits by the Chairman of the
Committee and members of the Monitoring Team and
other forms of direct dialogue by the Committee with
Member States. That makes it possible to certify the
commitment of States to the cause of the struggle
against terrorism and to see at first hand the best
practices and methods in such a struggle.

At this stage it will be important to focus efforts
on the weak aspects of national monitoring systems,
identified as a result of the study of information on
measures undertaken by States, as submitted in the
national reports to the 1540 Committee. In this context
we believe it important not to forget about the need to
implement another key objective of the first stage of
the Committee’s work, linked with the submission by
States of their first national reports on measures they
have undertaken in implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

It is precisely
full
and conscientious
implementation by all States of their obligations in this
field that will determine the success of our common
efforts to counteract the real and changing threat to
international peace and security coming from the
Taliban and Al-Qaida. We favour closer coordination in
this area, above all with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate.
Regarding the activity of the 1540 Committee, we
first would like to welcome the unanimous adoption on
25 April of resolution 1810 (2008), which extended the
Committee’s mandate for three years. As initiator and a
sponsor of resolution 1540 (2004) and also of
subsequent resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008),
the Russian Federation considers it one of the major
international instruments for preventing weapons of
mass destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials, including dual-use goods and technologies,
from falling into the hands of non-State players, first
and foremost terrorists.
We believe that despite the magnitude and
complexity of these tasks, through joint multilateral
efforts by the members of the international community,
with the United Nations in the leading role, the
Security Council will be able to close the remaining
proliferation gaps in national legislation and to
strengthen the basis for coordinated resistance to the
black markets in weapons of mass destruction.
During the period that has elapsed since the
previous briefing, which was marked by the adoption
of resolution 1810 (2008), the 1540 Committee has
with confidence entered a new stage of its activity,
linked to stepped-up efforts to assist States in the

10

We note with satisfaction data to the effect that
after last November the number of States that have
submitted their first national reports has now increased
to 150. Those States that have at least once sent the
Committee additional information now exceeds 100.
We believe this demonstrates that the Committee’s
active position is yielding tangible results. It is
precisely for this reason that targeted work with States
that have not yet submitted their first national reports
must be continued.
It is important to continue work on reaching
agreement on the report of the Security Council
Committee on the results of the work for 2006 through
2008. We believe that the report must above all reflect
the work of the Committee itself in implementing its
objectives, whose priorities are clearly spelled out in
resolution 1540 (2004). We are ready to participate
constructively in further work on the draft, taking into
account the remarks we have already made in this
regard, in compliance with the clear time parameters
laid down in resolution 1810 (2008).
Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China): The delegation of
China thanks Ambassadors Jurica, Verbeke and Urbina
for their respective briefings on the work of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999), the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001) concerning counter-terrorism, and the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). China appreciates the effectiveness of the
work of the three Ambassadors and their respective
teams.
We appreciate the fact that the 1267 Committee
has been making steady progress in all its work. The

08-32878

S/PV.5886

Committee has made fresh progress in further
improving the integrity and accuracy of its sanctions
list, improving the transparency of its work,
strengthening its website and increasing the exchanges
and dialogue with the Member States and competent
international organizations, fully acknowledging such
progress.
China believes that maintaining the authority and
understanding of the Committee requires the vigorous
support of all Member States of the United Nations.
China encourages all countries, in dealing with issues
involved, to provide the Committee with detailed
information to the greatest extent possible so as to
improve the effectiveness and fairness of the sanctions
mechanism. China supports the Committee in
continuing to improve its working methods —
including its listing and de-listing procedures — and in
increasing its cooperation with mechanisms such as the
CTC.
China congratulates Ambassador Jurica on his
assumption of the chairmanship of the CTC. We
believe that he will lead the Committee to further
success in its work.
Since the previous briefing to the Council on the
CTC, the Committee has adopted a revised
organizational plan for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). The
implementation of the plan has had a positive impact
on the work of both the CTC and the CTED — a fact
that China appreciates. We have also noted that the
CTC has done a great deal of effective work in
reviewing Preliminary Implementation Assessments,
carrying out technical assistance visits to Member
States and increasing the transparency of its work.
China believes that Security Council resolution
1805 (2008) has not only extended and clearly defined
the mandate of the CTED, but has also pointed out the
direction for the future work of the CTC. China hopes
that the CTC and the CTED will follow the provisions
set out in resolution 1805 (2008), will continue to
follow the principles of cooperation, transparency and
even-handedness and will advance their work in all
areas, thereby making the Security Council’s counterterrorism mechanisms more comprehensive and
effective.
China welcomes the fact that the mandate of the
1540 Committee has been renewed without difficulty.
We hope that the Committee will, in accordance with

08-32878

resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1810 (2008), formulate a
comprehensive and balanced programme of work as
soon as possible in order to effectively promote the
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1540
(2004). China values the role played by the Committee,
and we have been participating constructively and
actively in the Committee’s work in all areas. We are
prepared to continue our active support for that work
and to contribute to facilitating the comprehensive
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), to building
consensus on non-proliferation and to promoting
cooperation on non-proliferation throughout the world.
Over the past few months, despite the
international community’s tireless efforts to combat
terrorism, terrorists and their violent acts have
continued to be widespread worldwide. Terrorism
continues to pose a serious threat to the peace and
security of the international community. Therefore, the
United Nations should continue to play a central role in
the international fight and cooperation against
terrorism.
China believes that the Security Council’s
adoption of resolutions 1805 (2008) and 1810 (2008) in
swift succession demonstrated its members’ common
resolve to strengthen its counter-terrorism machinery
and to strongly combat terrorism by sending a positive
signal to the international community. China hopes that
the three Committees will continue to pool their
resources, improve their effectiveness and pay closer
attention in their work to the views of developing
countries and their counter-terrorism needs, so that the
Council’s counter-terrorism mechanisms can better
meet the expectations of all Member States.
In September, the General Assembly will assess
the implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. That assessment will be of
great importance for the counter-terrorism work of the
United Nations. China supports the three Committees
in actively implementing the Global Strategy within
their respective mandates, so that the Security Council
and the General Assembly can complement and
coordinate with each other in their counter-terrorism
efforts and can create favourable conditions for
assessing the Strategy.
Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Permit me, Sir, to congratulate you and your delegation
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May and on having organized

11

S/PV.5886

this debate. I also thank Ambassadors Jurica, Urbina
and Verbeke for their briefings on the work of the
Committees over which they preside. In particular, my
delegation would like to recognize the work done and
the dedication shown by Ambassador Verbeke as
Chairman of the 1267 Committee, related to Al-Qaida,
and to wish him every success in his new duties as
Special Coordinator of the Secretary-General for
Lebanon.
Effective compliance with the mandates of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) requires constant
review of their working methods. Panama welcomes
the important work done by the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, because it has
developed methodologies for deleting names of
individuals, entities and deceased persons from the
consolidated list. As Ambassador Verbeke indicated,
that will produce a dynamic list that reflects the
evolution of the threat to international peace and
security represented by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. The
views of interested Member States in that regard must
be duly heard and heeded.
My delegation also highlights the significant
progress made in recent months by the CounterTerrorism Committee in assessing the implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001) in each of the countries
Members of the Organization. The approval and
referral of more than 167 Preliminary Implementation
Assessments (PIAs) and the ongoing review of the
study on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1373 (2001) are the Committee’s main
mechanisms for defining the current state of
implementation.
It is worth pointing out that those documents are
only practical tools for defining priorities and
improving compliance with obligations under
resolution 1373 (2001). The Committee should bear in
mind that the PIAs and the study are living documents
of a technical nature, adapted to the particular
circumstances of a country, a region or a point in time.
We must also strive for greater cooperation and
coordination with the special Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, established by the General
Assembly in 2005.

12

Panama attaches great importance to the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. With
the adoption of resolution 1810 (2008), the work of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) moves from merely monitoring the
implementation of obligations to promoting best
practices that facilitate the attainment of the objectives
of its mandate and promoting dialogue among the
Committee, States and other organizations or entities,
in particular those having a broad and representative
membership. We highlight, inter alia, the important
work of the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force,
established among States of the Caribbean basin, which
supports countries in the region in implementing
legislative and financial measures to prevent the
financing of terrorism.
In order to more effectively accomplish the tasks
entrusted to them, these subsidiary bodies must
strengthen cooperation among themselves and with the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force, always
mindful that the diversity of approaches among the
Committees represents a truly integrated response to
the scourge of terrorism. All cooperation must focus on
common areas under those bodies’ respective
mandates. Any proposal to merge the mandates and
structures of these Committees must be examined very
carefully, given the different objectives and nature of
each mandate.
Finally, we should recall that we must always
wage the fight against terrorism mindful of the
importance of protecting and promoting human rights
and respect for the rule of law.
Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): First and
foremost, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and the United Kingdom for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would also
like to congratulate South Africa for having
accomplished its presidency in an excellent manner.
My delegation welcomes this open debate of the
Council, which provides an opportunity for the Chairs
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) to brief the Council and the larger United
Nations membership on their work since their last joint
briefing in November 2007. We take this opportunity to
thank the three Committees, under the able leadership

08-32878

S/PV.5886

of their Chairmen, and the expert bodies — the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
and the expert group of the 1540 Committee — for
their great efforts in discharging their respective
mandates.
Allow me to begin by reiterating my country’s
unwavering position that international terrorism and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
constitute serious threats to international peace and
security. Viet Nam has always been committed to the
implementation of its obligations under the
international treaties to which it is a party and Security
Council resolutions in those areas. Since Viet Nam
became a member of the Council, it has made
constructive contributions to the work of those
Committees, including through its assumption of the
vice-chairmanship of the CTC.
My delegation shares the assessment of the three
Committees Chairmen on the achievements made in
the past six months. We would like to underline the
activities of the 1267 Committee aimed at improving
the effectiveness and the full and fair implementation
of the sanctions regime under resolution 1267 (1999),
in particular through improving the quality of the
consolidated list, holding discussions to reach a
consensus understanding among the members of the
Committee on the three sanctions measures, and
exploring ways to further improve the Committee’s
procedures.
For its part, the CTC has adjusted the
organization and methods of work of CTED to improve
the quality and consistency of its technical judgments
and dialogue with Member States. We support the CTC
efforts in considering the preliminary implementation
assessments, which serve as a tool to intensify dialogue
with every Member State on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). In that regard, my delegation
wishes to express its special thanks to members of the
Committee, especially those of sub-Committee C,
CTED experts and the Committee’s secretariat, for
their cooperation. We will continue to participate in the
discussion of the survey on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) by Member States, considering
that document as providing a global picture of counterterrorism efforts and identifying areas for further
international cooperation to improve existing efforts.

08-32878

My delegation appreciates the efforts made by the
1540 Committee during the past six months, including
those to encourage States to meet the reporting
requirements, its various outreach activities to promote
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and its
work to coordinate the assistance to implement the
resolution. We welcome the adoption of resolution
1810 (2008), which extended the mandate of the
Committee until April 2011. In that regard, we wish to
reiterate that the Committee’s work should be in
accordance with its mandate, international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, thus actively
contributing to the cooperation of the international
community in counter-terrorism and non-proliferation.
With regard to the cooperation between the three
Committees through their expert groups, my delegation
takes note of the activities as presented in the joint
statement. We look forward to seeing concrete
cooperative actions undertaken by the three expert
groups within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, in the context of the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
My delegation wishes to promote the
Committees’ work in the coming months and takes this
opportunity to highlight the following points.
First, the quality of the Committees’ work
depends very much on the cooperation of Member
States in providing updated information on their
implementation of the related obligations. The Council
should continue to encourage the three Committees to
work out further innovative ways to improve
meaningful dialogues with Member States and enhance
their support for the work of the Committees.
Secondly, the principal mandate of the
Committees is to monitor the implementation of the
relevant Council resolutions. The Committees should
continue their efforts in trying to get as detailed and
correct a picture as possible of the efforts made by
Member States, understanding the difficulties and
challenges they face and engaging them in finding
appropriate measures to improve implementation.
Thirdly, while further efforts could be sought to
define possible areas of common interest to improve
coordination among the three Committees and their
expert groups, that should be done with a very clear
understanding of the different mandate of each body as
laid out by the Council.

13

S/PV.5886

In conclusion, my delegation registers its
continued commitment and cooperation for further
success in the work of the three Committees.
Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I would
like to thank the three Committee Chairmen for their
briefings and for their joint statement on the
cooperation among the three Security Council
Committees that deal with the issues of terrorism and
non-proliferation. The Chairmen’s dedicated leadership
is central to the effectiveness of those three subsidiary
bodies, and we commend them for that leadership.
Since this is Ambassador Verbeke’s last briefing
on this matter, I would like to thank him for his service
to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). He served with
distinction, and we will miss his leadership in that
Committee. I also would like to extend our
appreciation to the experts groups of the three
Committees for their invaluable support to the
Committees.
Today’s briefing is timely, given the recent
renewal of the mandates of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
upcoming consideration of the mandate of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999). All three are now well
established and ready to begin a new phase of their
work.
I would like to focus on several ways in which
the Committees can help counter the dual scourges of
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, which represent the pre-eminent threats to
international peace and security today.
We believe a concentration on capacity-building
is essential. Reports have been received and analysed.
It is time to act on the findings of those evaluations.
Resolution 1805 (2008) rightly stresses the important
mandate of the CTC in that area. We welcome the new
tools the CTC has developed, such as the technical
assistance matrix and directory of assistance on the
CTC website. We urge the CTC to continue its
coordination with the G8 Counter-Terrorism Action
Group and to organize regional meetings for States
seeking and offering assistance. The 1267 Committee
also has a key role in that area. To that end, it should

14

continue to share with the CTC information concerning
States’ technical assistance needs.
The 1540 Committee should work with States as
an effective clearinghouse, using the information it has
collected from States. It should then set about the work
of building capacity. The Committee should proceed
with its efforts to post its implementation matrices for
resolution 1540 (2004) on its website, subject to States’
consent. By doing so, the Committee can help States
seeking to provide assistance to plan and execute
assistance programmes. We also hope that States will
use the new technical assistance template of the 1540
Committee to submit requests to the Committee. States
should also submit action plans to the Committee, as
my Government has done, so the Committee can use
those plans to match requests with offers of assistance.
The United States is pleased to play its part in
addressing States’ technical assistance needs. Last year,
for example, the United States Antiterrorism Assistance
Program (ATA) trained over 4,500 participants from 64
countries. ATA’s courses emphasize law enforcement
under the rule of law and respect for human rights. In
an effort to address the conditions that terrorists exploit
for recruitment and ideological purposes, United States
assistance programmes administered through the
United States Agency for International Development
and other agencies are increasing access to education,
improving health care and focusing on democratic and
economic reform. To support the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), the United States has provided
over $2 billion annually for assistance or other
programmes.
We look forward to the completion of specific
projects mentioned in the briefings. In particular, as
Chairman Verbeke indicated, the 1267 Committee must
continue to give priority to updating the consolidated
list to ensure that it accurately reflects the current
threat posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We
encourage other Member States to contribute to that
effort by providing information for further listings and
de-listings. The Committee should also continue its
efforts to update the Taliban portion of the list by
designating new Taliban who are responsible for the
upsurge in violence in Afghanistan. Similarly, the
Committee should de-list former Taliban who have
severed their ties to the organization, and add new and
updated biographical information to the list so that
States can better enforce the sanctions.

08-32878

S/PV.5886

The Committees have accomplished much.
United Nations Member States have frozen
$150 million in terrorist assets by implementing the
sanctions under resolution 1267 (1999). But we must
not lose sight of the remaining challenges. Al-Qaida
has expanded its operations and the Taliban are
resurgent.
Finally, the prospect of terrorists gaining access
to weapons of mass destruction remains the gravest
threat imaginable. To counter terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the
Committees must continue to focus on practical and
concrete activities that can promote the capacity of
States to implement the respective resolutions. We
pledge our support in that essential fight.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
Allow me to thank and to congratulate Ambassadors
Jurica, Urbina and Verbeke for their statements
regarding the three Committees under their
chairmanship, namely, the Committees established
pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1540 (2004) and
1267 (1999), respectively. Members of the Council are
unanimous in believing that theirs is effective and
serious work that deserves our encouragement in
moving ahead.
My delegation, which has always advocated
strengthened cooperation among all United Nations
bodies working to combat terrorism, very much
appreciates this joint briefing, which clearly illustrates
the joint, effective and complementary work being
done by the three Committees. Moreover, the workshop
held in Dakar, Senegal, in September 2007 for West
African countries was a good example of the benefits
of that cooperation. It is also gratifying to note that the
three Committees have not lost sight of the need to
provide appropriate technical assistance to States in
accordance with their needs. That will enable States
requesting such assistance to enhance their capacity to
combat terrorist threats. As this is a collective and
unified undertaking, it is important that, if possible, all
States achieve the highest possible security standards
in order to avert any potential breech that could be
exploited by terrorist groups.
In their efforts to carry out joint visits to Member
States, we must in particular encourage the 1267 and
1373 Committees to continue the process of improving
their methods. Those visits, which are certainly very
useful, could perhaps benefit from being more flexible

08-32878

and focused on specific objectives and the main
concerns of the countries visited.
With regard to the 1540 Committee, we welcome
the considerable increase in the number of countries
that have submitted their initial reports. We of course
encourage countries that have not yet done so to meet
their obligations under the resolution. It is also
important that Member States continue to cooperate
with the Committee, especially as regards providing
the required reports and additional information.
Given the great importance of this issue that
concerns us all, my delegation would like to propose
the idea of having the three Committees hold regular
joint briefings for all Member States. That would make
for greater interaction with the Committees and all
Member States, which could then have an exchange of
experiences and information from which useful lessons
could be learned. That would also ensure greater
transparency in the Council’s counter-terrorism efforts.
Lastly, it would bring about better involvement by all
Member States in combating international terrorism.
Such an initiative is clearly useful and possible, as
each Committee already holds annual public
information meetings.
I would also like to thank and congratulate the
1267 Committee for the dialogue and open exchange it
hosted yesterday, along with the representatives of
Denmark, Liechtenstein, Sweden and Switzerland.
In conclusion, Burkina Faso encourages the
participation of expert groups in the efforts of the
United Nations system in the framework of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. We call for the
strengthening and improvement of cooperation
between regional and subregional organizations and
United Nations bodies with the responsibility of
combating terrorism. In that regard, it is important to
note that the African Centre for the Study and Research
on Terrorism, located in Algiers, is an excellent vehicle
for, and good example of, cooperation between United
Nations and African Union bodies.
Mr. Mantovani (Italy): Let me first express our
heartfelt congratulations to you, Sir, and to the British
delegation on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of May. Allow me also to thank
and commend the South African delegation for its
stewardship during the month of April. We also wish to
underscore our gratitude to the Chairs of the three
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council for their

15

S/PV.5886

comprehensive briefings and contributions to the joint
efforts against international terrorism. We also
welcome their initiative to increase mutual cooperation
so as to maximize synergy, avoid duplication and lower
the burden on Member States.
While aligning itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly on behalf of the presidency of the
European Union, Italy will limit its remarks to the
following few points.
I would like warmly to thank Ambassador
Verbeke, who will soon leave his position as Chairman
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) — a task he fulfilled with great precision,
responsibility and leadership.
The briefing we heard a few minutes ago gave us
just a sampling of the many activities of the 1267
Committee. The sanctions list continues to be an
essential tool in the fight against international
terrorism. It is important that, with the continued
support of the wider membership, it be constantly
updated as a living document corresponding to the
ever-present threat of Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We
believe that improving the quality of the consolidated
list should be one of the key priorities of the Sanctions
Committee. That is because only complete identifiers
and a regular update of the list can provide Member
States with the precise information needed to more
effectively apply the sanctions regime that has been
established.
We acknowledge that legal challenges have been
raised to the sanctions list at the national and
international levels and that the Committee and the
Council have the responsibility to do everything
reasonable to improve the handling of specific cases.
We see the merit of the Security Council continuing on
the path of improving existing procedures, as was done
in the recent past with resolutions 1730 (2006) and
1735 (2006), so as to reconcile security demands with
respect for fundamental rights.
We would also like to express our utmost
gratitude for the high professional skills shown
throughout these years by the Monitoring Team, whose
contribution to the general debate on sanctions is all
the more relevant, and we look forward to the
negotiations for the renewal of its mandate.
The Security Council has recently renewed the
mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Executive

16

Directorate (CTED) confirming its main tasks and
responsibilities, while endorsing the reorganization
plan, which lays the groundwork for more efficient
action. To that end, Italy truly appreciates all the
efforts made by the Executive Director, Mr. Smith. We
hope that, with more focused action, the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) and CTED can better
exploit their role and potential as instruments of
dialogue with Member States. We also have to
reinforce every opportunity to better coordinate
international
cooperation
with
donors,
other
partners — such as the Security Council Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1540 (2004) — and their groups of experts, as well as
all the participants in the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force.
We further encourage CTC and CTED to continue
to work with external organizations, such as the
Counter-Terrorism Action Group (CTAG) of the G8.
Italy is committed to strengthening such cooperation
during its presidency of the G8 next year. In that area,
we welcome the methodology introduced by CTED,
successfully implemented during the 17 April Tokyo
meeting with CTAG, aimed at identifying with the G8
presidency specific cases, countries, regions or themes
of mutual interest to be jointly discussed. That
methodology should contribute to the prevention of
duplication and overlapping in the provision of
technical assistance to interested countries.
Italy welcomes the recent adoption of resolution
1810 (2008), which renews the 1540 Committee’s
mandate for three more years. We support the new
emphasis placed on the need to step up efforts to
promote the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004), in particular through outreach activities and
international assistance. To that end, the sharing of
experience and lessons learned between the 1540
Committee, the membership and relevant international
and regional organizations will be crucial. Enhancing
cooperation between the 1540 Committee and the
Al-Qaida and Counter-Terrorism Committees will also
be essential to ensuring compliance with resolution
1540 (2004).
We look forward to fruitful discussions within the
1540 Committee on how to make the best use of and
improve existing funding mechanisms to assist States
in meeting their non-proliferation obligations. We also
look forward to the next comprehensive review of the

08-32878

S/PV.5886

status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
due by January 31 2009.
Let me conclude by saying a few words about the
September review of the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy. Several initiatives have already been
produced in the framework of the Strategy. Member
States have a responsibility to continue on that track in
order to achieve progress in all areas of the broad plan
of action that was approved with the Strategy. We
welcome the Task Force’s efforts thus far to achieve
specific goals in many important areas, and we
appreciate the contribution that both the Monitoring
Team and CTED have provided. Italy feels that those
joint efforts should continue and, if possible, be
strengthened. We look forward to the briefing that the
Task Force and its working groups will provide in the
near future.
Ms. Qwabe (South Africa): I, too, would like to
thank the Chairpersons of the three Committees for
their informative briefings.
I will make a few general remarks that are
applicable to all three committees and some specific
comments on the resolution that was recently adopted
renewing the mandate of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
The Chairmen of the three committees are
making noteworthy efforts to ensure that there is better
coordination between the Committees, as well as
between their experts. Joint visits by the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida/Taliban Committee
help to prevent duplication. However, the issue of
duplication can be adequately addressed only by the
adoption of decisions by the Security Council that
would further consolidate the work of the Committees.
Improving transparency in the work of the three
subsidiary bodies is very important. If Members
continue to be in the dark on important processes that
directly affect them, it will merely perpetuate distrust
of the Council. Open briefings and direct meetings
between the subsidiary bodies and Member States,
such as those that have already been held, are
important measures to clarify issues and to improve
transparency.
The Chairmen also briefed the Council on their
work in the promotion of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Global Strategy is an

08-32878

attempt by the United Nations membership as a whole
to address the scourge of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, as well as to identify the conditions
conducive to its spread. It is therefore important that
the three subsidiary bodies complement the
implementation of the Global Strategy, and we have
noted significant progress in that regard since the
Strategy’s adoption.
I would now like to make some specific
comments with regard to the 1540 Committee.
I would like to begin by reiterating South Africa’s
firm conviction that weapons of mass destruction do
not guarantee security, but rather detract from it. As
long as those weapons exist, the world will always face
the threat of nuclear catastrophe. Non-proliferation and
disarmament are mutually reinforcing processes. We
therefore welcome the fact that the recently adopted
resolution 1810 (2008) includes language on
disarmament, arms control and the right to the peaceful
uses of nuclear, chemical and biological technology,
within appropriate safeguards.
South
Africa
shares
the
international
community’s concerns regarding the existence of
networks dealing in the illicit transfer of nuclearrelated technology and believes that closer
international cooperation is necessary to root out the
phenomenon of the illicit trade in technology that
could be used in the manufacture of weapons of mass
destruction. Our experience with illicit networks, in
which South Africa is the only country amongst many
affected countries to successfully prosecute suspects
thus far, suggests that there is considerable room for
improvement, also in the most developed countries,
with regard to international cooperation and
enforcement machineries.
That experience has prompted us to insist on the
inclusion of language on networks in the current
resolution. It is clear that the greatest threat posed by
weapons of mass destruction and related technologies,
materials, financing and delivery systems falling into
the hands of non-State actors originates from the States
that possess or are capable of possessing such
weapons, and from countries with an advanced
industrial base.
With its mandate extended through resolution
1810 (2008), the immediate challenge for the 1540
Committee will be to develop a balanced programme of
work that will address the real challenges at the heart

17

S/PV.5886

of the proliferation risks posed by non-State actors,
such as how the international community should
respond to illicit proliferation networks.
Mr. Ettalhi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I am pleased at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We will strive to
cooperate most positively with you. We also express
our high appreciation for South Africa’s effective
leadership of the Security Council in April.
We thank Mr. Jurica, Mr. Verbeke and
Mr. Urbina, Chairmen, respectively, of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1373 (2001), 1267
(1999) and 1540 (2004), for their valuable briefings.
We highly appreciate their efforts to ensure the
Committees’ success.
The progress achieved by the sanctions
Committees in promoting national counter-terrorism
capacities, implementing the Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and fulfilling international transparency
commitments can only enjoy our support as a very
important step towards eradicating both the causes and
the symptoms of terrorism.
Our unanimous determination to reject any
justification for terrorism cannot be at the expense of
dealing objectively with the causes of terrorism.
Occupation, the levelling of accusations against
civilizations and cultures, the denial of the legitimacy
of resistance to occupation and the application of
double standards in the implementation of international
instruments: those all give rise to much anger and
violence.
With respect to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), we
have no doubt that the large number of Preliminary
Implementation Assessments (PIAs) that have been
adopted, as noted by the Chairman in his briefing,
reflect the easing of demands on States to update their
reports. We all hope that the new PIA matrices devised
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate will reflect every State’s performance in
keeping with the criteria of transparency and
objectivity and will take account of human rights
issues. We hope that the overall review of resolution
1373 (2001), which is expected to be included in the
Committee’s next report to the Council, will be
accurate, cautious and realistic and will avoid hasty
classifications.

18

Turning to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) — the Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee — Libya considers that there is a
great need to improve the criteria for adding and
removing names from the consolidated list, with a view
to enhancing the accuracy and completeness of the list.
We believe that the Committee should set criteria and
terms for the submission of names for inclusion on the
list, including the provision of accurate information on
the individuals or entities in question. Libya stresses
that our measures should be just and that the work of
the Committee should focus on human rights; this
would enhance the effectiveness of the implementation
of the sanctions regime established under resolution
1267 (1999).
We therefore appreciate the Council’s adoption of
resolution 1735 (2006), which establishes coordination
mechanisms to handle requests for the removal of
names from the consolidated list, as a very important
step towards improving the sanctions regime and
increasing its transparency. We believe, however, that
this step is not enough and that it does not meet the
need for transparency in guaranteeing justice and
clarity in these sanctions measures. We urge the
Committee to continue to implement the provisions of
resolution 1452 (2002) regarding exemptions, with a
view to easing the severity of the sanctions on listed
individuals and their families and addressing the
humanitarian difficulties they may be facing. Here, we
stress that the Committee should consider the obstacles
that impede speedy action on requests for exemptions,
in particular the use of delays and holds to stymie such
requests.
With respect to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), Libya once again
denounces the existence of weapons of mass
destruction. We are convinced that the only guarantee
against access by non-State actors to such weapons is
their total elimination. Libya therefore believes that the
goals of disarmament and non-proliferation are
mutually supportive; continuous, irreversible progress
must be made on both fronts. Libya believes it
important to ensure that there is no contradiction
among the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004), the
United Nations Charter, existing multilateral treaties on
weapons of mass destruction, other instruments
adopted within international organizations in this
sphere, and the role of the General Assembly.

08-32878

S/PV.5886

We believe that the important issue of preventing
weapons of mass destruction from falling into the
hands of non-State actors requires the active
participation of all Member States. We believe that the
subject should be considered in the General Assembly
with a view to agreement on a legally binding
instrument on this issue.
In conclusion, Libya once again reaffirms its
support for all international counter-terrorism efforts
and its support for all efforts to reach the international
community’s goal of eradicating terrorism and bringing
about a world of peace and security for all.
Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and the United
Kingdom delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. My thanks go to
Ambassador Kumalo and the South African delegation
for their very effective work last month.
I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this meeting to hear briefings by the Chairmen of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee and the Committee on the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors.
The Council should continue to follow the work of
these Committees attentively and to encourage good
interaction and exchanges of experience among them,
in conformity with their respective mandates, as it has
recently done through resolutions 1805 (2008) and
1810 (2008). We welcome the progress on this point
and the issuance of a statement to the press on the
initiative of Ambassadors Jurica, Urbina and
Verbeke — whom I thank for their briefings this
morning.
The Permanent Representative of Slovenia will
soon make a comprehensive statement on behalf of the
European Union, to which, clearly, my country fully
subscribes. I wish now to emphasize a number of
elements that my delegation views as particularly
important.
The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) is a very important part of our counterterrorism and non-proliferation machinery. France
hopes that it will successfully attain all of the
objectives set in its programme of work. The biennial
experts’ report — to whose finalization by the
Committee my delegation is looking forward — should
show significant progress in the implementation of the
resolution.

08-32878

But a great deal remains to be done. Some 40
States have yet to report. National reports still show
weaknesses in several key areas: the biological
segment is almost entirely in progress; gaps remain in
the fight against the financing of proliferation and the
control of transport and of sensitive exports.
That is why France has been actively engaged in
updating the Committee’s mandate. With resolution
1810 (2008), a qualitative leap forward should be
possible on assistance to States requiring it; that is one
of the most promising areas for the future. The
extension of the mandate will make it possible to better
plan and finance assistance activities. The Committee
has received very clear instructions to play an active
role in coordinating offers of and requests for
assistance. Many practical provisions were included in
the resolution to facilitate this.
The Committee is also mandated to promote the
sharing of experience that would be useful for the
implementation of the resolution. This is of great
importance, because many States have requested
specific examples.
Finally, resolution 1810 (2008) provides
explicitly for the possibility of visits by the Committee
to countries in order to heighten awareness and offer
assistance.
Neither these provisions nor the extension of the
mandate constitute a blank cheque. The resolution
provides for regular meetings with the Security
Council and increased dialogue with interested States,
which will further bolster the legitimacy of the
resolution. The provisions sketch a road map for the
future. Three years will not be excessive: it is essential
for the Committee to get under way as quickly as
possible in order to fully implement the mandate
entrusted to it. In the short term, it should adopt its
biennial report without delay. It should then ensure that
its mandate is faithfully and fully reflected in its
programme of work, and it should spare no effort in
helping States to implement the resolution.
As our colleague, the Permanent Representative
of Croatia, has just recalled, the Council adopted
resolution 1805 (2008) of 20 March, renewing the
mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) and endorsing the
revised organizational plan of the Directorate, which
plays an essential role in supporting the CounterTerrorism Committee. We spoke of this in March (see

19

S/PV.5886

S/PV.5855), and I shall not revisit the issue. I wish
merely to highlight three fundamental aspects of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on which there has been
progress in recent months.
My first point relates to the need to ensure
coherence. The Committee must use identical criteria
during its assessments of the data made available by
States. This does not however mean automating a
system which must take careful account of the distinct
features of each country.
My second point relates to the importance of
dialogue. The Committee carries out visits, adopts
Preliminary
Implementation
Assessments
and
participates, through the Executive Directorate, in
numerous international meetings regarding various
aspects of the fight against terrorism. There is a need to
make use of these channels for dialogue to meet the
simple but far-reaching objective of raising the level of
counter-terrorist means available to States and to
achieve
the
fullest
and
broadest
possible
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We must
work together to build a bastion against terrorism.
My last point relates to the multiplying effect of
other agencies or organizations active in combating
terrorism. This is particularly true regarding the
participation of the Executive Directorate in the
Secretary-General’s Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, and the numerous meetings held with
specialized bodies such as the Financial Action Task
Force, the International Civil Aviation Organization
and the Counter-Terrorism Action Group. The CounterTerrorism Committee should be at the core of a
network of partner entities. Here, the European Union
has already responded to this appeal.
I would not wish to conclude without saying a
word on the 1267 Committee and, above all, without
paying a tribute to the work of Ambassador Verbeke,
who has done a great deal to strengthen the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime in all its aspects.
The first aspect is the adaptation of the list to the
nature of the threat. This effort is reflected in the
de-listing of certain entries which no longer met the
criteria of association with Osama bin Laden, Al-Qaida
or the Taliban. New names have also been added. This
flexibility of the list is critical and we need to preserve
it. The Committee has begun the essential task of
updating the entries on the list in order to identify

20

wrong, incomplete or outdated entries. A particular
effort should be made regarding deceased individuals.
The second aspect relates to monitoring the
implementation of the regime. It is up to the
Committee and its Chairman to identify cases of
non-compliance with the sanctions and to deal with
them appropriately. At the same time, the work of
explaining the parameters of these obligations, as is
being carried out in particular through the Committee’s
Internet site, is also pivotal. This necessary vigilance
regarding the implementation of sanctions goes hand in
hand with the related task of ensuring the quality and
reliability of the information on the list.
The third and final aspect relates to the
improvement of procedures to make them clearer and
more transparent. Thus, the Committee has adopted a
standard form for requests for de-listing; it has updated
its procedures regarding exemptions to assets freezing;
and it is doing similar work regarding exemptions to
the travel ban. These efforts benefit from the robust
and credible nature of the sanctions regime and must
be encouraged.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that,
taken together, these three Committees form the core of
the Security Council’s response to the grave threat to
international peace and security posed by terrorism,
proliferation and the convergence of those threats. We
have reaffirmed on numerous occasions in this
Chamber, and together with the Security Council, that
terrorism is criminal and unjustifiable. This is
particularly true of Al-Qaida and of its associates, who
have targeted not only States on all continents, but also
the United Nations itself, as in Algiers last
11 December. Allow me once again to pay tribute to
the memory of the victims and to their families, and to
reaffirm France’s unswerving determination to thwart
the designs of terrorists wherever they may be active.
Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): My delegation too
wishes to congratulate you, Sir, and the delegation of
the United Kingdom on your assumption of the
presidency for this month. We also wish to thank South
Africa and to congratulate it on its able stewardship of
the Council last month.
My delegation appreciates the important briefing
by the Chairmen of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), the 1267 Committee and the 1540 Committee.
We would like to express our appreciation to the

08-32878

S/PV.5886

Chairmen for their able leadership of the work of those
Committees.
Today’s briefings clearly reflect the significance
of the close cooperation among the three Committees
dealing with counter-terrorism issues. We are of the
view that this cooperation will not only be crucial for
the work of the Committees, but also will be essential
for synergy and coherence in the Council’s
contribution to countering the threat posed by
terrorism. To this end, my delegation recalls the
intention of the Council to provide guidance to the
three Committees on areas of common interest in order
to better coordinate counter-terrorism efforts stipulated
in resolution 1805 (2008).
With regard to the briefing on the CounterTerrorism Committee, we duly note the Committee’s
accomplishments on several key initiatives, which will
serve as a sound basis for its future work. My
delegation is of the view that the revised organizational
plan could strengthen the role of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) to enhance
the CTC’s ability to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). We share the view that the
recommendations contained in the organizational plan
could consolidate the achievements of CTED, and
could eventually intensify the work of the CTC.
My delegation recognizes the significance of the
adoption of Preliminary Implementation Assessments
(PIAs) as a tool to intensify dialogue between the CTC
and Member States on the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). PIAs are dynamic documents, and we
hope that the CTC will continue to further improve the
consistency and accuracy of their content. On the issue
of a revised version of the “Survey of the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1373
(2001) by Member States”, we would like to underline
the need for the CTC to present a more accurate picture
in finalizing the survey.
On the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005),
my delegation reiterates the importance of CTED’s
support for the work of the CTC in ensuring
comprehensive implementation of the resolution. For
its part, Indonesia actively continues its efforts to
promote cultural dialogue, tolerance and mutual
understanding with religious communities and among
civilizations.
With regard to the briefing on the 1267
Committee, I would like to use this opportunity to

08-32878

reiterate our strong commitment to the promotion of
the effective implementation of the sanctions regime
adopted under resolution 1267 (1999) by improving the
quality of the consolidated list. We are of the view that
our joint efforts to improve the quality of the
consolidated list, particularly through enhancing its
completeness and accuracy, should contribute generally
to the effectiveness of the implementation of resolution
1267 (1999). In this context, my delegation fully
supports the intention of the Committee to evaluate the
review mechanism of the consolidated list, as provided
for in paragraph 6 (i) of the Committee’s guidelines.
While fully supporting the effort to identify
possible cases of non-compliance, my delegation
maintains its view that the Council, in considering the
compliance of Member States, should also take into
account their achievements in combating Al-Qaida and
its affiliates through robust national criminal law
enforcement. The problem of non-compliance may be
caused not only by lack of political will or insufficient
understanding of the sanctions regime, but also by
legal deficiencies of procedure applicable to the listing
and de-listing processes. My delegation therefore is of
the view that the Security Council should give its
utmost and urgent attention to the issue of further
improving fair and clear procedure. We are convinced
that addressing this issue will also improve and
promote effective implementation of the regime at the
national level.
Turning to the briefing on the 1540 Committee, I
would like to reassert Indonesia’s support for the main
tasks of the Committee, namely promoting global
capacity and raising international standards for
implementing the resolution. We are also pleased to
note that the Council, through resolution 1810 (2008),
has extended the mandate of the Committee for a
period of three years.
Since the full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is a long-term objective and an ongoing
process, we hope that in its future work the Committee
will continue to place priority on dialogue and
cooperation with Member States on their need to fulfil
their obligations under the resolution. In this regard,
my delegation stresses that the responsibility for
implementation of the resolution rests fully with
national Governments, whereas international and
regional organizations can continue to assist them upon
their request and needs.

21

S/PV.5886

Finally, my delegation reiterates the importance
of continued and strengthened cooperation among the
1267, Counter-Terrorism and 1540 Committees. My
delegation would also like to underline that full
implementation of resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) can be effectively carried out
through continuous efforts, patience, dialogue,
cooperation and assistance.
The President: I should now like to make a
statement in my capacity as representative of the
United Kingdom.
I would like to join others in thanking
Ambassadors Verbeke, Jurica and Urbina for their
briefings to the Council this morning. I would like to
thank not only them, but also their staffs and the expert
groups of each Committee, for their time and
commitment. Ambassador Verbeke’s leadership of the
1267 Committee will be much missed.
On the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
the United Kingdom welcomes the revised
organizational plan for the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and the
adoption of Security Council resolution 1805 (2008)
extending the Directorate’s mandate. We welcome the
renewed emphasis on tailored dialogue between States
and the Counter-Terrorism Committee and, in
particular, the need for increased focus on the delivery
of technical assistance as key to full implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001).
We look forward to early progress on the global
survey of the implementation of resolution 1373 (2001)
that is under discussion in the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. This will be the first substantive report
from the Committee on the strengths and weaknesses
in our collective efforts to tackle terrorism, and on
what more needs to be done. We look forward to
considering the report’s recommendations here in the
Security Council.
On the 1267 Committee, the United Kingdom
believes that we need to improve the quality of the
consolidated list of the Al-Qaida and Taliban Sanctions
Committee. The list must reflect the current threat. Its
legitimacy depends on the quality and extent of the
information within it. We must continue to update the
list at every opportunity and ensure our procedures for
listing and de-listing are efficient and effective. At
present, they are not. Our ability to remove individuals
that no longer meet the criteria is as important as

22

listing additional names that do. Additionally, I would
like to reinforce the importance of cooperation between
the 1267 Committee, the Monitoring Team, Member
States and regional and international organizations. We
hope that this cooperation continues to grow.
The United Kingdom welcomes the extension of
the mandate of the 1540 Committee, in particular the
clear focus on capacity-building and sharing of knowhow. The unanimous adoption of resolution 1810
(2008) sends a strong signal of the international
community’s determination to ensure that weapons of
mass destruction do not fall into the hands of criminals,
terrorists and would-be proliferators. We look forward
to early agreement on the Committee’s report on
compliance with resolution 1540 (2004).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Slovenia, to whom I give the floor.
Ms. Štiglic (Slovenia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The candidate
countries Turkey, Croatia and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro and Serbia, and the European Free Trade
Association (EFTA) country Norway, member of the
European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and
Armenia, align themselves with this declaration.
At the outset, let me congratulate you, Sir, upon
your assumption of the presidency for the month of
May. I would also like to thank South Africa for its
stewardship of the Council in the previous month.
The European Union is pleased to participate in
today’s debate. Due to time limitations, the EU will
shorten its statement. The full version is being
distributed and constitutes our official statement.
We welcome the briefings from the Chairmen of
the three Committees. These Committees play an
important role in the work of the United Nations in
countering the terrorist threat. We appreciate the
opportunity to hear more about their work as part of an
open and transparent debate.
Terrorism is a global threat that requires a global
and comprehensive response. The EU reiterates once
again that terrorism constitutes one of the most serious

08-32878

S/PV.5886

threats to international peace and security, and that any
acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable. The EU
is convinced that any measures taken to fight this
scourge must be in accordance with obligations under
international law in particular international human
rights law, refugee law, and international humanitarian
law. Effective counter-terrorism measures and the
protection of human rights are not conflicting, but
rather complementary and mutually reinforcing, goals.
Our action must be firmly based on due process and the
rule of law.
The EU would like to welcome efforts by the
three Security Council Committees and their expert
groups to enhance coherence and avoid duplication.
Further, the EU would highly encourage the expert
bodies of the Security Council Committees to continue
enhancing their mutual cooperation. A coordinated
approach will not only prevent duplication of work but
also help maximize resources and ensure synergy in
Security Council counter-terrorism work.
We commend the 1267 Committee for the
considerable progress made with regard to improving
the effectiveness of the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime. In doing so, the Committee was supported in
an effective manner by the Monitoring Team. We
welcome the issuance of the seventh report of the
Monitoring Team as an official United Nations
document (see S/2007/677) containing relevant
analysis and recommendations that will further
improve the effectiveness of the Committee’s work. We
also look forward to receiving the eighth report of the
Monitoring Team.
The EU welcomes the continued determination of
the Committee to improve procedures for listing,
notification and de-listing of individuals and entities,
to keep the consolidated list updated and to enhance
public outreach and the efforts undertaken to
implement these objectives. The EU has always
emphasized the need to strengthen fair and clear
procedures for placing individuals and entities on
sanctions lists and for removing them, in order to
enhance the effectiveness of targeted sanctions.
In addition, the EU welcomes the decision of the
1267 Committee to address the problems in
implementing the sanctions regime due to a lack of
identifiers. Addressing these problems and providing
additional identifiers will enhance the accuracy and

08-32878

quality of the list itself, thereby strengthening the
effectiveness and credibility of the sanctions regime.
In this regard, we welcome the decision of the
Committee to continue to review and update the list
and to consider which elements of its methodology
could be improved. The Committee’s decision to
update a number of the tools and documents related to
the consolidated list and to enhance dialogue between
the Committee and States by creating a tool for
voluntary, informal reporting will further improve its
work.
The EU recognizes the need to bring the
consolidated list to wider attention, in particular to the
attention of financial institutions. We believe that, in
doing so, it would be useful to add more information to
the list as to the primary reason for listing. We
welcome the decision of the Committee to separate
section E of the list from the rest of the list.
We note that the Monitoring Team has reported
some cases of non-compliance with the obligations
under the sanctions regimes. In this respect, the EU
welcomes the fact that the Committee has developed a
methodology
to
identify
possible
cases
of
non-compliance and to address them in the most
appropriate way. We look forward to the development
of specific and general recommendations on what can
be done to prevent the occurrence of such cases.
As regards the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), the EU welcomes the adoption of
Security Council resolution 1805 (2008), which
extended the mandate of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED). The
European Union recognizes the crucial role of CTED
in supporting the CTC in the fulfilment of its mandate.
The effective continuation of CTED’s work of
facilitating capacity-building and advising the CTC on
issues of implementation, including legal and technical
issues, will enhance the CTC’s ability to monitor
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624
(2005).
The European Union welcomes and fully supports
the organizational plan for CTED prepared by its
Executive Director, approved by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and endorsed by the Security Council in its
resolution 1805 (2008). The EU believes that the
revised organizational plan provides an excellent basis
for CTED’s future work.

23

S/PV.5886

The EU supports additional briefings to States
and further visits to selected States, with their consent.
These briefings and visits provide a means of direct
communication and of listening to the suggestions and
concerns of States. They also provide for better
understanding of all that sanctions regimes can offer to
assist States in their fight against terrorism.
The EU welcomes the work put forward by the
Committee
in
preparing
the
Preliminary
Implementation Assessments within the framework of
resolution 1373 (2001). We welcome the decision of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee to reassess the status
of implementation of resolution 1373 (2001) by all
States and to report its findings to the Council. We look
forward to seeing the results of the global survey of
implementation, which will provide valuable
information for the further work in the fight against
terrorism.
The EU welcomes the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1810 (2008) and is encouraged by
the extension of the mandate of the 1540 Committee
until April 2011, as well as by its enhancement. The
EU commends the work of the 1540 Committee and its
role in addressing the threat to international peace and
security posed by the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. At the same time, the EU believes that the
efforts to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, including to non-State actors, must be
strengthened and intensified.
The EU is keen to see the Committee strengthen
its role as a clearing house for facilitating technical
assistance
to
help
countries
achieve
full
implementation of all aspects of Security Council
resolution 1540 (2004). The EU also believes that a
longer, three-year mandate will be key to ensuring
better planning and funding of assistance. Countryspecific outreach events, now explicitly authorized
under the resolution, are also a promising development.
The EU remains fully committed to lending its
full support to the work of the 1540 Committee in
order to promote the universal implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). We are in the process of
preparing a new Joint Action, within the framework of
the implementation of the EU Strategy against the
Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, to
support the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
which will reflect the new tasks and priorities
identified in resolution 1810 (2008).

24

In that respect, the EU believes that making
better and broader use of voluntary funding for the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) is essential,
and we look forward to the forthcoming proposals of
the 1540 Committee in that regard. The EU looks
forward to the 1540 Committee’s presentation of a
comprehensive report to the Security Council no later
than 31 July 2008, as requested in resolution 1810
(2008).
To conclude, I would like once again to thank the
Chairmen of the three Committees for their work. The
EU will continue to promote universal adherence to the
conventions and protocols forming the legal basis for
the work of the United Nations in countering the
terrorist threat, and we will continue to support their
global implementation. We commend the work of the
Security Council as a vital component in the efforts of
the United Nations to combat the terrorist scourge,
which is a threat to all States and to all peoples.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Cuba, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Malmierca Díaz (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
On behalf of the delegation of Cuba, Sir, I wish you
every success in the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I also take this opportunity to
offer special congratulations to the Permanent
Representative of South Africa and his entire team for
the excellent work accomplished during the month of
April. In addition, I wish to thank the Chairmen of the
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) for the
information provided at this meeting.
For years, as everyone knows, our country has
been submitting to the Security Council detailed
information about the terrorist actions committed
against Cuba by various individuals and organizations
and about the complicit protection provided to them by
the Government of the United States. On many
occasions, we have spoken in this Chamber and sent
letters to the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Security Council, denouncing specific cases of flagrant
violations of resolution 1373 (2001). Unfortunately,
nothing has been done so far.
This very week, 8 May will mark the first
anniversary of the permanent release in the United
States of the terrorist Luis Posada Carriles, who is
rightly considered to be the most notorious terrorist in

08-32878

S/PV.5886

the Western Hemisphere. Despite the fact that the
Government of the United States itself has
acknowledged that he is a dangerous terrorist, and
despite all the evidence of its long relationship with
him at its disposal and provided by Cuba since 1998,
Posada Carriles was charged by United States
authorities with only minor immigration crimes.

the lives of Cuban and United States citizens. Once
again, Cuba demands the immediate release of Gerardo
Hernández, Ramón Labañino, Fernando González,
Antonio Guerrero and René González. For fighting
terrorism, our five heroes will have served 10 years of
unjust and cruel imprisonment in United States prisons
on 12 September 2008.

The release of that terrorist and former agent of
the Central Intelligence Agency demonstrates that his
insignificant trial in the United States was a farce. One
need only read the news to see that Posada Carriles
freely walks the streets of that country, making press
statements to anyone who will listen, and is honoured
and recognized in Miami for his terrorist acts against
Cuba. Nothing more need be said.

Cuba reiterates its request to the Security Council
and its Counter-Terrorism Committee to urgently
address the detailed information that our country has
provided them and to take all measures necessary
under the relevant resolutions. Double standards cannot
prevail. The Security Council cannot continue to
maintain a complicit silence in the face of this gross
affront to the victims of terrorism throughout the
world. It will be impossible to eliminate terrorism if
some terrorist acts are condemned while others are
ignored, tolerated or justified, or if the issue is simply
manipulated to promote narrow political interests.

Cuba is appearing once again in the Security
Council to strongly denounce and condemn the
complicit inaction of the Government of the United
States and the protection that it is providing to Posada
Carriles. While it insists on presenting itself as the
leader of its self-proclaimed “war on terror”, the
Government of the United States continues to ignore
the request for Posada Carrile’s extradition filed on
15 June 2005 by the Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela.
The Government of Cuba demands once again
that Washington return the terrorist to Venezuela or try
him on its own territory, in conformity with article 7 of
the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Civil Aviation.
The Government of the United States has even
had the nerve to allege that it cannot hand Posada
Carriles over to Venezuela or Cuba because he is in
danger of being tortured. This falsehood is even more
outrageous when one considers that the accusing
Government is precisely the one that is responsible for
the deaths of hundreds of thousands of civilians in
Iraq; that authorized the torture at Abu Ghraib and at
the Guantánamo naval base, a part of Cuban territory
illegally occupied by the United States; and that is an
accomplice in kidnappings, disappearances, secret
flights and clandestine prisons.
While confessed and unscrupulous terrorists walk
free, the Government of the United States holds
hostage in high-security prisons five young Cubans
who were only trying, with great altruism and courage,
to obtain information about Miami-based terrorist
groups in order to prevent their violent acts and to save

08-32878

Cuba has never permitted, nor will it ever permit,
its territory to be used for terrorist actions against any
State, without exception. As always, we shall continue
to strongly fight terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. As it has always done, Cuba will
continue to abide strictly by Security Council
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
and will maintain its cooperation with the subsidiary
bodies established pursuant to them.
Mr. President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of India, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Sen (India): At the outset, please accept my
felicitations, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. We are happy to
participate in today’s joint debate on three Security
Council items, whose implementation requires not only
the fullest collective effort by the entire membership,
but also their fullest participation in processes that
affect the collective security of all nations equally. I
will limit my remarks to a few comments, proceeding
from my last statement on this subject, in March this
year, before this body (see S/PV.5855).
To begin with, let me reaffirm India’s abiding
determination to work to conclude the long-pending
effort to finalize a comprehensive convention on
international terrorism, moving beyond debates that
essentially miss the larger point. Such a convention
must be agreed upon to create a strong interlocking

25

S/PV.5886

network of Member States, international organizations
and specialized agencies working in unison to counter
terrorism. The adoption of such a convention through
the exercise of the lawmaking powers of the General
Assembly would be in the interests of all Member
States and would reinvigorate the multilateral and
collective dimensions of counter-terrorism efforts.
India continues to call upon the world to act as one in
denying terrorists, their ideologues and their financiers
access to arms, funds and means of transportation for
their deadly goods, as well as safe havens.
If those overarching goals are to be achieved,
there is also a need for a more genuinely inclusive
approach to be adopted by the Security Council, taking
along the larger membership of the General Assembly.
While India remains committed to fully cooperating
with all existing counter-terrorism mechanisms, as a
State with long experience in dealing with terrorism,
we are of the view that better cooperation between the
Council and the General Assembly will provide our
collective efforts greater legitimacy and ownership.
There are also operational benefits to be achieved
from greater collective pragmatism in tackling
terrorism through multilateral mechanisms. Not the
least of those potential benefits is better
implementation of the resolutions relating to counterterrorism, namely resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) and their successor
resolutions.
However, to reach that stage of pragmatic, goalbased cooperation, we need to do much more than we
have done thus far. It is also unclear whether better
implementation of those resolutions can be secured by
upgrading their existing mandates, as in the recent case
of resolution 1810 (2008), or by working to identify
genuine barriers to better implementation and
promoting a more collaborative system of extending
assistance and utilizing available regional expertise and
appropriate technologies. Implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), including reporting, remains a national
responsibility on the basis of national legislation,
arrangements and regulations. There may also be merit
in an approach that provides incentives for cooperation
rather than the current effort to continually raise the
bar for implementation by adding newer and more
intrusive reporting obligations, irrespective of whether
those are currently described as voluntary tasks.

26

That apart, however, I also wish to reiterate at
this juncture India’s continuing emphasis on the need
for closer and more comprehensive international
cooperation to root out the phenomenon of illicit
activities such as clandestine proliferation of sensitive
technologies, which could contribute to the
manufacture of weapons of mass destruction.
The Security Council should also consider
whether its existing procedures need some overhauling,
in particular with regard to the sanctions regime
imposed upon Al-Qaida and Taliban operatives, entities
and their supporters. While at one level the effort to
improve modalities for review and delisting is to be
welcomed, there is also a need for the Council to
examine its own practice of selectively evaluating the
provision of information that it seeks from Member
States, which, for unrelated and procedural reasons, is
sometimes not utilized.
With regard to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC)
and
the
Counter-Terrorism
Executive
Directorate (CTED), we are encouraged by the positive
efforts of the dynamic new Executive Director. Greater
dialogue and consultation with all Member States and
better operational coordination with the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force is the correct
way forward for a mechanism that eventually has a
larger responsibility to the entire membership of the
United Nations.
Ultimately, we will collectively benefit from the
furtherance of the ongoing process of making the
CTED a completely professional, apolitical body that
goes beyond analysis of reports. However, the CTED
can only transcend the minutiae of examining reports
and preliminary implementation assessments once it is
no longer perceived as a largely political body, but as
an apolitical, professional organization.
In conclusion, I would venture the following
suggestions.
Better coordination between the various arms of
the Council’s counter-terrorism mechanism must begin
at home. In other words, inter-related aspects of the
work of the 1267 Committee, the 1540 Committee and
the CTC should be dovetailed with those of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force. Those
tasks should also be more closely linked with the core
tasks of the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, INTERPOL, the International Civil Aviation

08-32878

S/PV.5886

Organization, the International Maritime Organization
and others.
While supporting the greater emphasis on the
extension of technical assistance bilaterally, regionally
and internationally, we should keep in mind the
primary task of ensuring the fullest implementation of
the relevant Council resolutions before we take the
process forward to more technical and potentially
intrusive areas of implementation that may add to the
sense of report fatigue among many Member States.
India remains willing to provide all assistance in
the larger effort to counter the threat of terrorism. Our
commitment to do so is already on record, in India’s
fifth report, submitted to the CTC in March 2007. We
are willing to share information with other relevant
United Nations mechanisms that work in those fields.
Such assistance can be provided by India bilaterally or
multilaterally, especially to countries that are
themselves not directly threatened by terrorism but
whose participation is vital to the success of the larger
international effort.
Our comments here today are in the spirit of
pressing for further forward movement in bringing
existing mechanisms to deal with terrorism closer
together in operational terms. We welcome more
efforts to use such open dialogues as a mechanism to
build closer cooperation within the international
system. We therefore look forward to working in a
pragmatic manner to alter the regrettable perception
outside these walls that the role of the United Nations
in combating terrorism is limited to statements and
speeches and does not include concrete measures. For
that, we must not only work to foster better
institutional cooperation and “jointedness” — if I may
use the word — within the international system, we
must also focus on implementing goals that can be
achieved before mandating new and potentially
challenging commitments.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): First of all, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of May and express my
deep appreciation to you for convening today’s debate.
I would also like to thank the Chairs of the Council’s
three counter-terrorism committees for their respective
briefings.

08-32878

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy sets out the shared understanding among
Member States on how to address the common threat
of terrorism. In order to implement the Strategy, most
importantly, each Member State must strengthen its
national counter-terrorism capacity and promote
international cooperation as a matter of urgency. As the
Chair of the G8 this year, Japan places high priority on
building national capacities to combat terrorism and
organized crime, and we are making great efforts to
achieve that objective.
We highly value the work of the CounterTerrorism Committee (CTC) and the CounterTerrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) in identifying
specific needs for counter-terrorism technical
assistance through site visits and preliminary
implementation assessments. One of the major
challenges is how to match appropriate supporters with
the assistance needs identified by the CTED. For such
matchmaking, well-focused dialogue among CTED, the
CTC and Member States will be useful, as stated in
paragraph 5 of resolution 1805 (2008). Japan, as the
Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Action Group, is
making every effort to promote effective coordination
with the CTED. We are jointly striving to strengthen
information-sharing in New York and to coordinate the
best response to the counter-terrorism assistance
requirements of concerned countries.
Japan also welcomes the readiness of CTED to
participate actively in and support the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force. We hope the
CTED will make a significant contribution to the
implementation of the Counter-Terrorism Strategy
through its active participation in the Task Force and
its working groups.
The Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated individuals
and entities is playing a crucial role in that field. It is
our view that its mandate should be extended beyond
June, and we welcome the efforts made in improving
the quality and procedures of its consolidated list. We
encourage the Committee to continue that effort. Japan
places great importance on de-radicalization as an
essential element of counter-terrorism. We therefore
appreciate the Committee’s continuous engagement in
the working group on de-radicalization under the Task
Force.

27

S/PV.5886

Japan welcomes the recent decision of the
Security Council to extend and enhance the mandate of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004). Japan sees the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) as a key
element in our global efforts to prevent the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Japan has
taken an active initiative to promote the
universalization of resolution 1540 (2004). As the
Chair of the G8, it is our intention to promote the
examination of how G8 countries can contribute
further to the work of the 1540 Committee.
The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy review conference is slated for early
September 2008. The Strategy is a valuable instrument
for the Member States to work collectively in
combating terrorism. The United Nations and its
Member States must achieve greater cooperation to
further advance global efforts. We have high
expectations that the three subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council will do their utmost to implement the
Strategy. At the same time, it will be important for the
three Committees to coordinate and streamline their
activities and to avoid duplicating efforts in their visits
and assessments of the reports submitted by the
Member States. We would also appreciate it if the
Committees could provide regular informal briefings,
in addition to briefings such as this morning’s, to
ensure accountability and guidance to Member States.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Eilon Shahar (Israel): Allow to me to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council this month and to thank you
for convening this important debate. My delegation
also congratulates the Chairpersons of the subsidiary
bodies on their able stewardship and thanks them for
their briefings this morning.
The struggle against terrorism is a global one
and, as such, the United Nations has an important role
to play in coordinating the efforts to combat that
scourge. States must remain vigilant not only in
meeting their obligations to prevent terrorism but also
in providing support to those States that lack capacity.
We therefore encourage enhanced cooperation with the
Counter-Terrorism
Implementation
Task
Force,
subsidiary bodies of the Council and other relevant
entities of the United Nations. We also stress the

28

importance of a comprehensive approach within the
United Nations system to deal with the threat of
terrorism and measures taken to address it. To that end,
we look forward to the review of the implementation of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
this coming September.
While Israel has specifically experienced the
threat of terrorism, it is well known that terrorism
transcends geographical boundaries, borders and
nations. It is therefore incumbent upon all States to
adhere to their obligations under international law,
including the relevant resolutions adopted by the
Council, in particular resolution 1373 (2001). Some
States not only neglect their responsibilities to enforce
their borders and prevent the movement of terrorists;
worse, they host, support and sponsor terrorism. The
granting of safe haven to terrorists — as we see today
in parts of our region — is a threat to international
peace and security. The international community must
press for an end to State support for, and sponsorship
of, terrorism. Those States that lack the capacity to
implement their international obligations should be
assisted through the appropriate channels.
Resolution 1624 (2005) is part and parcel of the
work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED). We
note the Chairperson’s reference in this morning’s
briefing to the Committee’s agreement to initiate
discussions to explore the technical assistance needs of
States in implementing that resolution. We emphasize
the urgency and pressing need to address the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005) beyond
States’ reporting. We believe that no counter-terrorism
strategy is complete without addressing the issue of
incitement.
In March of this year, the Council extended the
mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate. We support that extension and the
organizational change made within CTED, which
allows for better quality, consistency and flexibility in
its work. We appreciate the dialogue among the
Executive Director, the Chairman and Member States.
Those efforts have led to greater transparency and
positive engagement with CTED. We look forward to
their continuation.
Although nine years have passed since the
Council adopted resolution 1267 (1999), the
Committee’s work and impact on countering terrorism

08-32878

S/PV.5886

is more relevant than ever. Israel fully supports the
work of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999). We encourage efforts to ensure
that fair and clear procedures continue to be utilized in
the listing and de-listing process. We welcome the
further consideration of how to improve and expand
the procedures so that the lists remain imbued with
quality and not merely quantity. At the same time, we
note that much progress has been achieved under
resolutions 1730 (2006) and 1735 (2006). In that
regard, we look forward to the deliberations of the
Council in the lead-up to the extension of the mandate
next month.
On a related note, we support taking a fresh look
at the working group established under paragraph 9 of
resolution 1566 (2004) to consider and submit
recommendations to the Council on practical measures
to be imposed on individuals, groups or entities
involved in, or associated with, terrorist activities,
other than those designated by the Al-Qaida/Taliban
Sanctions Committee.
Similarly, Israel supports resolution 1540 (2004)
and believes it is a significant step towards the
implementation of international standards against the
threats of international terrorism and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). We are
committed to its full implementation, and we welcome
resolution 1810 (2008), which extended the mandate of
the 1540 Committee for three more years. In that
context, allow me to briefly highlight some of Israel’s
national policies.

nuclear, chemical or biological weapons and their
means of delivery.
I wish to note that Israel’s support for curbing the
spread of weapons of mass destruction extends to other
mechanisms and initiatives as well, including the
Proliferation Security Initiative, the Global Threat
Reduction Initiative, the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, the Container Security Initiative
and the United States Megaport Initiative.
As many know, Israel is a country that has been
forced to live under the threat of terrorism, before its
inception and since. The vast majority of Israelis have
first-hand knowledge of the devastating effects of
terrorism. For us, terrorism is not a technicality or
abstract matter; it is a reality with devastating
consequences for our civilian population. Israelis feel
the threat of terrorism today, whether from the north,
the south or the heartland. For that reason, Israel
remains prepared to continue to work with the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council to advance
its objectives and improve cooperation and engagement
with other Member States. We appreciate this
opportunity for dialogue and an exchange of ideas and
are prepared to continue to do our part.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Lisson (Australia): Australia welcomes the
opportunity to participate in today’s debate and thanks
the Chairmen of the three Committees for their
briefings.

As
a
State
facing
conventional
and
non-conventional threats, including missiles and daily
terrorism, Israel has taken legal and practical measures
designed to prevent the proliferation of WMDs. Export
controls have been put into practice through the
adoption of the control lists of the Wassenaar
Arrangement, the Missile Technology Control Regime,
the Australia Group and the Nuclear Suppliers Group.
That was effected by the entry into force, in January
2008, of Israel’s Export Control Act. The list is updated
in accordance with international standards.

The comprehensive legal framework of the
United Nations in the field of counter-terrorism is of
fundamental importance in developing a global
response to the evolving threat of terrorism. Australia
strongly supports the work of the United Nations
counter-terrorism Committees. We encourage close
engagement by the Committees with the CounterTerrorism Implementation Task Force to ensure
appropriate coordination, avoid duplication and
encourage the effective implementation of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

Extensive counter-terrorism legislation exists in
Israel. We are committed to act against any form of
support for terrorism. Accordingly, we actively
confront any attempt by non-State actors to develop,
acquire, manufacture, possess, transport, transfer or use

Australia is focused on enhancing security and
capacity-building efforts with partner countries to
combat terrorism and prevent terrorist attacks.
Regional counter-terrorism successes are continuing to
have an impact on the primary terrorism threat to our
region, namely, Jemaah Islamiyah. Australia remains

08-32878

29

S/PV.5886

committed to working at all levels with Member States
to overcome the grave threat to our security posed by
terrorism.
Australia strongly supports the work of the
Security Council’s Counter-Terrorism Committee and
its Executive Directorate. We also support the
Committee in its efforts to monitor the implementation
of counter-terrorism measures. We welcome the
Directorate’s engagement with donors active in the
counter-terrorism field and its focus on matching donor
capabilities
with
recipients’ needs.
Effective
relationship-building between donor and recipient
countries and a practical focus on capabilities and
needs are critical for success.
Australia welcomes the steps being taken by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) to engage more closely with Member States and
regional bodies in order to better coordinate its work.
That will be important if global counter-terrorism
efforts are to be effective, as a strong legislative and
regulatory framework is essential in disrupting terrorist
networks and dealing with specific threats. Indeed, in
March of this year, Australia significantly increased the
maximum penalties under our legislation for terrorist
offences.
Australia welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 1810 (2008) and encourages the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) to
continue to build on its efforts of the past four years in
support of the universal and effective implementation
of the resolution. Australia in particular commends the
Committee for seeking to promote and develop greater
Asia-Pacific coordination and cooperation, including
facilitating assistance to countries of the region.
As Chair of the Australia Group, we work with 40
other member Governments and the European
Commission to strengthen the Group’s control lists.
Through outreach efforts, we complement the goals of
resolution 1540 (2004) and that Committee’s own
outreach efforts. Australia will also chair the planning
meeting of the 34-member Missile Technology Control
Regime to be held in Canberra later this year. That will
provide us with a further opportunity to contribute to
strengthening
international
non-proliferation
frameworks and norms.
Finally, Australia welcomes the emphasis —
particularly in resolution 1810 (2008) — on enhancing
ongoing cooperation between the 1540, 1267 and 1373

30

Committees. That will be particularly well received in
the Asia-Pacific region, where countries are focused on
cooperating in developing their counter-terrorism
capabilities.
The President: I call on the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Adi (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, on behalf of my country on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for May. I should
also like to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of South Africa, for his excellent
guidance of the Council last month.
Moreover, I thank Ambassadors Verbeke, Urbina
and Jurica, Chairmen of the sanctions Committees, for
their briefings to the Council on the work of their
Committees.
The millennia-long history of Syria is replete
with examples of the authenticity and deep-rooted
nature of its Arab traditions and of the Islamic and
Christian influences on its rejection of extremism and
fanaticism. Syria’s history reflects its reliance on
home-grown traditions and its acceptance of all
cultures and civilizations and the religious and
intellectual beliefs of others. My country has always
been devoted to its ethical position of principle, despite
the extreme changes that have occurred in the
international situation and in the language used to
describe those constant changes.
What has not changed is Syria’s ongoing
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, regardless of the source or the
perpetrators, be they individuals, groups or States. That
is because terrorism is manifested in criminal acts of
aggression that target innocent people, their lives and
their property, in violation of the sovereignty, political
independence, territorial integrity and regional security
of States. Terrorism knows neither nationality nor
religion. It strikes indiscriminately, and no one can
escape its horrors.
Terrorism is thus the very antithesis of all
religions, races, nationalities and civilizations. It must
be fought in the framework of international legitimacy,
under the United Nations Charter and in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council
and the provisions of international law.

08-32878

S/PV.5886

The crimes that Israel has daily perpetrated for
decades against the Arab people in the occupied Arab
territories and the occupied Syrian Golan are an
egregious example of State terrorism. They have been
denounced by the international community through
hundreds of resolutions adopted by this international
Organization. They are undeniably crimes of war.
Regrettably, however, acts of terrorism are
subject to varying standards. In that respect, we
reiterate that the most serious threat faced in the global
war on terrorism in which we are engaged is posed by
Israel’s changeable, unilateral interpretations of the
counter-terrorism struggle and of the resolutions of
international legitimacy. Indeed, according to Israeli
logic and views — which, unfortunately, enjoy the
sponsorship and support of some States — Israel’s
practice of organized and systematic State terrorism
against the Palestinian people, and its pursuit of
policies based on murder, destruction, the infliction of
hunger, tyranny, injustice, the imposition of collective
punishment and the violation of human rights and
international humanitarian law, are all justified by
claims of self-defence against air, electricity, water and
food — in other words, against humankind — under
the pretext of combating so-called Palestinian
terrorism. What kind of legitimate self-defence can
authorize acts that flout international resolutions and
the provisions of international law?
Syria joined the consensus on the adoption of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy on
the basis of its support for all international efforts in
that field. Syria knows that the Strategy provides
important support for international cooperation on
counter-terrorism. However, as it did in the debates
preceding the Strategy’s adoption, Syria reaffirms the
need to adopt a coherent and comprehensive national,
regional and international approach to counter
terrorism and deplete its sources. To that end, Syria
calls for a comprehensive analysis of all aspects of
terrorism and of the circumstances that promote the
spread of that scourge in order to build a common
international understanding of the best way to address
it and combat it.
Syria reiterates that terrorism poses an ongoing
threat to international peace and security. It also
reaffirms its respect for the relevant international
counter-terrorism resolutions. Syria is convinced in
that respect that the United Nations plays a pivotal role
in building international consensus in the struggle

08-32878

against terrorism. Security Council resolutions 1373
(2001), 1267 (1999), 1526 (2004), 1540 (2004) and
1566 (2004) have created a cohesive legal framework
for fighting terrorism at the international level.
On that basis, Syria is cooperating fully with the
United Nations and with the Security Council’s
sanctions Committees through the consideration by the
relevant Syrian parties of the observations set down by
the Counter-Terrorism Committee in its Preliminary
Implementation Assessment. Syria is now amending
legislative decree No. 33 of 2005, as noted in its fifth
report to the Committee.
The Syrian Arab Republic is sparing no effort in
the struggle against money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism. To that end, Syria has acceded
to the United Nations Convention against Corruption
and has joined the Edgemont Group, whose
membership includes financial investigation units from
106 States and which is designed to receive and
address notifications of financial transactions
suspected of being operations to launder money or
finance terrorism. Syria’s efforts have been
acknowledged internationally in the joint report, which
underscored Syria’s success in recent years in adopting
measures and enacting important legislation to that
end, in accordance with relevant international
recommendations. The report has thus greatly
contributed to strengthening the confidence of a
number of international financial institutions interested
in the subject.
Syria supports the efforts of the Security Council
Committee mandated to monitor the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), which Syria considers a
positive step towards ensuring the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and guaranteeing
international peace and security. Syria does not possess
such weapons and it has no intention of possessing
them. Moreover, it has declared this in numerous
public statements in the United Nations, including
before the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva and
the First Committee of the General Assembly.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, to whom I now give the floor.
Ms. Rodríguez de Ortiz (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation
congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of

31

S/PV.5886

May, and thanks the Chairmen of the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004) for their briefings today.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela reiterates its firm and categorical
condemnation of terrorism and reaffirms its
commitment to combat terrorism in all of its forms and
manifestations with full respect for international law,
international standards on the protection of human
rights and international humanitarian law. The essential
expression of this commitment has been the
strengthening of our legislation aimed at combating
terrorist acts, and the adoption of measures to intensify
our regional and global cooperation in fighting this
scourge, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations.
In this context, our delegation would like once
again to recall before the Security Council the request
for extradition, which almost three years ago the
Venezuelan Government submitted to the Government
of the United States with regard to the notorious
criminal and international terrorist Luís Posada
Carriles, a fugitive from Venezuelan justice who is
responsible for carrying out many terrorist plots, the
most well known of which was the attack on the
Cubana de Aviación aeroplane, which caused the death
of 73 innocent civilians in 1976 in Barbados. That
request has been ignored by the United States even
though Venezuela has complied with all of the relevant
requirements. In this context, the United States
authorities have accused Posada Carriles only of minor
immigration crimes.
The delegation of the United States has
repeatedly argued that, since 27 September 2005, when
the immigration judge ordered the expulsion of Posada
Carriles, the competent authorities have been
considering how to carry out that order. As has been
stated in this Chamber by the United States delegation,
the immigration judge ordered that this person could
not be deported either to Cuba or to Venezuela, because
it was probable that, if he were transferred to those
countries, he would be tortured.
Such arguments are unacceptable and are simply
technical legal manoeuvres designed to bypass our
request for extradition while this terrorist continues to
walk freely on United States territory. Since 1961,
Venezuela has been a State party to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading

32

Treatment or Punishment and has always respected our
commitments under international law. We request the
extradition of Posada Carriles so that he can be tried
for terrorist acts, with the due process guaranteed by
our national legislation.
To conclude, it is necessary for all States to
cooperate in accordance with international law in order
to find, deny haven to, capture and bring to justice, on
the basis of trial or extradition under national
legislation, anyone who finances, plans, supports,
prepares or commits terrorist acts or provides safe
haven, or who participates or intends to participate in
any such activity.
Once again, we bring our request to the CounterTerrorism Committee to review and verify compliance
by the United States with its obligations in fighting
terrorism, specifically in the case of Luís Posada
Carriles, in accordance with resolution 1373 (2001),
the Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the bilateral
extradition treaty signed in 1922, the International
Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings
and the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation.
Double standards should not prevail in the fight
against terrorism.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Qatar, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this open debate on an item that concerns
one of the most important challenges to international
peace and security. I should also like to extend our
thanks to the Chairmen of the three Security Council
Committees for their briefings. We are pleased to make
the following observations, which we had previously
expressed during our two years as a member of the
Security Council, but whose importance we would like
to underline in the light of the briefings we heard this
morning.
In general terms, we note that the Security
Council deals with terrorism without a clear definition
of the word, and without addressing its root causes and
the reasons behind its spread. Nor does the Council
take into proper account the issues of human rights and
international law, including international humanitarian
law. Thus, the Council is neglecting one of the most

08-32878

S/PV.5886

important elements of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, which two years ago was
adopted by the General Assembly as its resolution
60/288.
Secondly, the Security Council adopts means to
deal with terrorism without sufficient coherence or
coordination with other United Nations organs, such as
the General Assembly and its Global CounterTerrorism Strategy and other committees and counterterrorism mechanisms in the United Nations system,
including the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force. It is thus important to assess and review the
Council’s policy regarding terrorism.
I turn now to the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001).
Despite the fact that the mandate of the CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED)
was renewed in resolution 1805 (2008), no end date for
the work of the Committee itself has been set. One of
the most encouraging things is that by mid-2009 the
role of the Committee will be reviewed by the Council;
we hope that this will be a comprehensive review,
taking into account the lessons learned. It was
important that the resolution included some positive
elements, such as underlining the importance of States,
in their counter-terrorism activities, complying with
their obligations under international humanitarian law,
international law, human rights law and refugee law.
The resolution referred to CTITF and the importance of
the participation of the CTED in activities undertaken
in the framework of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
The organizational plan for CTED contained in
document S/2008/80, which was submitted by the
Executive Directorate in accordance with the
provisions of resolution 1787 (2007), sets forth a
number of important points, such as the establishment
of a centre for quality control to review all documents
before they are issued and a proposed amendment of
the working methods of CTED so that it may better
focus and adapt its visits to countries in all areas. But
we hoped to see in this resolution and in the
organizational plan a fuller explanation of those
positive aspects and a clearer timetable for the
resolution’s implementation.
It is very important that the Council should deal
non-selectively with all aspects of terrorism, but in
particular
efforts
at
preparing
Preliminary

08-32878

Implementation Assessments should be fair and the
visits undertaken by CTED should be balanced and
comprehensive, since resolution 1373 (2001) requires
all States without exception to pass counter-terrorism
legislation. Accordingly, we should not focus only on
visits to certain regions or countries, while exempting
other States because they are developed or because
they export technical assistance to other countries.
Experience and recent events have proven that
there is a deficiency in the laws of some developed
countries that do not fit the requirements of resolutions
1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) concerning the
prohibition of incitement. Such acts of incitement to
hatred have been occurring repeatedly, particularly
with regard to sacred matters, and have thus provoked
great emotion. Those acts violate resolution 1624
(2005) and create an environment not conducive to
counter-terrorism efforts, thereby undermining efforts
undertaken in the context of the Alliance of
Civilizations. Such acts prevent dealing with the
underlying causes of terrorism that are outlined in the
Global Strategy.
With regard to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, the listing and de-listing of
names and groups on the consolidated list does not take
into account due process. It is quite politicized, which
strips the Council of important credibility in the
counter-terrorism arena. The nature of the work of the
Committee’s Monitoring Team also needs to be
reviewed. The reports presented by the Team include at
times undocumented judgments that could be
interpreted as an implied accusation of terrorism
against specific countries and specific regions.
With regard to the Security Council Committee
on weapons of mass destruction (WMDs), established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we should not
introduce controversial issues in the work of that
Committee. The committee should concentrate on
prohibiting the acquisition of WMDs by non-State
actors. The best means of doing that is basically the
disarmament of those weapons and the prohibition of
their proliferation by implementing international
treaties in that regard. We should not take resolutions
prohibiting the proliferation of WMDs as a pretext for
preventing States from enjoying technology and rights
for peaceful purposes, in accordance with international
treaties in that area.

33

S/PV.5886

On the basis of our position supporting efforts to
combat terrorism, whether nationally or through
multilateral agreements, we emphasize the importance
of full compliance with international law and
international humanitarian law, as well as all related
conventions and protocols, so that such efforts to
counter terrorism would not be vindictive, leading to
an increase in terrorist acts, rather than addressing the
causes of terrorism.
Also, we should not equate terrorism with the
legitimate struggle against foreign occupation. Since
the Security Council, in accordance with the Charter, is
responsible for maintaining international peace and
security, it is therefore very important to enhance the
credibility of this organ and to build the deepest trust
between it and the States Members of the United
Nations, so that its policies concerning counterterrorism in all its forms and manifestations can be
activated and implemented in full.
The President: The representative of the United
States has asked for the floor to make a further
statement.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America):
The Council is here today to review the work of the
1267 Committee, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
and the 1540 Committee. Most speakers have engaged
constructively in discussing ways to increase
cooperation and advance the work of the three
committees, and we appreciate those contributions. It is
disappointing, therefore, that two representatives in
particular departed from the focus of the debate to
introduce allegations that distort the facts of two cases
being adjudicated in the United States.
In the case of Mr. Luis Posada Carriles, the
United States has taken a number of legal actions with
respect to Mr. Posada. In taking these steps, the United
States has acted in ways that are consistent with
international law and with our domestic legal
framework, which provides various constitutional
safeguards to protect individual rights. As with all
democracies that follow the rule of law — as opposed
to other systems of governance — those safeguards
provide that an individual cannot be brought to trial or
extradited unless sufficient evidence has been
established that he committed the offense for which he
has been charged. In the United States, this standard is
described as “probable cause”. Let me present a brief

34

overview of steps my Government has taken with
respect to Posada within this legal framework.
Posada entered the United States illegally in early
2005. He was detained by immigration authorities in
the United States on 17 May 2005, and he was, in
accordance with United States law, placed in removal
proceedings. On 27 September 2005, an immigration
judge ordered Posada’s removal from the United States
but granted a deferral of removal to Cuba and
Venezuela under the regulations implementing the
United Nations Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment.
The court ordered that Posada “be deported and
removed from the United States to any country other
than Cuba and Venezuela willing to accept him”. This
order remains in effect. The United States has been
seeking ways to implement it, consistent with the terms
of the order and United States regulations that
implement the obligations of the United States under
the Convention against Torture.
Moreover, the United States sought and obtained
a criminal indictment charging Posada with violations
of our immigration laws. The United States District
Court handling that case dismissed the indictment. As
is well known, our judges are wholly independent of
the executive branch of our Government. They enjoy
tenure for life and are fiercely independent. This
federal judge, not sitting in Florida but in Texas,
reached her decision according to her reading of the
law.
In our system, as in all those that respect the rule
of law, a decision by the courts must be obeyed unless
and until it is overturned by a higher court. The United
States filed a notice appealing the district court’s
decision dismissing the case on 5 June 2007, but that
appeal has not yet been decided.
Posada also remains under investigation for past
activities. In the meantime, Posada remains subject to
the order of removal issued by the immigration judge
and is without legal status in the United States. He is
also subject to an order of supervision from the
Department of Homeland Security Immigration and
Customs Enforcement, which imposes certain
restrictions on Posada, including reporting and
monitoring requirements. In sum, the United States
continues to be engaged in an ongoing series of actions

08-32878

S/PV.5886

with respect to Posada, consistent with our legal
requirements, due process and the rule of law.

States to deal with a clear and infamous case of
international terrorism.

In the case of the five Cubans accused of spying,
in 2001 the individuals in question were convicted in
United States federal courts of conspiracy to commit
espionage, among other charges, which included
conspiracy by one of those individuals to commit
murder, having supported and implemented a plan to
shoot down United States civilian aircraft. On
31 October 2005, the Eleventh Circuit Court of
Appeals vacated a previous ruling by a three-judge
appellate panel that ordered a new trial. On rehearing,
the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals as a whole
affirmed the propriety of the trial on the challenged
ground and returned the rest of the appellate issues to
the three-judge panel for a decision. The remaining
appellate issues await a decision by the court.

The reality is far different from what they would
have us believe. Thursday, 8 May, will be the first
anniversary of the permanent release of the terrorist
Posada Carriles. To date, despite all the evidence at its
disposal, the Government of the United States has not
charged Posada Carriles with his terrorist activities. We
are witnesses to ridiculous and shameful efforts by the
prosecution to continue to delay this case, which are a
legal delaying tactic to prevent justice from being
done. At the same time, the terrorist’s legal defence is
being given countless deadlines in order to continue an
endless immigration trial, which we know does not
ultimately guarantee the imposition of any kind of
punishment for his terrorist acts. Once again, we
reaffirm in this Chamber the falseness of the claim that
the United States authorities have acted in accordance
with international law.

The five convicted spies are serving their prison
sentences while the case is processed in the United
States judicial system. The United States has always
provided the five defendants with all the guarantees of
due process inherent in the independent and impartial
United States judicial system. Despite the frustration
expressed by the two speakers who raised these cases,
we assure them that United States courts and
administrative procedures are independent and that
they fairly and impartially interpret and apply the law.
The President: The representative of Cuba has
requested the floor to make a further statement. I invite
him to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Quiñones Sánchez (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of my delegation, I wish to thank
you, Madam President, for the opportunity to address
this body once again to respond to the comments made
by the representative of the United States. I do not
believe that the claims presented by Cuba distort the
objective of this debate. It is in our interest to
contribute constructively to Security Council debate on
terrorism so as to promote cooperation and the true
fight against that scourge.
We are dealing with a case of the clear violation
of Security Council resolution 1373 (2001). Time and
again, we hear the same baseless arguments. Once
again, Council members and the other delegations
present in this Chamber await specific responses
regarding actions by the Government of the United

08-32878

The double standards, the hypocrisy and the lies
seem to be limitless. Among the arguments used
against the extradition of Posada Carriles to Venezuela,
they say that he runs the risk of being tortured. The
accusing Government is trying to evade the criminal
past of Posada Carriles, who, at the command of the
Central Intelligence Agency, tortured young Latin
Americans. Obviously, it is protecting him. The
accuser seems to forget that it has been exactly four
years since the atrocities committed by the United
States occupation forces at Abu Ghraib came to light. It
wishes to forget the approval of torture at the illegally
occupied Guantánamo naval base, the secret
kidnappings of people throughout the world, the secret
flights and the clandestine prisons, all on the pretext of
fighting terrorism.
The United States ought to be silent — at least
for the sake of decency — concern itself with resolving
its problems and become a true fighter against
terrorism by complying with the international legal
order.
Fortunately, the Cuba in which acts of torture
were committed ceased to exist long ago. It was the
Cuba of drunken Marines in the streets of Havana
desecrating our national monuments — the Cuba of the
dictator Fulgencio Batista, murdering or torturing
students with the tacit complicity of the United States
leaders of that era. On 1 January 1959, Cuba freed
itself from the terrorist assassins and torturers of the

35

S/PV.5886

Batista dictatorship, who left our country to go to their
true safe haven, the United States of America.
Despite the rigged trial that took place in Miami
against our five heroes, the struggle of our compatriots
against anti-Cuban terrorism has been amply
demonstrated in the United States. They were
convicted solely for having risked their lives to fight
terrorist groups that operate freely in that city. The
whole illegal trial against our five heroes has amounted
to scandalous support for the anti-Cuban terrorist
groups operating there. It is truly embarrassing that,
while our five heroes are unjustly imprisoned and
subjected to draconian sentences and punishments and
while their human rights are brutally violated, the
terrorist hijackers of Cuban ships and aircraft receive
easy terms of bail, and some of them are even set free
in the United States. This demonstrates once again that
the United States Government does not punish the
crime of terrorism when it is perpetrated against
countries that do not bow before its imperialist policy.
The five heroes must be released. They cannot be
compared to Posada Carriles, who has committed acts
of a different kind: terrorist acts.
The
struggle
against
terrorism
requires
seriousness, commitment and, above all, political will.
Cuba reiterates its urgent request that the Security
Council, using the means at its disposal, duly consider
our claims and act accordingly.
The President: The representative of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has also requested
the floor to make a further statement. I invite her to
take a seat at the Council table and to make her
statement.
Ms. Rodríguez de Ortiz (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
you, Madam President, for this second opportunity to
take the floor, and we apologize to those present for
once again taking the floor. However, for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, this Council is an
important forum in which to address these issues,

36

which are indeed a priority for our country. We do not
share the opinion of the Mission of the United States
that this is not the appropriate forum. Yes, this is the
appropriate forum.
What the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is
again requesting in this Council is compliance with
commitments undertaken by States under international
treaties. We do not understand why the United States
cannot comply with the extradition treaty that has been
signed by our two countries. They are simply
disregarding an extradition request that we have put
forward, which complies with all the requirements that
the treaty establishes. Why do they ignore our request
for extradition, and try the terrorist Posada Carriles
only for immigration violations? We reject the
argument that Posada Carriles cannot be extradited to
our country because he could be tortured there. We
reiterate that Venezuela complies with the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. Our country always
guarantees due process. The torturers are others.
The Government of the United States has all the
necessary documentation to prove the terrorist nature of
the activities of Posada Carriles. Their concern in this
case therefore makes a mockery of justice, the memory
of the victims of terrorist acts and the suffering of their
families. It is also an example of the double standards
of a Government that says it fights against terrorism,
but in its actions supports terrorist methods.
The Security Council must examine the case, and
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) must verify
compliance by the Government of the United States
with its commitments in fighting terrorism in
accordance with international law.
The President: There are no further speakers
inscribed on my list. The Security Council has thus
concluded the present stage of its consideration of the
item on its agenda.
The meeting was adjourned at 1.25 p.m.

08-32878
