S/PV.7092

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7092nd meeting

Monday, 6 January 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Jordan)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Errázuriz
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Lamek
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Sul Kyung-hoon
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Gasana
Mr. Wilson
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central African Republic
(S/2013/787)

14-20048 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1420048*

S/PV.7092

The situation in the Central African Republic

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Expression of welcome to new members and of
thanks to outgoing members of the Council
The President (spoke in Arabic): As this is the
first formal meeting of the Security Council this year,
I would like to extend my warm wishes on the occasion
of the New Year to all members of the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the United Nations as a whole.
In presiding over the first formal meeting of the
Council in 2014, I am happy to welcome the other new
members, namely, Chad, Chile, Lithuania and Nigeria.
We all look forward to their participation in the work
of the Council. Their experience and wisdom will be of
invaluable assistance in the discharge of the Council’s
responsibilities.
I also take this opportunity to express the Council’s
gratitude to the outgoing members — Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo — for their
important contributions to the work of the Council
during their terms in 2012 and 2013.
Expression of thanks to the retiring President
The President (spoke in Arabic): I also take this
opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the Council,
to His Excellency Mr. Gérard Araud, Permanent
Representative of France, for his service as President of
the Security Council for the month of December 2013.
I am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing my deep appreciation to Ambassador Araud
and his team for successfully conducting the Council’s
business last month.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Central African Republic
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation
in the Central African Republic (S/2013/787)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Central
African Republic to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome the presence
of Her Excellency Ms. Léonie Banga-Bothy, Minister
for Foreign Affairs, African Integration, Francophonie

2/11

06/01/2014

and Central Africans Abroad of the Central African
Republic.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Jeffrey
Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2013/787, which contains the report of
the Secretary-General on the situation in the Central
African Republic.
I now give the floor to Mr. Feltman.
Mr. Feltman: The situation in the Central African
Republic has deteriorated greatly since the most recent
United Nations briefing to the Security Council (see
S/PV.7069). The attacks by the anti-Balaka against
Bangui on 5 December triggered a period of heavy
unrest in the capital and in the interior of the country.
In Bangui alone, more than 750 casualties have been
confirmed, and the death toll outside Bangui is likely
to be substantial.
According to the latest information, approximately
2.2 million people in the Central African Republic need
humanitarian assistance, that is, close to half of the
population of the country. One in every two inhabitants
of Bangui has sought refuge outside their homes. Their
number is estimated at approximately 513,000, of whom
100,000 are at a makeshift camp at the airport.
Killings in Bangui and in the rest of the country
continue every day, and the population remains divided
along religious affiliation. Access to residential
neighbourhoods in Bangui is controlled either by
“anti-Christian” or “anti-Muslim” checkpoints,
manned by armed civilians. Similarly, localities outside
Bangui — such as Bossangoa, Bouar, Bozoum and
Paoua, among others — witness atrocities on a daily
basis, including direct clashes between Christian and
Muslim communities. The danger of escalation into
sustained violence along religious lines remains real,
with the potential for long-term danger to the country.

14-20048

06/01/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

Several countries, including Cameroon, Chad,
Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, the Niger, Nigeria and Senegal,
have repatriated tens of thousands of their citizens, the
vast majority of whom are Muslims. That is the first
time in the history of the Central African Republic that
people have felt obliged to leave the country for fear for
their lives on account of their religion.
The quick deployment by the African Union
(AU) and France, respectively, of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and Operation Sangaris prevented
the situation from degenerating into higher levels
of conflict and atrocities. The speed at which both
forces attained operational level and their subsequent
deployment have changed the security dynamics in
Bangui, with visible patrols being undertaken by both
forces. As MISCA continues to work towards reaching
its authorized strength of 6,000, its presence will be
increased outside of Bangui, thus contributing to the
improvement of the security situation in the countryside.
We greatly appreciate the role of African States and
France in the committing troops to the Central African
Republic. I would like, at this stage, to pay tribute to
the African and French soldiers who have fallen while
performing their duties in the name of peace. The role
played by the Economic Community of Central African
States (ECCAS) and by its individual member States to
bring stability to the Central African Republic should
also be commended.
Currently, we are working with the African Union
on the organization of the donors conference that the
Council requested to support MISCA. It will be held on
1 February at Addis Ababa on the margins of the AU
Summit. We count on the generous support of Council
members and other States and organizations.
The events of 5 December dealt a serious blow
to the transitional authorities, and to the Head of
State of the Transition in particular. The inability of
the transitional authorities to curb widespread Séléka
human rights abuses and violations against Christian
populations over the past year contributed to the gradual
transformation of local self-defence groups — the
anti-Balaka — into a full-blown rebellion. As a result
of its predominantly Muslim composition, Séléka
abuses against the Christian populations in the Central
African Republic were quickly interpreted as a religious
conflict pitting Muslins against Christians. The
international commission of inquiry to be established

S/PV.7092

in accordance with resolution 2127 (2013) is a most
welcome development that will certainly look into
those and other abuses and human rights violations.
On the other hand, the frustration of Muslim
communities in the Central African Republic is
the result of years of marginalization by successive
Governments since the country’s independence, more
than 50 years ago. For instance, while the Muslim
community represents an estimated 20 per cent of the
total population of the Central African Republic, no
Muslim holidays are observed officially by the country.
I would like to commend the Forum of Religious
Leaders for their laudable efforts and sacrifices and for
their proactive approach in trying to appease tensions
among communities. The Forum brings together the
Archbishop, the Imam and a Pastor of Bangui. They
need support as a matter of urgency to be able to carry
on with their efforts.
ECCAS Heads of State have proposed an inclusive
national conference, which should serve as a forum
for all the national actors to share their frustrations,
identify the country’s challenges and, hopefully, agree
on the way forward, including preparing for elections
and determining a common set of priorities for the
post-transition period.
Concerning the elections, some progress was
made with the adoption of a new electoral code and the
swearing in of the seven-member National Electoral
Authority, which brings together representatives of
civil society, the political parties and the Government.
The United Nations mission on the ground — the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the
Central African Republic — is providing technical and
logistics support to the National Electoral Authority.
We will soon deploy an electoral needs assessment
mission. Conditions conducive to holding elections,
however, remain elusive. The systematic looting of
all local administrations and the destruction by the
ex-Séléka of all types of civil national registries means
that reconstituting the voters lists would require a
massive effort.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) of all armed groups should constitute one of the
top priorities. We must learn from our past experiences
in the Central African Republic and from the several
DDR programmes carried out there. We must ensure
that the conditions conducive to such an exercise are
present, including the requisite amount of funding.

14-200483/11

S/PV.7092

The situation in the Central African Republic

A DDR process implemented in accordance with
internationally accepted standards is critical. It will
pave the way for holistic security sector reforms and
contribute to laying the foundations for lasting peace.
Allow me now to say a few words about the
humanitarian situation, which has deteriorated at an
alarming rate. All Central Africans have been affected
by the crisis. As I mentioned at the outset, nearly
half of the population needs humanitarian assistance.
Persistent violence has forced one fifth of the population
to flee their homes. That number has more than doubled
since 5 December. More than 935,000 people are now
sleeping outside or in temporary spaces. In Bangui, half
of the population has sought refuge at one of 55 sites
for internally displaced persons. More than 100,000
people are seeking security at the airport alone. Those
displaced urgently need protection and shelter, as well
as access to water, health care, food, basic supplies and
sanitation and hygiene services.
Non-governmental organization (NGO) partners
and staff of United Nations humanitarian agencies,
funds and programmes have remained in the Central
African Republic to deliver assistance in what is a very
dangerous and unpredictable environment. The increase
in violence last month has exacerbated the needs.
Working closely with civil society and religious leaders
from all communities, NGOs and United Nations staff
are tirelessly providing medical care and delivering
supplies to hospitals, health centres and dispensaries at
internally displaced person sites.
On 11 December, the United Nations activated a
system-wide level 3 emergency response. That allows
us to send our most experienced and skilful staff,
release emergency funds and mobilize relief supplies
and pipelines. Since then, a senior humanitarian
coordinator at the level of Assistant Secretary-General
has been deployed to strengthen the humanitarian
response in the country. Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator Valerie Amos allocated $10 million from
the Central Emergency Response Fund to support relief
efforts in the Central African Republic. United Nations
agencies have also ramped up their responses.
Despite the tremendous efforts of humanitarians
on the ground, needs continue to outpace the response.
Violence and insecurity have forced many to flee into
forests and out of reach of aid. A lack of funding has
also constrained the response and threatens to further

4/11

06/01/2014

inhibit humanitarian operations unless funding is
urgently received. For example, without additional
contributions, the World Food Programme food pipeline
for the Central African Republic will be 90 per cent
depleted in February.
The humanitarian country team has developed a
100-day plan for priority humanitarian action, which
is part of the broader 2014 response strategy. The plan
requires $152 million to rapidly scale up life-saving
assistance and protection. Last year’s humanitarian
appeal for the Central African Republic was one of the
most underfunded appeals globally, and the competing
needs worldwide are by no means less burdensome this
year.
I cannot conclude my remarks without making
reference to protection issues, notably those affecting
women and children, who always bear the brunt in
conflict situations. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, the Special Advisor of the
Secretary-General for the Prevention of Genocide,
Mr. Adama Dieng, and a representative of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict conducted a joint assessment
mission to the Central African Republic from 17 to
21 December. The joint mission called for urgent action
to protect civilians, in particular women and children,
and to prevent the country from plunging into fullscale sectarian conflict. The United Nations has also
undertaken missions to places such as Bria, Bouar,
Paoua, Bossangoa and Bambari. Through a concerted
effort in the Central African Republic, we are finalizing
support packages for the communities there. The same
is being done for children in armed conflict.
Women and children constitute the most vulnerable
group in society, and are therefore disproportionally
affected by the dire humanitarian situation. Women
and peace and security questions, as outlined in the
seminal resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent related
resolutions, have always guided our actions in the
search for solutions in the Central Africa Republic. I
am pleased to see that the donor community is paying
increased attention to the Central Africa Republic,
which, we hope, will result in desperately needed
additional resources.
The violence and the atrocities in the Central Africa
Republic must stop. Those in positions of authority or
influence must do more to end violence and halt grave

14-20048

06/01/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

violations against civilians, including children. Attacks
against humanitarian personnel and the use of civilian
spaces such as schools and hospitals for military
purposes must also end. I ask the Council to again
remind all parties to the conflict of their responsibilities
under international humanitarian and human rights law
and to ensure that all those responsible for violations
are held to account.
There is a very real risk that the crisis could spread
beyond the country’s borders and further destabilize
the region. The United Nations, under the leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Central Africa Republic, will continue to do its best
to prevent the situation in the Central Africa Republic
from unravelling further and human rights abuses and
violations from reaching unthinkable levels; ensure
humanitarian aid for the most vulnerable; and return the
country to constitutional order. Here at Headquarters,
the Deputy Secretary-General regularly chairs a senior
action group to consider how best to respond to the
multifaceted crisis in the Central Africa Republic. This
is the first case for the Secretary-General’s new Rights
Upfront agenda.
In conclusion, let me note that it is our collective
responsibility to act now, before it is too late.
The President: I thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.
I now give the floor to the representative of Chad.
Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like, at the start of the new year, to wish all
members of the Security Council the best of health and
greatest success in their work. I also take this opportunity
to convey our heartfelt and warm congratulations to
your country, Sir, upon its election to the Council and
upon your assumption of the presidency. My delegation
assures you of its support and we wish you the greatest
of success.
I would like to highly commend Mr. Gérard Araud,
Permanent Representative of France and outgoing
President of the Council, for the excellent work achieved
under his leadership, the results of which are more than
clear.
My delegation is delighted to be serving on the
Security Council as a non-permanent member. We take
this opportunity to thank all of those who, by voting for
us, contributed to our successful election. Likewise, we
warmly congratulate all newly elected members, that
is, Nigeria, Chile, Jordan and Lithuania. My delegation

S/PV.7092

pledges to spare no effort in contributing to the smooth
functioning of the work of the Security Council and its
subsidiary organs.
I would also like to thank and congratulate
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing, which indeed covered
almost everything that I had wanted to say.
Chad is profoundly concerned at the situation in
the Central Africa Republic, in particular at the scale
of the crisis in the country and the and ever-more
dangerous developments we continue to see — all in
spite of the robust mandate entrusted to the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and other forces involved there
through resolution 2127 (2013), adopted on 5 December
2013. While the situation seems to be showing the
early signs of improvement in certain areas, the violent
attacks being committed against the civilian population
in general and foreign nationals in particular have
not decreased at all. On the contrary, the situation
continues to be characterized by widespread insecurity,
massacres, rape and acts of brutality that further expose
civilian populations already displaced en masse into
makeshift camps, as well as by the massive wholesale
exodus of foreign nationals to their countries of origin,
including Chadians, Cameroonians, Senegalese,
Malians and many others.
Chad deplores the fact that the situation has
claimed scores of dead and hundreds of missing persons
among its nationals, and we continue to repatriate our
nationals via charter flights and over-land transport.
Like the nationals of other countries, Chadians have
been dispossessed of their possessions and had their
homes ransacked. Such hatred against all communities
of foreign origin due to their belonging to a particular
religion cannot be justified under any pretext and must
be condemned in the strongest possible terms.
Nonetheless, the remarkable efforts being deployed
by MISCA and the French forces to accomplish their
mission, under what are extremely difficult and
complex conditions, must be commended. In that
regard, Chad welcomes the ongoing commitment of
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
France to achieve greater coordination of the efforts
under way to help the Central African Republic
to emerge definitively from the recurrent cycle of
violence and political crisis. Against that backdrop,

14-200485/11

S/PV.7092

The situation in the Central African Republic

Chad, together with other countries of Central Africa,
is and will remain committed, as it has been since
1994, to supporting joint efforts to re-establish peace
and stability in the Central African Republic. We will
not allow ourselves to be distracted by the insidious
media campaign craftily organized by power-hungry
groups seeking to distort international public opinion
by blurring the lines between Séléka and Muslims and
Muslims and Chadians, without the slightest proof.
Like the countries of the Central Africa region,
Chad is aware of the consequences of the crisis on
its own security and stability and on the subregional
economic integration process. The number of
extraordinary ECCAS summits held on the subject
of the Central African Republic since the outbreak of
the crisis, the signing of the Libreville Global Peace
Agreement, the implementation of the N’Djamena
road map and the strengthening of the former Mission
for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central African
Republic, which became MISCA on 19 December 2013
with additional contingents, are, among other things,
tangible elements that reflect the determination and
the degree of ECCAS’s mobilization in its search for a
solution to the crisis.
In same vein, ECCAS is preparing to hold another
extraordinary summit in N’Djamena on 9 January with
the participation of all international partners to address
the situation in Central African Republic, including
the lack of progress in the security and political fronts
despite the deployment of MISCA and the French
forces. It is obvious that the implementation of the
recommended solutions lies first and foremost with the
Central African political stakeholders. Without their
robust and responsible involvement, it will be difficult
to put an end to the cycle of violence and to move the
political process forward.
In this war for power, where religion is deliberately
exploited for political purposes and conducted by
proxy militias, it is important that the Central African
political class emerge from its lethargy and play its full
role in order to save the country. To do so, MISCA and
the other forces deployed in Central African Republic
should continue their mission of the disarmament and
cantonment of ex-Séléka and anti-Balaka to pacify the
country and allow for the holding of free and transparent
elections in a peaceful environment, in accordance with
the Libreville Agreement and the N’Djamena road map.

6/11

06/01/2014

In that light, Chad calls for greater mobilization by
the entire international community, in particular the
United Nations, the European Union and the Central
African Republic’s bilateral partners, to support
the actions already undertaken on the ground by the
African Union, ECCAS and France. Such a mobilization
must take into account the need for a holistic approach
supported by concurrent actions and based on the
humanitarian situation on the ground, the protection of
civilians, disarmament, the political transition process,
the strengthening of administration and justice, national
reconciliation and the establishment of a truly national
army, which is the only guarantee of peace and stability
in the country.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Minister for Foreign Affairs Banga-Bothy of
the Central African Republic.
Ms. Banga-Bothy (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): At the outset, allow me to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January 2014. I also
take this opportunity to pay tribute to your predecessor
for his personal involvement in the process aimed at
resolving the crisis in the Central African Republic. I
would also like to express my best wishes for a happy
new year to all Security Council members.
In his statement to the General Assembly on
26 September 2013, the Transitional Prime Minister of
Central African Republic, His Excellency Mr. Nicolas
Tiangaye, sounded the alarm regarding the possible
chaos that could descend on the Central African
Republic given the already extreme deterioration of
the security and humanitarian situation in the country
at that time (see A/68/PV.13). Given that horrifying
prospect and the imminent sectarian war brewing
among the beleaguered population, the prompt response
of the international community — with the adoption of
resolution 2121 (2013), which was to pave the way for
international action, the re-establishment of peace and
the provision of assistance to people at the mercy of
armed groups and militias of all types — provided a
glimmer of hope to the Central African Republic.
Unfortunately, as the Security Council was
preparing to adopt resolution 2127 (2013), on
5 December 2013, the enemies of the Central African
people, who perceived that resolution authorizing
the application of Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations as a threat to their bloody, diabolical

14-20048

06/01/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

undertaking, chose to make themselves heard with
weapons and attacked Bangui at dawn, causing the
deaths of several hundred people. Although a robust
reaction by defence and security forces was able to
halt the attackers and limit the damage inflicted by
the 5 December attack, the overall deterioration in the
security situation, the resumption of violence and the
subsequent senseless killing considerably worsened the
humanitarian situation in the capital.
Like those who have spoken before me, I too can
confirm that 300,000 people have had to flee their
homes for camps because of the violence of those
armed groups. Those men, women and children are
living in dire conditions and are exposed to all sorts of
violence, disease and famine. It appears that there is a
real risk of large-scale outbreaks of infectious diseases,
in particular cholera. For instance, the fact that people
have huddled on the grounds of the Bangui M’Poko
International Airport means that they are not only
exposed to the scourges I have just mentioned, but also
that their very security is threatened — as are airport
facilities themselves.
Foreign persons of the Muslim faith have not been
spared either. We would like to take this opportunity
to express the official apologies of the Central African
Republic to the States whose nationals have been
submitted to abuse during these events.
Despite the efforts of non-governmental and
humanitarian organizations and the agencies of the
United Nations to provide people with the necessary
assistance, the situation is only deteriorating further.
Attention is entirely focused on Bangui, the scene
of the most recent violence. The rest of the people
in the hinterlands appear to be left to their sad fate.
This shows the scope and seriousness of the situation,
which requires additional efforts on the part of the
international community.
Considerable efforts have been deployed on the
security front, with a call for a cessation of hostilities
and the beginning of negotiations with anti-Balaka
self-defence groups — as evidenced repeatedly by our
Head of State in extending the hand of friendship in
the course of his addresses to the nation. Unfortunately,
those irregular and unidentified forces have not
shown any desire to engage in negotiations with the
Government. Instead, they have continued to carry
out senseless attacks against civilians, the bases of
ex-Séléka elements and even contingents of the African-

S/PV.7092

led International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA).
Given the situation, religious authorities, both
Christian and Muslim, have undertaken commendable
efforts to try to bring together the leaders of the various
communities in order to pursue a policy of national
reconciliation. It must be acknowledged, however, that
such work will be long-term in nature and require both
patience and determination.
Moreover, with respect to the transitional bodies,
it should be noted that all of the bodies provided for
under the Transitional Charter have been established.
The exception in that regard is the High Council for
Communication, whose process is under way. The
composition of the National Electoral Authority has
just been voted upon, and that institution will soon
become operational if the security situation in the
country becomes stable.
The transitional authorities have also reaffirmed
their commitment not to stand in the elections. They
want the elections to be credible and transparent so
as to lead to a final end to the repeated crises in the
Central African Republic. That is why the elections
must not be organized hastily, but rather on the basis
of regular procedures, going through the various stages
and in accordance with the various agreements signed
in the context of the transition in the Central African
Republic.
With regard to security, as I have already
mentioned, the 5 December attack was a fatal blow to
the efforts carried out until then. Despite the helpful
actions of the French Operation Sangaris to initiate the
disarmament of armed groups and the cantonment of
most Séléka elements, the anti-Balaka militia and some
elements answering to ex-Séléka leaders continue to
sow terror in the various neighborhoods of Bangui,
thereby preventing those who have sought refuge in the
sites for displaced people to return to their homes and
resume their normal lives.
Since the transition from the Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
(MICOPAX) to MISCA on 19 November, a remarkable
job has been done with the support of Operation
Sangaris in the field. This has given some hope for the
re-establishment of peace and security in the Central
African Republic. The Mission, which is carried
out pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), should in our
view be accompanied by the action of the transitional

14-200487/11

S/PV.7092

The situation in the Central African Republic

authorities themselves, which will require the Central
African defence and security forces to work side by
side with those of the international community to bring
peace to the country.
As that noble task is carried out, we regret the loss of
life of brave French soldiers in the context of Operation
Sagaris and of Congolese and Chadian soldiers in the
context of the African-led International Support Mission
in the Central African Republic. Those men gave their
lives to bring peace to the Central African Republic.
We pay them a well-deserved tribute on behalf of the
Head of State of the Transitional Government and of
the people of the Central African Republic. I wish to
pay my respects to the families of the disappeared and
to their Goverments and countrymen.
Given the extreme nature of the crisis in the
Central African Republic and the considerable means
that will be necessary to end it, we ask the international
community to increase the financial and logistic
resources going to the forces on the ground in the
Central African Republic. As provided for in resolution
2127 (2013), a United Nations peacekeeping operation
in the current situation in the Central African Republic
could, should conditions allow, provide considerable
support for the efforts undertaken by the African Union,
France and the other countries that are providing troops
or resources.
The Central African Republic Government
commends the African Union’s commitment to
increasing the number of MISCA personnel to 10,000
men within six months. I trust that, at this strength,
MISCA will be able to cover the entire country of the
Central African Republic and carry out its mission
adequately. The assessment of MISCA’s performance in
this period will make it possible, if necessary, to adjust
the approach and take appropriate action.
We also call for the strengthening of the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central
African Republic, with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General playing an extremely important
role in disarmament, demobilization and reintegration;
in human rights and peacebuilding; and in the
forthcoming organization of the elections in the near
future.
While it is evident that, despite the extreme gravity
of the situation in the Central African Republic, the
people have bravely survived the chaos to date, it is
to a large extent thanks to the tireless international

8/11

06/01/2014

solidarity provided to our people during the course of
three decades of political and military violence. I thank
all African States that have provided additional troops
to MISCA in support of endeavours to re-establish
peace and security in my country. I call for the timely
organization of the donors conference desired not just
by the African Union, but also by the authorities of the
Central African Republic.
My thanks also go to the European Union and the
United States of America for providing financial and
logistical support and equipment to the stabilization
efforts in the Central African Union.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations.
Mr. António (spoke in French): I should like to
start by wishing Council members a very happy new
year. I join the President in welcoming Her Excellency
Ms. Léonie Banga-Bothy Mbazoa, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, African Integration, Francophonie and Central
Africans Abroad of the Central African Republic.
I would also like to congratulate the delegation
of Jordan on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I take this opportunity to thank your
predecessor, Mr. President, as you just did, the
delegation of France, for its presidency of the Security
Council during December 2013.
I would also like to congratulate the other new
members of the Security Council: Chad, Chile,
Lithuania and Nigeria. I would like to especially
congratulate the two African delegations that have
joined the Council — Chad and Nigeria — whose work,
alongside that of Rwanda, will raise the voice of Africa
within the framework of the Security Council.
I thank Ambassador Feltman for his very
comprehensive briefing, which painted a very detailed
picture of the situation on the ground and the steps that
need to be taken.
On behalf of the African Union Commission, I
would like to thank the Council for its invitation and
for the opportunity afforded to the African Union to
address this body on the situation in the Central African
Republic. This meeting clearly reflects the Security
Council’s focused attention to the especially alarming
developments that continue to unfold in that country.

14-20048

06/01/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

As Council members know, on 19 July 2013
the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union authorized the deployment of the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and granted it a clear mandate to
protect the civilian population and stabilize the security
situation. The Peace and Security Council had asked
the Security Council to support the deployment of
MISCА and to take the measures needed to that effect.
In that regard, I welcome the fact that, in its resolutions
2121 (2013) and 2127 (2013), the Council has supported
and authorized the deployment of MISCA. That is a
further illustration of the close partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations.
On 19 December 2013, MISCA took over from the
Mission for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central
African Republic (MICOPAX) of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS). That
transition was the result of intense consultations with
the ECCAS, within the African Peace and Security
Framework. I would like once again to express the
appreciation of the African Union to ECCAS and
MICOPAX for their work under particularly difficult
conditions. It goes without saying that the cooperation
between the African Union and ECCAS continues,
given that the situation requires ongoing and active
regional involvement and the mobilization of all of
Africa’s energy. As soon as it assumed authority,
MISCA began working to build on the achievements
attained by MICOPAX and effectively implement its
mandate, guided by the concept of operations adopted
in agreement with ECCAS.
I should like to underscore that MISCA’s original
plan was severely hindered by the attacks perpetrated
on 5 December 2013 against Government forces by
initially unidentified armed groups that were later
determined to be of the so-called anti-Balaka group.
Following those bloody events and through extended
consultations between Heads of State of the region
and African Union partners, the Peace and Security
Council decided on 13 December 2013 to authorize an
increase in the force strength of MISCA of up to 6,000
uniformed personnel, depending on developments in
the situation on the ground. Clearly, like the French
Operation Sangaris, MISCA embarked on its work in
a particularly difficult environment, characterized by
clashes between anti-Balaka and ex-Séléka forces, and
sometimes between individuals.

S/PV.7092

This violence is all the more destabilizing and
difficult to contain because it has assumed on a sectarian
and religious character. Heinous crimes have been
committed. Lynchings, summary executions, looting
and destruction of property have increased. Tens of
thousands of people have had to flee their homes to seek
refuge in other areas of the city of Bangui considered
safer, primarily the area surrounding the airport.
Since its inception, MISCA has had to take measures
to address this situation. The reinforcement of ground
personnel following the arrival of the Burundian
contingent helped to contain the tide of violence and
respond as best it could to the many demands on the
MISCA forces — at times for escorts, at others to hold
fixed points or secure commercial and public buildings.
Positioned in various sites in the city of Bangui,
MISCA troops deployed in the capital had initially held
fixed points, while patrols were left to the elements of
the Operation Sangaris, which were more mobile and
equipped with adequate means of communication.
Since then, military and police forces have
adopted new plans for dividing the territory in order
to attain an adequate grip over Bangui and the rest of
Central African territory. The imminent deployment
of the Rwandan contingent and the provision of
communication, mobility and protection equipment
should allow MISCA to accelerate its securing of
Bangui and embark on the second phase of deployment
pursuant to its concept of operations.
During their working visit to Bangui on
28 December 2013, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Republic of Chad, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs
and of Defence of the Republic of Congo, and the
African Union Peace and Security Commissioner were
encouraged by the steps taken by MISCA commanders
to redeploy its forces and called for the stigmatization
of any contingents within MISCA to be avoided. The
Ministers and the Commissioner also stressed the need
for continued international support to facilitate the
implementation of MISCA’s mandate as authorized
by resolution 2127 (2013). I also wish to stress that
the commanders of MISCA and Operation Sangaris
continue to work in coordination and collaboration as
they conduct operations to secure the city of Bangui.
The calm reported in recent days is the result of the
joint action of the two forces.
MISCA is committed to working closely with the
various leaders within the Central African Republic.

14-200489/11

S/PV.7092

The situation in the Central African Republic

At the political level, this means encouraging the
transitional authorities to work closely together,
accelerate the timetable for transition, and launch the
necessary process of reconciliation among the various
national communities. It also means encouraging
them to do what is necessary for the State to resume
the effective provision of public services, including
effective State control over income sources and the
transparent management of public finances.
At a more operational level, MISCA seeks to
promote, as far as possible, the return to normal life.
From this point of view, I note that on 4 January the head
of MISCA held a meeting with the Mayor of Bangui,
district and neighbourhoods leaders from Bangui, and
representatives of humanitarian agencies with a view
to agreeing with them on practical measures to meet
the security needs of the population and facilitate
the work of the military and the police. A committee
was established to monitor the implementation of the
measures agreed. One of the immediate results expected
is the return of displaced populations, especially those
located around the Bangui airport, to their homes.
In the coming days, MISCA will make the most of
the current relative calm to step up its implementation
of plans to divide and organize Bangui and the rest of
Central African territory by sector; to develop strategies
to support the implementation of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes and
security and defence sector reform; and to consider how
to support the electoral process, in coordination with
other stakeholders.
The Commission is preparing to deploy an initial
group of human rights observers to support MISCA in
this area, which is critical to the restoration of justice,
public order and State authority. The transitional
authorities, including the Prime Minister, have been
urged to step up the launch of the work of the judiciary.
Similarly, following the discovery in Bangui on
25 December 2013 of a mass grave containing several
bodies, a request was sent to the transitional authorities
for the public prosecutor to initiate the necessary
procedures and conduct adequate investigations into
these events.
Similarly, the Special Representative of the
Chairperson of the Commission and MISCA
Commander, General Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko,
maintains close collaboration with other members of
the international community in Bangui, including the

10/11

06/01/2014

Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic, and the
representatives of France, the United States of
America and the European Union in order to facilitate
coordinated international action on the ground.
It goes without saying that MISCA is operating
under difficult conditions. Indeed, the Mission still
faces several challenges, linked in particular to the
lack of infrastructure in the country, which has made
its tasks even more complex, hindered manoeuvres
and considerably increased the cost, as well as to the
inadequacy of air and land mobility and communications
assets.
Let me reiterate here the gratitude of the African
Union to the international partners that have been
supporting MISCA. I would like to highlight the
European Union and the United States, as well as
France, with which we are working on the ground.
Additional support, both logistical and financial, is still
required from the international community. We hope
that the donor conference to be held in Addis Ababa on
1 February will be an opportunity for Member States
and our partners alike to show their support for MISCA.
We are confident that MISCA can meet the
challenges before it. The determination of the
African Union is total and the commitment of troopcontributing countries unflinching. MISCA personnel
are performing their duties with dedication and a great
sense of sacrifice, aware that they are participating in
a duty-bound act of African solidarity with a brotherly
country and people in distress. As fragile as they
may be, the first results on the ground strengthen our
conviction that the established goals will be met — just
as the African Union has proved to be the case in other
theatres of operations, in particular in Somalia — with
the extremely valuable support of the United Nations
and other international partners.
We believe that the priority for the international
community, and of the United Nations in particular,
should be to support MISCA so that the Mission can
create the minimal conditions for the deployment of
a United Nations operation in due course. While the
efforts of the African Union and its peace and security
structures must also be strengthened, it is also true
that a lasting solution to the continent’s crises will
be possible only by strengthening African capacities.
Regardless of their good intentions, our partners will

14-20048

06/01/2014

The situation in the Central African Republic

not always be able to assume the burden of peacekeeping
on the continent. In our view, any other approach risks
undermining the efforts that MISCA is currently
undertaking, with the support of Operation Sangaris,
by generating uncertainty, which would undermine the
gains already made and complicate the situation on the
ground. Such a situation would make any deployment of
a United Nations operation more difficult. We therefore
expect the Security Council to take this opportunity to
strongly reiterate, in line with its previous resolutions,
its support for MISCA and the need for all involved to
facilitate the implementation of its mandate.
Beyond renewed support for МISСА, the
international community, including the United Nations,
must redouble its efforts to support the implementation
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes, security sector reform and the electoral
process. Financial assistance is also urgently needed to
facilitate a relaunching of economic activity. Of course,
I would not want to fail to mention the extremely
worrisome humanitarian situation that prevails on the
ground. The international community’s response to
that situation should be much more robust. It is through
such concrete actions to respond to the needs on the
ground that the international community can usefully

S/PV.7092

contribute to the ongoing work and success of MISCA,
which is working on behalf of not only the African
Union but also the international community as a whole.
The response to the current crisis is obviously not
taking place only on the military and security fronts;
in fact, it is fundamentally political in nature. From
that point of view, the commitment of the transitional
authorities is essential. It is important that they fully
shoulder their responsibilities. The efforts they will
undertake in the effective conduct of the transition and
the contribution they make to MISCA will be crucial
to the success of our efforts. The initiatives undertaken
by ECCAS, particularly through its acting chairman
and the chairman of its committee monitoring the
situation in the Central African Republic, namely,
Their Excellencies President Idriss Deby Itno of Chad
and President Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of
the Congo, should be strongly supported.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers. I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

14-2004811/11
