UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/26015
30 June 1993
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

NOTE BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

1.
The President of the Security Council wishes to refer to the issue of the
format of the annual report of the Security Council to the General Assembly,
which the Council has to submit under Article 24 (3) of the Charter of the
United Nations and to certain other matters.
2.
The President of the Council wishes to state in this regard that all
members of the Council have indicated their agreement with the following
proposals:
1.

The Security Council should take all the necessary measures to ensure
the timely submission of its report to the General Assembly. For that
purpose:

(a) The Security Council should retain the existing practice whereby
the annual report is submitted to the General Assembly in a single volume
covering the period from 16 June of one year to 15 June of the next year;
(b) The Secretariat should submit the draft report to the members of
the Security Council no later than 30 September immediately following the
period covered by the report, so that the report may be adopted by the
Council in time for consideration by the Assembly during the main part of
its regular session.
2.

Presidential statements should be published, effective 1 January 1994,
in an annual series using the prefix "S/PRST/ " followed by the year
and the number of the statement. A new appendix should be included in
the annual report of the Security Council to the General Assembly,
starting with the report covering the period from 16 June 1992 to
15 June 1993, providing a chronological listing of presidential
statements for the period under review and indicating the date when
the statement was made or issued and the relevant agenda item or
subject-matter. At the time of approval of presidential statements,
the Council members should indicate the agenda item and, where none
exists, an agreed formulation of the subject-matter under which the
statement is being authorized. That should be reflected in the
Council document circulating the presidential statement.

93-38021 (E)

300693

/...

S/26015
English
Page 2

3.

The appendices in the annual report of the Security Council listing
the resolutions and presidential statements should provide crossreferences to the relevant chapter, section and subsection of the
report, for each resolution and presidential statement.

4.

The draft annual report of the Security Council to the General
Assembly should no longer be issued as a confidential document; it
should be a document with a "limited distribution" designation, as is
the common practice in other bodies of the United Nations.

5.

Henceforth, the draft report should be adopted at a public meeting of
the Security Council. At that meeting, the document containing the
draft report should be made available to interested delegations.

6.

Whenever inclusion of a reference to unpublished documentation in a
draft resolution or a draft presidential statement is envisaged, the
Secretariat should bring the matter to the attention of the President
of the Council so that the President, in turn, could raise the matter
with the members of the Council in order to determine whether or not
to retain the reference in the draft text and, where the members of
the Security Council decide that it is to be retained, whether that
document should be published as an official document of the Security
Council.

7.

The provisional agenda for formal meetings of the Council should be
included in the Journal provided that it has been approved in informal
consultations.

8.

The Group discussed various possible options to establish new ways to
provide information to States that are not members of the Council. It
was agreed that the Council should keep this question under due
consideration so as to enhance its practice in this respect.

3.
The members of the Council will continue their consideration of other
suggestions concerning the Council’s documentation and related matters.

-----
