S/PV.8514

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8514th meeting

Tuesday, 23 April 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Maas. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Kenes
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Nguema Ndong
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Syihab
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Mr. Radomski
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Nkosi
Lord Ahmad
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Sexual violence in conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280)
Letter dated 11 April 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Germany to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/313)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-11756 (E)
*1911756*

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Sexual violence in conflict
Report of the Secretary-General on conflictrelated sexual violence (S/2019/280)
Letter dated 11 April 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of Germany
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/313)
The President: I wish to warmly welcome the
Secretary-General, Ministers and other distinguished
representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their presence today underscores the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Afghanistan, Albania, Argentina,
Australia, Bangladesh, Botswana, Brazil, Cambodia,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Djibouti, Ecuador,
Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, Georgia,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Morocco,
Myanmar, Namibia, the Netherlands, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sri Lanka, the Sudan, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine,
the United Arab Emirates, Uruguay and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Pramila
Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict; Dr. Denis Mukwege,
Nobel Peace Prize laureate; Ms. Nadia Murad, Nobel
Peace Prize laureate; Ms. Amal Clooney, barrister;
and Ms. Inas Miloud, Co-Founder and Director of the
Tamazight Women’s Movement.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: Mr. Robert
2/103

23/04/2019

Mardini, Permanent Observer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to the United Nations;
Her Excellency Ms. Mara Marinaki, Principle Adviser
on Gender and the Implementation of United Nations
Security Council Resolution 1325 (2000) on Women
and Peace and Security of the European External Action
Service; Ms. Clare Hutchinson, Special Representative
of the NATO Secretary-General for Women, Peace and
Security; Her Excellency Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations; and Her Excellency Mrs. Jeanne d’Arc Byaje,
Permanent Observer of the Economic Community of
Central African States to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2019/280, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence.
I wish to also draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/313, which contains a letter dated
11 April 2019 from the Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.
The Secretary-General: I thank Germany and
His Excellency the Foreign Minister, Mr. Heiko Maas,
for hosting this important debate. I welcome Nobel
Peace Prize laureates Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis
Mukwege and thank them for their extraordinary work.
Their advocacy highlights two vital elements of our
response to the crime of sexual violence in conflict: the
call for justice and the need for support and assistance
to victims. While their efforts originate in Iraq and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, they have a global
impact. The United Nations is proud to work with
victims and survivors to support the movements that
they have started. I also welcome Ms. Inas Miloud and
Ms. Amal Clooney and thank them for their activism
and advocacy.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

It is 10 years since the establishment of the mandate
and the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Over the course of the decade, there
has been a paradigm shift in the understanding of the
crime of conflict-related sexual violence, its impact on
international peace and security, the response required
to prevent and end it, and the full range of services
required by survivors. That is the result of advocacy and
action by individuals, Governments, non-governmental
organizations and institutions. I commend all those
involved, including the Council, which has established
a robust normative framework to address the issue.
An increasing number of Governments have shown a
willingness to pursue justice and provide services for
survivors. Advocacy groups have demonstrated beyond
doubt that sexual violence is deliberately used as a tactic
of war to terrorize people, dehumanize communities
and destabilize societies so that they struggle to recover
for years or even decades.

S/PV. 8514

told me of the gang rape of women and girls in their
homes before they fled Myanmar. That is why the
President of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Peter Maurer, and I pledged earlier this year to
step up efforts to prevent and end such crimes and to
put victims and survivors at the centre of our response.
At the same time, we urged Governments to do more to
address the issue and to support survivors.
We must recognize that sexual violence in conflict
largely affects women and girls because it is closely
linked to broader issues of gender inequality and
discrimination. Prevention must therefore be based on
promoting women’s rights and gender equality in all
areas before, during and after conflict. That must include
women’s full and effective participation in political,
economic and social life and ensuring accessible and
responsive justice and security institutions.

Local civil society organizations, many of them
women’s organizations, are at the forefront of our
efforts to prevent this crime and to provide redress for
it, and they deserve our strong and consistent support.
Individual heroes, including those with us today, have
shown great courage in speaking out on the enormous
and lasting damage done by the crime, which is most
often perpetrated against women and girls.

We must also recognize that there are links between
sexual violence in conflict, gender inequality and
discrimination and violent extremism and terrorism.
Extremists and terrorists often build their ideologies
around the subjugation of women and girls and use
sexual violence in various ways, from forced marriage
to virtual enslavement. Sexual violence continues to
fuel conflict and severely impacts the prospects for
lasting peace.

The United Nations system has stepped up by
taking action to implement the resolutions passed by
the Council on women and peace and security. To give
just a few examples, United Nations peacekeepers now
receive consistent training to prevent and to respond
to sexual violence in conflict. We have strengthened
our ability to investigate crimes of sexual and genderbased violence, deploying dedicated investigators
to United Nations commissions of inquiry and to
national and international courts. We have improved
our data and analysis of such crimes — an essential
basis for successful prevention. And we are supporting
Governments to improve their response and services
for survivors.

My report (S/2019/280) outlines a series of
recommendations that are intended to provide a
comprehensive approach to conflict-related sexual
violence. Prevention is a strong theme running through
the recommendations. I encourage the Council to
include the prevention of conflict-related sexual
violence in all its country-specific resolutions and in
the mandates of peace operations. I also encourage
the Council to integrate the issue of conflict-related
sexual violence fully into the work of its sanctions
committees and to include measures to prevent these
crimes in its initiatives on security sector and justice
reform. Strengthening prevention in the context of the
Council’s peacemaking efforts is also critical.

Despite all those efforts, the reality on the ground
has not changed. Sexual violence continues to be a
horrific feature of conflicts around the world.

Where women are part of peacekeeping missions,
we know that reporting on and protection from sexual
violence increase. When women are at the peace table,
there is greater likelihood of accountability for these
crimes. When women are part of ceasefire monitoring,
they can ensure that gender-based crimes are monitored
and reported.

Throughout my career, I have heard first-hand
accounts of sexual violence in war zones, from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the former
Yugoslavia. In Bangladesh last year, Rohingya refugees

19-117563/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

My recommendations also stress the need to
strengthen justice and accountability. Despite a handful
of high-profile convictions, there is widespread
impunity for sexual violence in conflict. Most of these
crimes are never reported or investigated, much less
prosecuted. My recommendations include increasing
support to national authorities as they reform laws,
improve their capacities to investigate and prosecute
these crimes and protect survivors who testify from
stigma and fear of reprisal. They also emphasize the
need for greater support for survivors and their families,
including health care, reparations and other assistance.
I commend the efforts of Dr. Mukwege to create a
global fund to support victims and call on all Member
States to contribute so that the fund can transform the
lives of those affected and provide a measure of redress.
I thank the members of the Council for their
leadership over the past decade. This agenda has
benefitted from both the commitment and the consensus
of Council members, and I encourage Council members
to continue working together to reconcile differences.
The global response to these crimes must ensure the
punishment of the perpetrators and comprehensive
support to survivors, in full respect for their human
rights. Together, we can and must replace impunity
with justice and indifference with action.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Patten.
Ms. Patten: I wish to begin by acknowledging the
leadership of Germany and the personal commitment
of His Excellency Mr. Heiko Maas, its Federal Minister
for Foreign Affairs, for convening this open debate.
I am proud to join two of the heroes of our common
cause, Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege,
recipients of the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize, who give voice
to the survivors of this heinous crime. Their award
is a triumph of all survivors. Allow me also to thank
Ms. Inas Miloud for being here to amplify the voices
of indigenous women affected by sexual violence in
conflict, as well as Ms. Amal Clooney for her presence
among us today.
In the 10 years since the establishment of this
mandate by the Security Council, a crime that has
often been called “history’s greatest silence” has seized
the consciousness of the international community and
global action has escalated in an unprecedented way.
4/103

23/04/2019

The Council has played a critical role by recognizing
that the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war
and terrorism constitutes a fundamental threat to
international peace and security and that it requires a
focused and strategic security and justice response to
prevent such crimes, as well as comprehensive services
for survivors.
Although stigma and other social barriers contribute
to chronic underreporting of sexual violence, we now
understand much more about its many forms, drivers
and impacts, and about the devastating physical,
psychological and social burdens survivors face. In
the past decade, the prevention of sexual violence has
been incorporated into peace agreements and ceasefire
verification frameworks, and Governments and
regional organizations have signed joint communiqués
and frameworks of cooperation with the United Nations
as a basis for joint action. Technical assistance has
been provided to national security and justice sector
actors to strengthen accountability. United Nations
peacekeepers are receiving more consistent training
to improve operational readiness to prevent sexual
violence in conflict.
Still, after a decade of concerted attention and action,
the reality that we must face is that the implementation
of resolutions, policies, agreements and commitments
remains slow and that criminal accountability for these
crimes remains elusive. We have not yet improved the
situation on the ground in a sustained or meaningful
way. Wars are still being fought on and over the bodies
of women and girls. Sexual violence, in its destruction
of the individual and the pervasive way it undermines
the prospects for peace and development, casts a long
shadow over humankind. It is used precisely because
it is such an effective means of targeting individuals
and devastating entire communities. Sexual violence
fuels conflict and severely impacts the prospects for
lasting peace. Victims are often targeted on the basis
of their actual or perceived ethnic, religious, political
or clan affiliation.
When I visited South Sudan last year, I was
horrified by the sheer brutality of the sexual violence,
perpetrated along ethnic lines against women and
girls, even children as young as 4 years old. I met
with communities that had arrived only days before
in the protection of civilians site in Juba, having fled
attacks in Western Equatoria. They were utterly shellshocked as they described the reign of terror and the
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

scale and brutal methods used, including gang rape and
abductions for sexual slavery.
Sexual violence persists as part of the broader
strategy to displace communities, expel an undesirable
group or seize contested land or resources. It continues
to function as both a driver and a result of forced
displacement. In Cox’s Bazar, in Bangladesh, I met with
Rohingya women and girls who described a pattern of
widespread atrocities, including gang rape, committed
as part of military clearance operations in northern
Rakhine state, in Myanmar. In Libya, we have seen that
new or exacerbated vulnerabilities can develop in the
course of migration, giving rise to rape, trafficking and
sexual exploitation and abuse among those who, once
displaced, find themselves without access to resources
or legal status.
The despair wrought by conflict often gives rise
to further abuse in the name of protection. Imagine
a desperation so raw that parents would marry their
daughter off to one stranger to spare her rape by many.
In Iraq, I met women abducted by Da’esh — including
Yazidi, Turkmen Shia and Christian women — who
faced the heart-wrenching choice of leaving their
children born of conflict-related sexual violence
behind in order to gain acceptance back into their
communities, or else not returning home at all because
they could not bear to abandon their children. Such
children may number in the thousands after protracted
conflicts in Bosnia, Colombia, Syria, Iraq, the Horn
of Africa, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
West Africa. Their marginalization and lack of legal
status represent a global peace and security concern,
as they are especially vulnerable to radicalization and
recruitment by armed groups.
In Maiduguri, Nigeria, I met with women and girls
who had escaped from Boko Haram. Sitting in a room
with dozens of them, I counted so many babies in their
arms. I was shocked when they told me that they were
better off with their Boko Haram captors because they
had gone from being abducted and raped by one man to
being subjected daily to sexual violence in the camps
and having to sell their bodies to feed their children.
It is essential that victims of sexual violence
by terrorist groups such as Boko Haram, Da’esh or
Al-Shabaab be able to return in dignity and that
services be provided for them, rather than being treated
as affiliates or intelligence assets. This is all the more
critical when we consider how such groups are using

S/PV. 8514

sexual violence as a tactic of terrorism and a means of
advancing political, military and economic objectives.
They have used sexual slavery and forced marriage as
part of the system of punishment and reward through
which they consolidate power and build a world order
cast in their own image and beliefs.
Everywhere I have travelled, I have seen that
survivors are not a homogeneous group — they require
tailor-made services and interventions. That includes
women who are disproportionately affected in every
conflict zone; children who are increasingly targeted
as a way to destroy the future of communities; men and
boys who often endure sexual violence in the context
of detention and interrogation; women’s human rights
defenders and journalists who report sexual violence;
and members of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and
intersex communities that have been targeted on the
basis of their sexual orientation or gender identity.
The urgency of ensuring comprehensive health
services for all survivors, including sexual and
reproductive health, as well as psychosocial and legal
support, could not be more acute. That is at the heart
of the survivor-centred approach that the SecretaryGeneral articulates in his recommendations and is
the central pillar of the strategic priorities that I have
established since taking Office.
Yet, if we are ever to prevent those crimes from
occurring in the first place, we must confront the
unacceptable reality that it is still largely “cost-free” to
rape a woman, child or man in armed conflicts around
the world. To turn the tide, we must increase the cost
and consequences for those who commit, command or
condone sexual violence in conflict. We must convert
a centuries-old culture of impunity into a culture of
accountability. Therefore, we must prioritize deterrence
and prevention through justice and accountability.
One of the critical challenges going forward will
be how to ensure compliance with international law
and the resolutions of the Security Council on the part
of parties to conflict who are listed year after year by
the Secretary-General. Of the 49 parties listed this
year, 36 non-State actors have made no commitment
to preventing sexual violence and most of them have
now been listed for six years or more. If those parties
perceive that their actions are subject to neither scrutiny
nor consequences, they will have no incentive to cease
violations. I urge the Security Council to consider

19-117565/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

additional targeted measures that may be undertaken to
apply pressure on those parties.
At the same time, an approach that places survivors
at the centre of all our actions requires a holistic
concept of justice and accountability, ensuring that
survivors receive the livelihood support that they
require to rebuild their lives and the reparations that
are the obligations of States under international law.
Therefore, I wish to emphasize the recommendation of
the Secretary-General for Member States to give due
consideration to the establishment of a survivor’s fund.
Finally, we must recognize that civil society
organizations in situations of conflict all around the
world continue to be the most important protection
actors on the frontlines. It is imperative that we support
a broad range of such civil society actors as central to
our overall prevention strategies.
I wish to express my appreciation to the members
of the Security Council for their serious deliberation
of the platform of recommendations of the SecretaryGeneral. The draft resolution put forward by Germany
on that basis would represent a significant step forward
in terms of strengthening justice and accountability
and adopting a survivor-centred approach in all
our interventions.
The acute vulnerability of so many women, children
and men to sexual violence in conflict situations
around the world must now crystalize our resolve into
clear action to prevent such crimes. It is essential that
we translate promises into practice and resolutions
into solutions. It is time to bring such crimes and those
who commit them into the spotlight of international
scrutiny and to send a clear message that the world will
not tolerate the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war
and terrorism.
The President: I thank Ms. Patten for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Dr. Mukwege.
Dr. Mukwege (spoke in French): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for inviting me to take the floor during
this open debate on sexual violence in conflict.
Allow me first of all to share with the Security
Council a recollection engraved in my memory
following my first statement to the Council more than
10 years ago. A diplomat from a permanent member
State had asked, “Why are we talking about this subject
here?” That memory reminds us that we have come a
6/103

23/04/2019

long way in addressing this subject, which is understood
to affect our common conscience and humanity and is
intimately linked to international peace and security.
I welcome the Security Council’s willingness
to continue to place the item “Women and peace and
security” at the centre of the international community’s
attention and on its agenda. Since the adoption of
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2009), the link
between sexual violence and international peace and
security has been clearly established and rape as a
strategy of war has been fully recognized as a war crime,
a crime against humanity and even as a constituent act
of the crime of genocide. That is a remarkable step
forward, because before a problem can be addressed it
must first of all be recognized. Thanks to those legal
developments, no political or military leader today
can ignore or neglect the fact that it is contrary to
international law to use rape and sexual violence as a
weapon of domination and terror.
We support all initiatives aimed at establishing a
red line against those barbaric acts of which we have
been first-hand witnesses for too long, and we hope to
see the United Nations and individual States adopting
sanctions against the perpetrators and instigators of
sexual violence in armed conflict. We believe that local
civil society organizations must be fully involved in
early warning and rapid response mechanisms and in
the collection of data on sexual crimes that would be
channelled to centres for monitoring sexual violence
established at the local, national, regional and global
levels, which would relay them as soon as possible
to the review mechanisms of the United Nations
sanctions committees.
In Panzi, we have developed a model of holistic care
that includes medical, psychological, socio-economic
and legal assistance. I take this opportunity to remind
the Council that such care for victims must be considered
as a human right to rehabilitation, in accordance with
resolution 2106 (2013). Our experience shows us that
the healing process for survivors is only complete
when justice is done. That is why we fully support the
recommendations of the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/280) and the work of his Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Similarly, we welcome the initiative taken by
Germany to introduce a new resolution, as it places
particular emphasis on the need for recognition of the
status of children born of rape and a comprehensive
19-11756

Women and peace and security

23/04/2019

survivor-centred approach, as well as the need to apply
sanctions, bring justice, demand accountability and
provide reparations.
We encourage all efforts to combat impunity at
both the national and international levels, as well as
the use of special tribunals, which we hope to see in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in every
country in a similar situation. We will also continue to
advocate for the implementation of transitional justice
tools. In countries striving to emerge from violence and
dictatorships, security institutions and forces must be
cleaned up, and victims have a right not just to quality
care but to truth and justice. Reparations do not just
complete the process of healing and reintegrating
victims, they enable society to recognize the pain that
has been inflicted, combat stigma, discrimination
and gender inequality, and prevent crimes of sexual
violence from recurring.
We hope that the international community will
commit to establishing a fund to address the needs
of survivors and fill the current gaps in the legal
system at the national and international levels. Such a
mechanism would include funding to provide reparation
programmes and projects in countries that either ignore
their responsibilities or need support in fulfilling
them. There can be no lasting peace without justice or
as long as States fail to listen to women victims with
dignity or involve them fully in peacebuilding and
social reconstruction.
Everywhere I go in the world, the words of
survivors — such as Nadia Murad, my fellow Nobel Peace
Prize laureate — are being heard, and their testimonies
are living proof. We cannot remain indifferent to their
cries. At the same time, the normative framework for
combating sexual violence has been steadily improving
for 20 years. The evidence is there. The documentation
exists. What is the human community waiting for to
see justice done for the victims? We urge the decision
makers and officials here today to adopt draft resolution
S/2019/328 and thereby demonstrate the courage and
political will needed to bridge the current gap between
the law and actual practice and contribute to building a
better world free of sexual violence in times of conflict.
The President:
his briefing.

I

thank

Dr.

I now give the floor to Ms. Murad.

Mukwege

for

S/PV. 8514

Ms. Murad (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Secretary-General, the Government
of Germany and you, Mr. President, its Minister for
Foreign Affairs, as well as the members of the Council,
for giving me the opportunity to participate in this
important open debate on the crimes of sexual violence
committed against women all over the world, which
have become a dangerous problem that requires all of
us to respond and find solutions to. I am happy that
today the Council has decided to discuss the issue,
which concerns us all.
When we speak about systematic sexual violence
crimes in modern times, we cannot fail to discuss what
Da’esh did to Yezidi women in Iraq and Syria, enslaving
thousands of Yezidi women and girls in front of local
and international communities while no one intervened
to stop them. The genocide against Yezidis is still
ongoing, and the social fabric of an entire community
has been torn to shreds. Da’esh has crushed the hopes
and aspirations of entire generations and has prevented
us from practicing our customs and traditions. It has
forced the people who survived the genocide to live in
camps without the most basic means of subsistence.
There are dozens of mass graves across our entire
region. Yezidi women were captured and sold as slaves
and used as a weapon against our community.
Having been unable — or to be more accurate,
having failed to protect women and children from
sexual slavery and a small minority population from
genocide — we, as an international community and
as human beings, should take on the responsibility
of rescuing and freeing those who have been missing
since 2014 and are still in captivity. We have repeatedly
demanded that the international community, States and
Governments establish a working group to save Yezidi
women and children, but to no avail. Our appeals fell on
deaf ears. The result has been our collective failure. We
know very well that these women have been subjected
to sexual violence and have been bought and sold by
Da’esh in Iraq and Syria. What is stopping us from
saving them? Thousands of victims and survivors are
living today in deplorable conditions in displacement
camps, traumatized and suffering from the sexual
violence that was inflicted on them. What I want to
say is that while there are some steps that we can take
to prevent crimes of sexual violence, when we do not
prevent them we must shoulder our responsibility to act
by providing every possible support to those who have
faced sexual violence.

19-117567/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

My Yezidi women colleagues who were subjected
to sexual violence at the hands of Da’esh broke the
barrier of silence, stigma and fear and told their
stories openly, in the hope that this would bring them
justice and support and encourage the international
community to put an end to such crimes. However,
so far not a single person has been tried for sexual
enslavement crimes against Yezidi women, and more
than 350,000 Yazidis are still displaced in camps. That
is nearly 80 per cent of Iraq’s Yezidi population. Almost
five years after the genocide of my people occurred in
front of the international community, no serious steps
have been taken to save those who are left. We make
statements at the United Nations, but there have been no
practical measures, such as reconstructing our regions,
bringing perpetrators to justice or returning victims
and displaced persons to their homes. We need serious
action on the ground, not slogans.
We were hoping that our testimonies would bring
members of Da’esh to justice. But thousands of them
are still free today and thousands more have been
detained but not tried. What we are demanding today
is that the perpetrators of genocide and those who used
Yezidi women as a weapon of war be brought to justice.
They must be brought before a specialized international
tribunal and prosecuted for perpetrating genocide and
crimes of sexual violence against women and children.
That would send a message to others and help to prevent
similar crimes in future.
Lastly, the Security Council’s adoption of resolution
2379 (2017), establishing an investigative team to
investigate crimes committed by Da’esh, support
accountability and achieve justice for the victims, was a
step in the right direction, even if it came late. We hope
that the Council will continue to support Mr. Karim
Khan and the United Nations Investigative Team for the
Promotion of Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/ISIL in Iraq as they continue to collect evidence.
It is also the duty of the Council and the international
community to draft a resolution that guarantees full
support for the victims of sexual violence, including on
the material, psychological and health fronts.
The President: I thank Ms. Murad for her statement.
I now give the floor to Ms. Clooney.
Ms. Clooney: I would like to thank the German
Government for inviting me to address the Security
Council today on the topic of accountability for sexual
8/103

23/04/2019

violence in conflict. It is an honour to be included
among such a distinguished panel of speakers.
In preparing to deliver these remarks alongside
Ms. Nadia Murad — my client, friend and somebody I
greatly admire — I thought back to a conversation we
had when we first met. Nadia told me of her suffering at
the hands of 12 different men of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham (ISIS) who enslaved and brutalized her.
She recounted the murder of her mother and brothers.
She showed me threatening messages that she had
received from ISIS on her phone. And as she did that,
it occurred to me that she never expressed fear for her
life or safety. Instead, that day and ever since, she has
spoken of only one fear — that when this is all over, the
ISIS men will just shave off their beards and go back to
their normal lives and that there will be no justice.
I am legal counsel to Nadia and other Yazidi women
and girls who were kidnapped, bought, sold, enslaved
and raped by ISIS, and my brief is the pursuit of justice.
But it was clear from an early stage that this was going
to be a challenge. The world’s Powers were focused on
a military solution and nobody wished to speak about
justice. So we fixed on one imperative — we could
not allow the evidence to disappear. Ms. Murad and I
therefore came here to the United Nations and we asked
the Security Council for help. We asked that it send a
team of investigators to Iraq to gather evidence of ISIS
crimes so that, one day, trials would be possible and
justice would be within reach.
After many months of advocacy, with strong
leadership from the United Kingdom and support from
Iraq and the United States, Nadia and I sat together in
this Chamber (see S/PV.8052) and watched 15 hands
go up in favour of adopting resolution 2379 (2017).
We welcomed the appointment of an eminent lawyer,
Mr. Karim Khan, to lead the Investigative Team
established pursuant to Security Council resolution 2379
(2017), and we celebrated the moment four weeks ago
when the Team, working alongside the Iraqi authorities,
began to exhume mass graves and identify the victims’
remains. That first step in any criminal inquiry was a
cathartic moment for many Yazidi families, and we are
encouraged to hear that the investigation in Iraq is now
fully under way.
We have also seen milestones in national courts
around the world. In the United States, I represent
Yazidi women and girls who were held in the house of
an ISIS member named Umm Sayyaf, along with one
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

of the few non-Yazidi victims of ISIS’s sexual violence
that we know of, an American hostage named Kayla
Mueller, who was held in brutal conditions for over 18
months and raped repeatedly by the head of ISIS, Abu
Bakr Al-Baghdadi. Umm Sayyaf showed no solidarity
with her fellow females. She locked them in a room,
instigated their beatings and put makeup on them to
prepare them for rape. I am requesting her transfer to
the United States to face justice for those crimes.
In France, I represent Yazidi victims in a case
against Lafarge, a company that made multi-million
dollar payments to ISIS and is the first multinational to
be charged with complicity in crimes against humanity
committed by the group.
In Germany, I represent a Yazidi victim in a case
in which the German Supreme Court confirmed that
the charges against an ISIS commander responsible for
sexual slavery amount to genocide, which is the first
judicial recognition of that fact anywhere in the world.
Two weeks ago, I was in Munich, where the first
trial against an ISIS member for international crimes
committed against a Yazidi victim has now begun. In
that case, I represent the mother of a 5-year-old Yazidi
child who was enslaved, chained outdoors to a window
and left to slowly die of thirst in the scorching heat.
The ISIS member who allowed it to happen now faces
charges of murder as a war crime.
Those are important milestones, and I would like
to convey special thanks to the German prosecutors I
have worked closely with over the past few years for
their determination and professionalism in bringing
those cases to trial. But let me be very clear. That does
not come close to the level of justice the survivors
wish for or the scale of the international response that
they deserve.
Let us remember that the crimes committed by ISIS
against women and girls are unlike anything we have
witnessed in modern times. ISIS controlled territory
the size of the United Kingdom and ruled over 8 million
people. More than 40,000 foreign fighters from 110
countries are estimated to have joined ISIS’s ranks in
Iraq and Syria. But the question of bringing them to
justice has barely raised a whisper, and yet, if we do not
act now, it will be too late. Thousands of perpetrators,
including some of the most high-ranking, are held by
coalition-backed Syrian Democratic Forces in Syria.
Those Forces say that they “lack logistical support to
hold them for a long time”, and President Trump has

S/PV. 8514

warned that if Europe does not find a way to put foreign
fighters on trial, the United States will be “forced to
release them”.
Thousands more ISIS members are detained in Iraq,
but there, trials that the United Nations says are lacking
due process proceed on a single terrorism charge
without witnesses and move swiftly to executions. None
of those trials stand as a measure of justice for Yazidis.
They do not provide victims an opportunity to look
their abusers in the eye and tell the world what ISIS has
done. The charges do not include sexual violence, and
crimes like genocide are not even on the books.
That has to change, and there is now a unique
opportunity for international accountability, because
thousands of ISIS militants are in custody, a United
Nations team is collecting evidence and survivors are
waiting to testify, but also because people in the region
are calling for international trials. In Syria, the Syrian
Democratic Forces has called for “a special international
tribunal to prosecute foreign fighters”, and in Iraq, the
Kurdish regional Government has made a similar plea.
Meanwhile, the Council has itself made clear that
the genocide pursued by ISIS through murder and rape
represents a threat to international peace and security,
and when it reached a similar conclusion about such
crimes in Rwanda and Bosnia, it established tribunals
to put the perpetrators on trial. But if Al-Baghdadi is
arrested today, where will he go? Here are four options
for the Council to consider.
First, the Council can refer the situation to the
International Criminal Court (ICC), as many Yazidi
survivors have called for. Unfortunately, that seems
increasingly unlikely. The United States Government
has recently said, through its National Security Adviser
John Bolton and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, that
the ICC is “dead to us” and that those who support
certain ICC investigations can be denied entry to the
United States, have their assets frozen and may even
face arrest.
A similarly devastating blow to the ICC was
delivered by another permanent member of the Council.
A senior Russian official told this Chamber last month
that Russia would never refer another situation to the
ICC, nor would it ever “help our colleagues in the
Security Council to create any more such tribunals”.
He added, for good measure, that maybe the whole
experiment with international justice should never even
have been started at all. Survivors of sexual violence

19-117569/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

can only hope that the Council will find a way through
that impasse, but there are other ways that justice can
be served.
The second option is that like-minded States that
believe in justice could set up a court by a treaty.
That could be done by States that are members of the
Global Coalition against Da’esh, many of which are
represented here today. After all, if 79 States can come
together to fight ISIS on the battlefield, why can they
not establish a court, either in The Hague or somewhere
in the region? The Global Coalition has stated that its
mission is to “ensure the enduring defeat of ISIS”, but
that is not possible without justice. As members of the
Coalition have themselves acknowledged, a military
defeat is not on its own an enduring one, because until
we kill the idea behind ISIS, it will simply regroup
under a new umbrella.
Thirdly, if the Council does not act and the Global
Coalition does not act, the European Union (EU)
can. The EU recently helped to establish a special
court in The Hague to deal with international crimes
committed in Kosovo. That court has the support of
all EU countries, as well as the United States, Canada,
Norway, Turkey and Switzerland, and its cases are
handled by international prosecutors and judges. With
Iraqi support, the EU and like-minded States could do
the same for ISIS crimes, or the EU could expand the
mandate of the European Public Prosecutor’s Office to
cover international crimes and set up a new EU court
with jurisdiction over them.
Fourthly, Iraq could enter into a treaty with the
United Nations to set up a hybrid court, as was done
for Sierra Leone and Cambodia, to prosecute those
responsible for international crimes.
None of those solutions comes without complication
or cost and none of them would replace the need to
have credible trials in national courts alongside any
international ones. But the draft resolution the Council
is considering today notes the prevalence of sexual
violence in wars all over the world and the Council’s
profound concern about the slow progress in eliminating
sexual violence in conflict. I agree that we are facing an
epidemic of sexual violence and I believe that justice is
the antidote.
It is therefore my respectful submission to the
Council today that, although the draft resolution under
consideration would represent a welcome step forward,
especially insofar as it strengthens the sanctions regime
10/103

23/04/2019

for those who commit sexual violence, we must go
further. If the Council cannot prevent sexual violence
in war, then it must at least punish it. As the parents of
Kayla Mueller and other American ISIL hostages have
put it, when crimes like these are made public in an
open court, victims like them can be heard and begin to
heal and we can hope that justice will put an end to such
crimes against humanity.
Therefore, instead of abandoning international
justice we must stand up for it, because justice is not
inevitable — it does not just happen and it does not
stand a chance if people in power, including those at
this table, do not make it a priority.
After the Second World War, the victorious nations,
namely, the United Kingdom, France, Russia and the
United States, asked themselves the same question
about the Nazis that we are asking now about ISIL—
when it comes to war, should we really care about
justice? Mr. Anthony Eden, then Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom, took the view that the guilt of the Nazis was
so black that they fell outside any judicial process.
Others thought that show trials or mass executions
would be a better response. But the United States,
under Presidents Roosevelt and Truman, pushed for
trials because, the United States said, it was important
to create a record of the Nazi system of terrorism. The
American prosecutor who opened the trial said that he
did so because “the wrongs which we seek to condemn
and punish have been so calculated, so malignant,
and so devastating, that civilization cannot tolerate
their being ignored, because it cannot survive their
being repeated”.
This is the Council’s Nuremberg moment, its chance
to stand on the right side of history. The Council owes it
to Nadia and to the thousands of women and girls who
must watch ISIL members shave off their beards and
go back to their normal lives, while they, the victims,
never can.
Nadia has been given many honours since she
decided to bravely speak out about the horrors she
and her people have suffered. She has received titles,
awards, words of thanks and promises of assistance. But
she would trade her Nobel Peace Prize in a heartbeat for
the chance to get what she really wants — the chance to
face, in a court of law, those who murdered her mother
and her brothers and those who brutally and repeatedly
raped her.
19-11756

Women and peace and security

23/04/2019

It is time for the Council to make justice its priority
so that history can record what happened, so that we
can stop it happening again and to truly honour those
who, like Nadia, have already suffered too much.
The President:
her statement.

I

thank

Ms.

Clooney

for

I now give the floor to Ms. Miloud.
Ms. Miloud: I am Inas Miloud. My people are
the Amazigh and they are the indigenous inhabitants
of Libya. I was born in 1990 and I grew up in Yafran,
a small Amazigh town in the Nafusa mountains about
100 miles from Tripoli.
Since the 2011 revolution, I have been working with
indigenous women and girls affected by sexual and
gender-based violence, as well as displaced and migrant
communities in Libya. Today I represent not only my
people, the Amazigh, but all women in Libya. I speak
in my capacity as the Chairperson of the Tamazight
Women’s Movement, an organization that undertakes
research and advocacy on indigenous issues in Libya
from an intersectional feminist perspective. I also speak
today on behalf of the non-governmental organization
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
Last week, the United Nations-supported national
peace conference that was meant to put Libya on the
road to democracy and elections had to be postponed. As
noted by Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Libya, people cannot
be asked to take part in a conference while they are
exposed to gunfire and air strikes.
Weeks into General Khalifa Haftar’s military
assault on Tripoli, as the number of civilian deaths
mounts, thousands flee and the humanitarian crisis
deepens, I think about my family — not only the
grave threats they currently face but the reality that
they have had to live through for decades under the
Al-Qaddafi regime. In 2011, we took to the streets to
demand our freedom, an end to repression and our right
to democracy.
Yet eight years after the United Nations-brokered
political agreement, my country remains embroiled
in crisis and our hopes for change have been dashed.
The renewal of conflict in 2014 brought an increase
in sexual violence and threats to women’s security,
including widespread sexual torture of women and men,
particularly internally displaced persons, indigenous

S/PV. 8514

and other minority communities and women human
rights defenders.
In 2018, we collected hundreds of stories from
Libyans across the country about their experiences
of sexual and gender-based violence, which primarily
affects women and girls. The majority of testimonies
provided by both men and women outline a common
pattern of physical violence, rape, sexual harassment,
verbal abuse, abductions and domestic violence. Their
stories highlight two indisputable facts.
First, rigid patriarchal norms, amplified by
the presence of armed groups and the widespread
availability of weapons, are the central cause of genderbased violence and lack of security for women.
Secondly, gender-based violence exists in a
continuum that extends from times of peace to periods
of conflict and from public spaces to private lives.
Despite the United Nations arms embargo, weapons
continue to flow into the country unchecked. Due to the
widespread availability of weapons in every household,
violence often escalates into a deadly outcome.
Patriarchal notions of family honour, coupled with
fear of retaliation, ensure that domestic violence and
sexual and gender-based violence are rarely reported.
Indigenous women are even further marginalized due to
the entrenched discrimination against our communities
that has existed for decades.
Hundreds of indigenous women are targets of
sexual and gender-based violence simply because they
belong to communities such as the Tebu, the Tuareg and
my own people, the Amazigh. In 2016, my friend was
gang-raped by an armed group on her way from Tripoli
to the Nafusa Mountains with her brother. Five armed
men stopped her, beat her brother and assaulted her.
They told her that Amazigh women deserve to be raped.
I have known many others, both in my personal
life and through my work, who have been the victims
of gender-based violence and their stories remain
shrouded in silence. Chronic underreporting due to
stigma, fear of retaliation and a lack of trust in the
judicial system fuels impunity for perpetrators on all
sides of the conflict.
For many in Libya, internal displacement has
become a permanent feature of life. Forty per cent of the
1 million international migrants in Libya are women.
Denied basic human necessities such as safe shelter,
food and medicine, displaced women and young girls

19-1175611/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

and boys are especially vulnerable to violence. They
are abducted and even raped — often multiple times,
by different perpetrators, including by armed groups as
well as State actors. Sexual and gender-based violence
is perpetrated in ways that affect both women and men.
Men and boys are targeted, particularly in Libyan
detention centres and prisons. In Libyan detention
centres, a commonly reported torture technique involves
forcing men to stand in a circle to watch the rape and
sometimes murder of women. Anyone who moves or
speaks out is beaten or killed. In most cases, there are
no services to meet the needs of female survivors, let
alone male survivors.
A feature of the violence targeting men and
boys — and a reason for its stigmatization — is the deeply
entrenched assumptions about male invulnerability.
Challenging harmful gender norms and attitudes in
terms of both masculinity and femininity is therefore
essential for addressing the root causes of gender-based
violence and militarization.
Like many Libyans, the revolution changed my life.
Through the revolution, I learned what it means to be
an activist and why that matters, not only for women or
my own people, the Tamazight, who have been denied
social, cultural and political rights for decades, but for
all Libyans.
The work of women human rights defenders
remains essential for both protecting basic human rights
and peace and security in Libya, on the one hand, and
providing such life-saving services as food, medical care
and free counselling to survivors of sexual and genderbased violence, on the other hand. However, attacks
against them are still on the rise: more than 10 cases
have been documented since 2017. Sexual and genderbased violence is systematically used to intimidate and
silence women activists and political figures. Reprisals
for our activism and the criminalization of our work has
led to severe restrictions on the freedom of movement,
assembly and speech. Numerous women’s organizations
have simply stopped working due to such harassment
and threats.
Enabling women’s full participation in public life as
activists, politicians or ordinary citizens is an essential
step forward, challenging deeply held beliefs about the
roles of men and women. Participation is therefore a
necessary condition for adequately addressing sexual
and gender-based violence.
12/103

23/04/2019

Critically, the peace process led by the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya has largely excluded
Libyan women and indigenous groups. As a result,
the 2015 Libyan Political Agreement does not address
many crucial issues, such as gender equality, sexual
and gender-based violence, displacement, restrictions
on freedom of movement, particularly of young women,
and fear of reprisals for women’s rights activism.
When Secretary-General António Guterres visited
Libya earlier this month, many meetings took place
behind closed doors, so there was no clear signal that
civil society was invited to participate. This reflects
a broader pattern of disengagement between ordinary
Libyans and the United Nations-led peace process.
Peace cannot be built without building trust with our
communities and having meaningful consultation with
civil society.
Last week, my cousin’s entire family was killed
when their house was destroyed during the recent
shelling in Tripoli. Theirs is just one example of the
toll this conflict has taken on civilian lives. As bombs
rain down on Tripoli and clashes continue in Alzizia
and Zuwaya, ordinary Libyans now look to the Security
Council to speak in a unified voice and take swift
action to end the current crisis and put Libya on the
path to peace.
We call on the Security Council to demand a
ceasefire and ensure that civilians are protected from
attacks. We welcome recent efforts to this end and
urge all Council members to ensure international
humanitarian law is upheld. The Council must stop the
sale of weapons that are being used to perpetuate the
violence, including sexual and gender-based violence.
All Member States must uphold international law,
including the Arms Trade Treaty and enforce the United
Nations embargo on all weapons sales to Libya.
The Council must recognize the gendered impact
of arms. Security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration are urgently needed.
The Council must investigate all allegations of sexual
violence promptly, impartially and fully. It must
support survivors. A survivor-centred approach means
both ensuring survivors’ rights and addressing their
needs, including, as a priority, access to life-saving
interventions and post-rape medical care, including
comprehensive sexual and reproductive health services,
emergency contraception, the option of safe abortion
services, and HIV prevention and treatment.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

The Council must protect the human rights of
refugees and migrants in accordance with international
law. It must publicly condemn attacks and threats against
human rights defenders, including women human rights
defenders, and develop specific protection measures in
consultation with them in order to address the violence
they face due to their work.
The Council must ensure that any peace agreements
are gender-sensitive and protect and respect the human
rights of women and girls, particularly as they relate to
the Constitution, the electoral system, the police and
the judiciary. It must meaningfully include women,
indigenous peoples and youth and ensure that they
are able to substantively influence all phases of the
upcoming National Conference and elections. They
must be included as decision makers — not only
as observers.
In conclusion, as we approach the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
I urge the Security Council to see the current situation
in Libya as an important test of its credibility as the
international community and of what progress on the
women and peace and security agenda really means for
women, survivors and activists, and their communities,
all of whom are suffering through conflict.
Amina Megheirbi, a fellow Libyan woman human
rights defender from Benghazi, sat in this very chair
and delivered a statement at an open debate on this topic
in February 2012 (see S/PV.6722). The fact that today I
am delivering the same messages to the Council as she
did then should be a stark reminder that the Council’s
efforts to bring peace to Libya have not been enough.
The Al-Qadhafi regime not only repressed my
people, the Amazigh, our culture and a way of life,
but criminalized speaking the Tamazight language in
public and forbade it being taught in schools. Growing
up speaking a banned language meant learning how to
fight for my own freedom of speech from a very young
age. It is therefore no small achievement that I address
the Security Council today. Let these efforts not be
in vain.
The President: I thank Ms. Miloud for her
briefing, and I thank all the briefers for their impressive
statements, which clearly underline why we are meeting
here today. The Security Council needs to stand with
the survivors.

S/PV. 8514

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
“There is nothing I can do to forget all this.” The
woman who uttered these words is sitting at this table:
Ms. Nadia Murad. All of us in this Chamber know her
story; all of us know what this sentence is about.
When we talk about sexual violence in conflict, we
are talking about her story. But we are also talking about
thousands of other stories that have never been told to
the world, stories hauntingly similar to Ms. Murad’s
story, stories that could be told by many Rohingya
women in Myanmar or by girls in Syria, where sexual
violence is used as a weapon of war.
Almost 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), that is the grim reality of almost all
conflict. Resolution 1325 (2000) was a milestone,
but reality shows that its implementation is lagging
behind — we must do more. We must take three
important steps forward.
First, we must strengthen accountability. We must
strengthen the channels through which information on
non-compliance reaches the Security Council and its
sanctions committees. We want to ensure that sexual
violence has consequences, including through targeted
sanctions. Of course, we also need to ensure that crimes
are prosecuted, including at the national level. After all,
the failure to bring perpetrators of sexual violence in
conflict to justice fosters a deadly culture of impunity.
In Germany, the Prosecutor General began in 2014
to investigate war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham
in Iraq and Syria. Our legal system is working closely
on that with the relevant United Nations Special Envoy
and others should follow that example.
Secondly, we must place the victims — the
survivors of sexual violence — at the heart of our work.
That is why draft resolution S/2019/328, which we have
proposed, calls on all States Members of the United
Nations to support such survivors by providing better
access to justice, medical and psychological services,
as well as reintegration support, in other words by
enabling them to live their lives with dignity. Only
when we help victims to achieve justice, when we hear
their voices and let them testify, are we giving survivors
the chance to stop being victims.
Thirdly, we must focus on those who are not yet
getting enough attention, such as the boys and men

19-1175613/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

who have experienced sexual violence and the mothers
who give birth as a result of wartime rape and their
children. Those who have survived sexual violence
often remain victims long after the crimes have been
committed. They are stigmatized and cast out — and
that is horrible.

23/04/2019

led Preventing Sexual Violence in Conflict Initiative
over seven years ago, there is still so much more to do.
Draft resolution S/2019/328, which is before us today, is
a positive contribution to much-needed efforts to move
the agenda forward.

Yet the horror does not stop there. Sexual violence
not only affects the survivors but it also destroys the
society they live in. That makes the path to peace all
the more difficult. If you destroy women, you destroy
the family and eventually the entire village. That is how
Dr. Mukwege, who is also in the Chamber today, once
put it.

The United Kingdom is supporting the draft
resolution, which was proposed by Germany, because
time after time in this very Chamber we have heard
shocking reports of conflict-related sexual violence,
like those we heard today. I am sure I speak for everyone
in this Chamber when I pay tribute to the likes of Nadia
Murad and Inas Miloud for their brave courage and
testimony, which they have presented once again today.

Dr. Mukwege saved the lives of tens of thousands
of women in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize, like Nadia
Murad. They share a bond in their inspiring fight for
justice. We have to do all we can to help them in that
fight — not only politically, through the draft resolution
that Germany is proposing, but also financially. That is
why we have earmarked €400,000 that we will use to
support their work and the survivors of sexual violence
in conflict.

The impact of crimes of sexual violence on
countries, survivors, communities and families is
very clear and it is our responsibility, as the Security
Council, to respond to that challenge. The proposed
draft resolution builds on previous resolutions in
developing an integrated, effective and international
approach to tackling such grave crimes. There are three
elements of the draft resolution that I wish to focus on
in my statement.

There is nothing I can do to forget all this. Nadia
Murad’s statement sent a chill down our spine. It sends
a clear and powerful message not to forget and to open
our eyes and use all the means we have to fight to
ensure her story is not repeated.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the Minister of State for the
Commonwealth and the United Nations of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): Allow me first
to extend my heartfelt thanks to Germany and to you,
Mr. President, in particular for your personal efforts in
prioritizing discussion on this important issue before
us today — conflict-related sexual violence — and for
gathering such knowledgeable briefers.
I am sure I speak for everyone in this Chamber
and beyond, when I say that our biggest thanks go
to our briefers, in particular to those courageous
survivors of sexual violence in conflict. Once again,
we have heard compelling testimony that, despite the
considerable momentum that has been built on this very
issue since the adoption of resolution 2106 (2013) and
others, as well as the launch of the United Kingdom14/103

First, the proposed draft resolution rightly
recognizes the importance of focusing on survivors’
needs through a survivor-centred approach, a point
again articulated by the Secretary-General in his
contribution today. We believe that such an approach is
key to all policies and programmes that aim to meet the
needs of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence
and to avoid putting them at risk of further harm.
Secondly,
the
proposed
draft
resolution
acknowledges that conflict-related sexual violence
has a disproportionate impact on women and girls. It
encourages support for children born of sexual violence
and recognizes that sexual violence also affects men
and boys. The United Kingdom believes that survivor
services should cater to all survivors without exception
and welcomes the efforts made in the draft resolution to
promote that very approach.
Thirdly, the draft resolution emphasizes the role
that civil society plays in efforts to address conflictrelated sexual violence, including by tackling stigma,
as well as its central role in the implementation of a
broader women and peace and security agenda.
However, the United Kingdom believes that more
needs to be done. We regret that the language on services
for survivors of sexual violence, recognizing the acute
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

need for those services to include comprehensive
reproductive and sexual health care, including safe
termination of pregnancies, did not meet with the
support of all the Council members. It is important
nonetheless that we maintain our consistent efforts in
that respect and the progress that we have made on that
issue, including through previous Council resolutions,
most notably resolution 2106 (2013).
Over the past several years, the United Kingdom
has spent more than £46 million on preventing and
responding to conflict-related sexual violence around
the world, and I want to assure the Council that as our
Prime Minister’s special representative on this very
issue, it is a personal priority for me. Our international
consultations have informed our efforts to put survivors
at the centre of our approach, not only in how we
respond to incidents that have already occurred but
also, importantly, and as we heard from our briefers
today, in how we prevent them from happening again.
We have been pleased to work with like-minded
partners, and I would particularly like to pay tribute
to the close cooperation we have enjoyed with Special
Representative Patten and her Office, as well as our
joint visits, such as the one we made not so long ago
to Iraq.
Accountability is key both to response and
prevention — first, because achieving justice is a vital
step in helping survivors to repair and rebuild their
lives, as we have also heard again today, and secondly,
because ending impunity, as we heard from Amal
Clooney, is an essential deterrent to future violence
of this nature. That is why the United Kingdom is
committed to strengthening justice for survivors
and holding perpetrators to account. That means not
only ensuring that international standards and best
practices for gathering evidence are upheld so that
convictions can be secured, but also that survivors are
not traumatized all over again. That is why we should
tackle both conscious and unconscious bias within
criminal justice systems and build the capacity of
judges and prosecutors to gain a better understanding
of conflict-related sexual violence and of the need to
act, which is a priority, as has been illustrated by the
testimonies we have heard today from Nadia Murad.
We owe it to the survivors.
That is why the United Kingdom is working with the
Institute for International Criminal Investigations and
with Nadia’s Initiative to develop the Murad Code, an
ethical code of conduct that will ensure that survivors

S/PV. 8514

give informed consent regarding evidence-gathering
and are referred safely and confidentially to support
services. We want to see the Code incorporated into
all donor funding requirements, and we hope that all
members will sign up when we launch it formally at
our Preventing Sexual Violence Initiative international
conference, to be held in London in November.
However, we should also recognize that for some
survivors, achieving justice does not necessarily mean
going through a formal court system, which is why we
support the Dr. Denis Mukwege Foundation and Nadia’s
Initiative in developing community-focused redress for
survivors. The United Kingdom recently funded a pilot
project in that regard in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We also support Dr. Mukwege’s plea for more
holistic support for survivors. We therefore endorse
the call to Council members to provide more funding
for the survivor advocacy networks, health-care
professionals and psychosocial services that offer such
support and that are making a real difference in the
lives of survivors on the ground. I was going to end my
statement today with a question for the briefers on how
we, the international community, can do more to ensure
that survivors of sexual violence have access to such
holistic support. But through their testimonies we have
heard many of the answers today. I would particularly
like to respond to the testimonies we heard from the
survivors and from Amal Clooney by saying that in
thanking them for providing their insights today, I want
to assure them that we will reflect on the contributions
they have made. In doing so, I feel proud of the United
Kingdom’s contribution, above all in penning and
securing unanimous support for resolution 2379 (2017),
which ensured that we held the members of the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) who perpetrated
those crimes to account.
We stand with the Government of Iraq, the
survivors, Nadia Murad and others such as Amal
Clooney who represent them. We totally support
the work and efforts on the ground in Iraq of Karim
Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the United Nations
Investigative Team for the Promotion of Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/ISIL in Iraq. We look
forward to their responses and their continued insights
and expertise and, most importantly, to the testimonies
of survivors. We should all remain focused on that key
priority. It should be the basis of international action in
preventing sexual violence in conflict. Yes, as we have

19-1175615/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

heard today, words are important, but words alone do
not provide justice and accountability for survivors. It
is time to act, and we must do just that.
Mr. Nguema Ndong (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I would first like to welcome your presence
in the Chamber, Mr. President, and that of the other
Ministers here today.
We associate ourselves with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the African Union.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea acknowledges
the release of the Secretary-General’s latest annual
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280)
with concern. The report is the reason we have to thank
Germany and France for their initiative in convening
this important open debate focused on promoting
measures for preventing and ending this evil. We also
want to extend a warm welcome to Dr. Mukwege,
Ms. Murad, Ms. Clooney and Ms. Miloud, and to thank
them for their informative briefings.
Equatorial Guinea firmly condemns the use of
sexual violence as a tactic of war, terror or subjection.
Sexual violence in conflict is increasingly being used
as a weapon of war, and as one of the most horrific
expressions of human cruelty it deserves to be utterly
repudiated. We therefore commend Germany on
its initiative and its commitment to strengthening
a holistic process that will help us make progress on
preventing and eliminating conflicted-related sexual
violence and improving the related United Nations
infrastructure. We believe that this initiative is vital
to advancing that crucial agenda and taking action to
mark the tenth anniversary of the establishment by
resolution 1888 (2009) of the mandate of the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict.
Equatorial Guinea’s fundamental law recognizes
gender equality and actively promotes women’s
participation in every sector. We understand and
believe in the critical role that a gender perspective
and women’s participation can play at every level in
implementing plans for peace, security and sustainable
development. From that point of view, we believe
firmly that in order to support States’ strategies and
efforts to combat sexual violence more effectively, the
international community must commit to working with
States on approaches that support and sustain women
and children, displaced persons and refugees, minorities
and other vulnerable groups far beyond a conflict’s
16/103

23/04/2019

actual duration. In regard to the issue of migrants and
displaced persons, the President of Equatorial Guinea
has been entrusted by the African Union with the role
of African Leader for Refugees and Displaced Persons
in Africa. Equatorial Guinea will work to give its very
best in collaborating on the issue and contributing to
the quest for lasting solutions to this human tragedy.
As the Secretary-General says on page 1 of
his report,
“Preventing sexual violence requires the
advancement of substantive gender equality
before, during and after conflict, including by
ensuring women’s full and effective participation
of women in political, economic and social life
and ensuring accessible and responsive justice and
security institutions.”
The strengthened cooperation between the
Security Council and the African Union’s African
Peace and Security Architecture, which also reinforces
subregional initiatives for implementing the Council’s
resolutions in order to advance the agenda for women
and peace and security, among other things, is an
example of the type of alliances to which we should
continue to give more predictable support.
In emphasizing that the most effective way to
combat the crime of conflict-related sexual violence
is the prevention of conflict itself, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea calls on the parties involved in
conflict to commit themselves to ensuring the protection
of civilians, in accordance with international law, while
always bearing in mind the primary responsibility of
States in that regard by respecting State sovereignty and
supporting their efforts in implementation of the relevant
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
As the testimonies of the speakers show, despite
the achievements, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
remains concerned about the slow progress in preventing
and eliminating conflict-related sexual violence. In that
regard, we support the preventive approach advocated
by the Secretary-General in his report, as well as his
recommendations to address gender inequality, in
times of war and peace, as the main root cause of sexual
violence in armed conflict.
The growing complexity of armed conflicts has
resulted in sexual violence being increasingly used as a
tactic of war and a source of income for parties involved
in conflict, such as groups of violent extremists,
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

terrorists or organized crime in those territories or
neighbouring countries. Uneven development and the
displacement, within and between countries, of people
fleeing conflict further complicate the situation.
In that context, despite the progress made by
States, including with the support of the United
Nations, in efforts to advance towards and to eliminate
impunity for such crimes, protecting all victims and
their families and ensuring accountability remain
significant challenges. In that regard, ending impunity
for crimes of sexual violence is an important objective
of the Council.

S/PV. 8514

In conclusion, the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
will continue to support the various components of
the United Nations architecture for combating sexual
violence in armed conflict and to promote cooperation
among them and the United Nations agencies
responsible for counter-terrorism, organized crime,
humanitarian response and sustainable development in
order to ensure a victim-centred approach to that crime
so that they may not only survive but also thrive.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I would
like to wish a warm welcome to today’s briefers and to
thank them for their very important contributions.

As has already been recommended on other
occasions, we must ensure that sexual violence is a
designation criteria in the relevant sanctions regimes.
At the same time, the international community
should support countries that request assistance in
strengthening the capacity of their legal and social
protection institutions and their cooperation with other
social sectors, thereby ensuring that their gains can be
transformed in a sustainable way.

Allow me to begin by offering the heartfelt
condolences of the United States to the people of Sri
Lanka for the Easter Day terrorist attacks that killed
nearly 300 people and wounded hundreds of others. The
United States condemns those attacks in the strongest
terms. We stand with the Sri Lankan people, and we
remain ready to provide our assistance to the local
authorities as they work to investigate the attacks and
bring the perpetrators to justice.

In February, under the presidency of Equatorial
Guinea, the Council adopted resolution 2457 (2019) on
silencing the guns in Africa by 2020 (see S/PV.8473).
The spirit of that resolution is broadly reflected in the
issue that we are discussing today, since, as Africa
is the continent with the highest incidence of rape in
conflict, the effective implementation of resolution
2457 (2019) would implicitly mean the elimination
of that horrendous phenomenon in Africa. In order
to achieve that goal, the international community’s
cooperation is essential. That same cooperation is
critical to the adoption of the draft resolution on the
financing of peacekeeping operations in Africa, which
is pending before this Council and which the Republic
of Equatorial Guinea hopes will be adopted in the
course of this year.

The United States is resolute in recognizing
that conflict-related sexual violence is a matter of
international peace and security that demands collective
action to promote prevention, hold perpetrators
accountable and support survivors. None of us can turn
our backs on this issue. It requires the engagement of
all Member States and of the United Nations to support
the efforts of those fighting to protect women, provide
accountability and support survivors.

I would like to acknowledge the commitment and
dedication of the Informal Expert Group on Women
and Peace and Security, UN-Women and the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict, led by Ms. Patten,
to this issue. We support its strategic initiatives, such as
the framework of cooperation with the African Union
Commission concerning the prevention and response
to conflicted-related sexual violence in Africa,
among others.

It is for survivors that the United States invests in
early warning and response initiatives to prevent sexual
violence in conflict. The promise of a future without the
sexual violence that often accompanies conflict begins
with supporting communities to partner with security
and governance institutions to expand the effectiveness
of prevention efforts.
It is for survivors that the United States commitment to
justice and accountability is at the heart of our response
to this issue. As Special Representative Pramila Patten
noted, despite widespread reports of sexual violence in
conflict, such acts are often not investigated, let alone
prosecuted. Fear and stigma prevent survivors from
coming forward. Ending impunity would help deter
the recurrence of such crimes while ensuring survivors
access to the justice they deserve.

19-1175617/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

I would particularly like to welcome Ms. Nadia
Murad, and I commend her for her bravery in the face
of unimaginable terror and as a leading advocate for
supporting the United Nations Investigative Team to
Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)
(UNITAD). We support accountability for ISIL and
other perpetrators of those crimes, and we are working
with the Government of Iraq and other partners to help
ensure that ISIL is held accountable. As the United
States announced last year (see S/PV.8412), we are
providing $2 million to support UNITAD’s efforts,
which include exhuming a mass grave in Kocho,
Ms. Murad’s home village.
It is for survivors that we implement and fund
unique rapid response programmes for extreme forms
of gender-based violence, including the Voices Against
Violence fund that directly supports Yazidi women and
girls who escaped from ISIL. Ensuring that survivors
have access to the resources they need to heal and
recover is the first step in breaking the silence and
stigma that they experience, changing the norms that
enable and exacerbate violence in conflict and securing
the justice they so deserve so that they can use their
voices as agents of peace, live free from violence and
have access to equal opportunities.
Solutions require strategic responses that start with
best practices learned on the ground, with actors across
the United Nations system, civil society and Member
States playing important roles. Our commitment to
the maintenance of international peace and security
begins with those most affected by war, violence and
terrorism. By putting survivors at the heart of our
work, we enhance our understanding of the barriers to
security and are better positioned to build partnerships
with communities that lead to justice and prosperity.
We welcome today’s open debate as an opportunity
to recognize how we can support survivors in building
the solutions that will help to prevent and eradicate
sexual violence in conflict. The United States
commends the work of the United Nations in that regard
and looks forward to continued efforts that explore the
entire cycle of conflict and gender-based violence.
The best long-term protection from sexual violence
in conflict comes from building societies where
women and girls are valued and their human rights
are respected. That includes institutionalizing equal
protections under the law and access to education and
18/103

23/04/2019

opportunity, which are essential to enabling women’s
participation in public life. We must also address
the root causes of sexual violence, such as structural
inequality and gender discrimination, which drive
this crime and result in perpetual cycles of violence
and injustice.
In humanitarian and disaster-response efforts, it is
essential that we promote safe communities and protect
vulnerable populations from all forms of violence. That
includes providing services, reducing risks, creating
a secure environment and challenging the norms
that exacerbate violence and conflict and perpetuate
gender inequality.
Finally, we urge the United Nations and Member
States to invest in enhanced efforts to update earlywarning indicators and the investigation, monitoring
and disaggregation of reports on sexual violence in
conflict with a view towards informing prevention,
mitigation and accountability measures.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the
outset, China strongly condemns the series of explosions
in Sri Lanka. We convey our deep condolences over the
deaths of the victims and our sympathies to the families
of the deceased and the injured.
I welcome the presence in New York of Your
Excellency, the Federal Minister of Foreign Affairs
of Germany, to preside over this open debate. I
thank Secretary-General Guterres and his Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Patten, for their briefings. I also thank the other
briefers for their presentations.
Today, we are confronted with a complex and
challenging international security landscape, the
wide prevalence of armed conflicts old and new, and
rampant terrorist activities, leaving women, girls and
other vulnerable groups to bear the brunt of sexual
violence in armed conflict. China strongly condemns
and stands firm against the use of sexual violence as
a means of war and any and all acts of sexual violence
against women and girls. In that regard, I would like to
make the following points.
First, we must prevent or end conflict through
peaceful means and root out the breeding grounds
for sexual violence in conflict. The Security Council
should support the settlement of disputes through
political engagement, dialogue and consultation within
the parameters of its mandate under the Charter of the
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

United Nations, play a greater role in such areas as
conflict prevention and peacekeeping, and effectively
combat terrorism to provide solid safeguards for the
protection of women. Since the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the international community has created a
good framework for the women and peace and security
agenda. The relevant resolutions of the Council should
be properly implemented on the ground.
Secondly, we must fully respect the sovereignty
and will of the countries concerned and the measures
taken by their Governments in the context of their
national realities. Those countries have the primary
responsibility for preventing and combatting sexual
violence in conflict and protecting their women and
children. We should vigorously support capacitybuilding of the countries concerned, provide targeted
assistance, enhance capacity-building in security, social
governance and other areas, and effectively safeguard
the rights and interests of women in conflict.
Thirdly, we need to scale up the protection of
women’s rights and interests in the post-conflict
reconstruction process. In particular, due regard should
be paid to the rights of victims of sexual violence in
conflict. The international community should, in a
long-term perspective, provide development assistance
and technical support for the realization of gender
equality and women’s empowerment in developing
countries so as to protect women’s rights and interests
at a fundamental level. The international community
should actively help post-conflict countries, ramp up
their economic and social development, and ensure that
the development dividend is shared by all, including
women. Attention should be given to guiding women’s
organizations and civil society in playing a constructive
role to that end.
Fourthly, we must create synergies among the
relevant bodies of the United Nations. The Council
should fulfil its primary responsibility for maintaining
international
peace
and
security,
strengthen
coordination with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
among others, and conduct cooperation in a way that
is consistent with its mandate and expertise. The
United Nations should strengthen its cooperation with
the relevant regional and subregional organizations to
build synergy in combating sexual violence in conflict.
China stands ready, along with the international
community, to continue stepping up cooperation to

S/PV. 8514

jointly create a peaceful, secure and stable international
environment for the effective protection of the rights
and interests of women and girls and for an early
end to sexual violence in conflict, making a greater
contribution to the further advancement of the cause of
women and peace and security .
Mr. Kenes (Belgium) (spoke in French): More than a
decade ago, the Council recognized that sexual violence
is often used as a tactic of war for which there can be
no amnesty. It will soon be 10 years since the Council
established the Office of the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, the team of experts and the
functions of women’s protection advisers. My country
wishes to thank all these indispensable actors both for
their dedication to the prevention of sexual violence and
for their commitment to justice. In adopting resolution
1820 (2008), the Council — including Belgium, which
was a member at that time — called unanimously for the
immediate and complete cessation of sexual violence
and for an end to the impunity of the guilty parties.
Today, 10 years later, the collective responsibility
to protect civilians from this threat remains ours
and unchanged.
Belgium thanks Germany for having organized
this important debate under its presidency. My country
also thanks this morning’s briefers, who have painted
a very clear and serious picture. The bodies of women,
men and children continue to be used as a battlefield;
conflict-related sexual violence continues to wreak
havoc on families and entire communities with the aim
of displacing populations and creating lasting fear. We
must intensify our efforts and further strengthen the
tools available to the Council.
While the Council has made great strides, we must
pursue our efforts. The testimonies of Dr. Mukwege
and Ms. Murad made that clear, as did today’s other
briefers. The Council is very honoured to welcome them
here today. Their exemplary work makes a difference
for victims and contributes to awareness and, in so
doing, to prevention. Dr Mukwege, in Bukavu, provides
rape survivors with emergency medical care, including
sexual and reproductive health care. But beyond that, he
advises them so that they can cope with horror they have
suffered, get back on their feet and, most importantly,
survive. The voice of Ms. Murad, herself a survivor
whose action echoes the voices of thousands of others,
today represents many women, men and children, all
with different needs if they are to heal and survive.

19-1175619/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

23/04/2019

One of the key points of the draft resolution before
us today is a survivor-centred approach. Belgium
particularly welcomes the inclusion of particularly
disadvantaged groups, such as lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex people, who face multiple
and cross-gender forms of discrimination. My country
welcomes the fact that, for the first time, the Council
is talking about children born of rape. We have heard
testimony from Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh and
that of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral. As in other conflict zones, children born
of rape and their mothers risk being ostracized from
their communities and even losing their citizenship or
official identity.

survivors. We believe that the International Criminal
Court also plays a key role in that area.

In that regard, Belgium has urged the Security
Council to call on States to provide comprehensive
service and care to victims, including sexual and
reproductive health care, legal services, psychosocial
services and socioeconomic support. For Belgium,
that includes freedom of choice and access to abortion
without risk for women who have been raped. In the
context of sexual violence in conflict, the restoration
of victims’ sexual and reproductive health is indeed
critical and in line with the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council in the past, including resolutions 1889
(2009), 2106 (2013) and 2122 (2013).

Crimes of sexual violence will stop only if we
address the root causes of sexual violence. Such a
paradigm shift requires us to pursue efforts to achieve
gender equality, include women’s empowerment in
prevention measures and, more generally, step up
support for organizations dedicated to the protection
of women’s rights and human rights defenders in
accordance with resolution 1325 (2000), the twentieth
anniversary of which we will celebrate next year.

Sexual violence will never be stopped or prevented
if we accept impunity. That has come through clearly
in this morning’s debate. The fight against impunity is
a long-term goal of Belgium’s foreign policy, including
by means of the prevention of new crimes. The
perpetrators of such crimes must be brought to justice.
Our country will support the strengthening of States’
capacities and is already funding the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict.
In cases in which States either refuse or are unable
to mete out justice, Belgium calls for supporting the
work of international mechanisms such as international
commissions of inquiry, the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar, the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant in Iraq, and the Impartial and Independent
Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011. Documenting the crime
in question is a necessary step in bringing justice to
20/103

Within the Council, we must continue to strengthen
existing mechanisms to combat impunity and step up
prevention, such as by means of separate designation
criteria for conflict-related sexual violence in
connection with relevant Security Council sanctions
regimes. While we welcome the holding of this open
debate and the adoption of draft resolution S/2019/328,
Belgium regrets that a consensus could not be reached
to establish a formal working group, which would have
made it possible to strengthen the monitoring of the
implementation of Council resolutions by State and
non-State actors.

Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Allow me at the outset
to join others in offering my delegation’s heartfelt
condolences to the Government and the people of Sri
Lanka, especially the victims, following the horrific
terrorist attack that claimed more than 300 lives and
wounded many others. Indonesia strongly condemns
that attack.
Let me also thank Germany for convening this
very important open debate. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral and all the briefers for their comprehensive and
inspirational presentations.
As reported by Secretary-General (S/2019/280),
structural discrimination is at the heart of differential
impact on the victims of conflict-related sexual
violence. Most victims do not seek care owing to a
range of challenges, including stigma, threats, fear of
reprisal and community pressures. Their reluctancy
to report prevents their cases from being reported, let
alone addressed.
On that note, Indonesia condemns the use of sexual
violence as a tactic of war that can exacerbate conflict
and impede the restoration of peace. It is very timely
for the Security Council to send a strong message of our
continued commitment to address that issue. Indonesia
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8514

attaches great importance to efforts to end and prevent
sexual violence in the context of the women and peace
and security agenda.

for the victims of conflict-related sexual violence
and to support the fight against impunity based on
political intimidation.

Indonesia hosted a regional training exercise on
women and peace and security on 8 and 9 April. One
of its outcomes was a recommendation to establish a
global coalition of women networks for peace and
tolerance, made up of female peacekeepers, negotiators
and mediators. That coalition will strengthen our
collective efforts to increase women’s contribution to
fostering peace and security. In that context, I wish to
focus on three points.

Indonesia has been a champion of the women and
peace and security agenda in the region. As one of the
largest troop-contributing countries to peacekeeping
operations, Indonesia believes that it is crucial to
enhance training for United Nations peacekeepers on
conflict-related sexual violence. We are glad to note that
the Secretary-General also shared similar views in his
statement. Therefore, eliminating sexual exploitation
and abuse has been integrated into the predeployment
curriculum at the Indonesian Peacekeeping Operations
Training Centre.

First is the centrality of national authorities with
the primary responsibility to eliminate conflict-related
sexual violence and prioritize the needs of the survivors
of those crimes, while permitting no discrimination.
Treating such persons as survivors — rather than simply
blaming the victims — will help national authorities to
develop long-term and practical policies for addressing
conflict-related sexual violence, taking into account
sociocultural considerations.
Second is the fact that there is no one-size-fitsall solution to end and prevent conflict-related sexual
violence. Accountability for such crimes should be
considered on a case-by-case basis, using a tailor-made
approach in every conflict. For instance, the creation of
a specialized police unit and court dedicated to sexual
violence might be effective in one conflict situation but
not effective at all in others.
Therefore, Indonesia recognizes the importance of
approaching such issues on a country-specific basis. We
particularly commend the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
for their efforts to encourage the implementation of
joint communiqués to address conflict-related sexual
violence between the United Nations and several
national Governments. A tailor-made approach will
help to ensure both accountability for past crimes and
the prevention of future crimes.
Third is the importance of capacity-building to
strengthen efforts in eliminating conflict-related
sexual violence. In order to address the root causes of
conflict, capacity-building should be aimed at building
the capacity of law enforcement, strengthening national
legislation and ensuring its effective implementation.
In that regard, capacity-building programmes must
be proportional and responsive in order to ensure that
reparation and reconciliation processes are established

The year 2019 marks the seventieth anniversary
of the Geneva Conventions. It is time to revitalize all
parties’ commitments to take all possible measures to
implement international humanitarian law, including
our commitments to end and prevent sexual violence
in conflict. Ultimately, our efforts should focus on
strengthening national ownership, leadership and
capacities for reaching a constructive solution to
combating conflict-related sexual violence.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we express our solidarity with the Government
and the people of Sri Lanka in the aftermath of the
condemnable terrorist acts to which they fell victim.
We thank the German presidency for convening this
open debate on the issue of sexual violence in conflict,
which is a priority issue for Peru. We particularly
welcome your participation, Mr. President, as Minister
for Foreign Affairs, as well as that of the other highlevel officials and attendees today. We are also grateful
for the briefings and moving testimonies delivered by
the briefers.
Peru is a country committed to the women and peace
and security agenda, which addresses combating sexual
violence in conflicts. That commitment is manifested
in our leadership of the Security Council’s Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security, which
Peru co-chairs with Germany — a country to which we
are grateful for its efforts to adopt a needed new draft
resolution on conflict-related sexual violence.
Ten years after the adoption of resolution 1888
(2009), which established the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the issue remains particularly

19-1175621/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

relevant. We are faced today by new modalities of sexual
violence, the systematic use of which — whether as a
tactic of war or terrorism or as an attack on collective
identities — constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. My country deplores the magnitude
and gravity of the problem. The latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/280) confirms the existence
of the nexus linking sexual violence, human trafficking
and terrorism, while also highlighting a number of
alarming trends, such as that involving sexual violence
perpetrated against children.
In that regard, we condemn in the strongest terms
all forms of sexual violence in armed conflict. Action
to combat those atrocity crimes must include not only
protecting victims, but also bringing those responsible
to justice. The Council has a very important role to
play in that task, in line with resolution 1820 (2008),
which states that amnesty cannot be granted for sexual
crimes committed in the context of conflict resolution
processes. It is also essential to address the root causes
of sexual violence. To that end, we must recognize
and combat inequality between men and women
through the implementation of policies that promote
equality, the empowerment of women and the creation
of opportunities.
Evidence shows that greater participation of
women in decision-making processes results in a lower
likelihood of conflict and that the defence and promotion
of their rights reduces their vulnerability. We cannot
ignore that the majority of sexual violence cases are not
reported because of the stigma and fear of the victims
or the intimidation they face by their attackers. At the
same time, due care for and rehabilitation of victims are
indispensable to any sustainable peacebuilding process
and include understanding that their trauma is also
psychological and has the potential to destroy the social
fabric of a community.
The Security Council should also continue to
encourage and support specific commitments and plans
for the prevention of sexual violence in the conflicts
on its agenda by promoting collaboration with local
non-governmental organizations and United Nations
entities in the field.
In conclusion, I wish to express our appreciation
for the important awareness-raising work on sexual
violence in conflict that is being carried out by Ms. Nadia
Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege, both Nobel Peace
Prize laureates in 2018, and the Special Representative
22/103

23/04/2019

on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, in
line with the priority that the Secretary-General assigns
to that issue.
Mr. Ipo (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): We
would like to welcome you, Sir, the Federal Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Germany, and thank you for
presiding over our work.
We would also like to express our Government’s
solidarity with the Government and people of Sri
Lanka in the wake of the recent terrorist attacks that
left numerous victims.
My delegation commends Secretary-General
António Guterres for the high quality of his report on
conflict-related sexual violence throughout the world
(S/2019/280), as well as Ms. Pramila Patten, Ms. Amal
Clooney and Ms. Inas Miloud for their detailed briefings
and the relevance of their recommendations. We
welcome the presence among us of Ministers, as well
as of Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege, Nobel
Peace Prize Laureates in 2018, and express our deep
appreciation to them for their commitment to the fight
against conflict-related sexual violence.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by Ms. Fatima Mohammed on behalf of the
African Union.
As the international community prepares to
commemorate the twentieth anniversary of resolution
1325 (2000), on the impact and role of women in
conflict prevention and resolution, as well as the
tenth anniversary of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, it is deeply worrying to note, as
resolution 1820 (2008) indicates, that sexual violence
is increasingly being used as a weapon of war and
terrorism and poses a challenge to international peace
and security.
Côte d’Ivoire believes that sexual violence
constitutes a serious violation of fundamental rights
and human dignity, and its multiple consequences
on victims have undeniable repercussions on peace,
social cohesion and economic development. It is also
regrettable to note that this phenomenon is increasingly
becoming a lucrative activity, as noted in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. Rape — often gang rape — sexual
slavery, forced prostitution and many other forms of
sexual violence therefore fuel conflict and terrorism.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

New security challenges, such as violent extremism
and terrorism, sexual and gender-based violence and
stigmatization, are negatively impacting women’s ability
to play their full role in peace, security and development
in Africa. However, it should be noted that excellent
progress has been made in the fight for the advancement
of women in Africa, particularly through the adoption
of more relevant legal instruments. The 2003 Protocol
to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights
on the Rights of Women in Africa, better known as the
Maputo Protocol, and the African Union Agenda 2063
therefore represent significant progress in promoting
gender equality and strengthening women’s role in
addressing peace, security and development challenges.
The persistence of gender-based sexual violence is
less a matter of the existence of normative frameworks
than of the effective implementation of sanctions
against perpetrators of sexual crimes. My delegation
therefore believes that accountability must, so to speak,
be one of the main lines of action of States and the
international community. To that end, the capacity of
national judicial institutions, as well as national and
international mechanisms for identifying perpetrators
of sexual violence in conflict, should be strengthened
to ensure that perpetrators are held accountable before
the competent courts.
Similarly, the presence of experts on sexual violence
issues within sanctions committees would also help to
better identify the perpetrators of sexual violence and
prompt action provided for by international legislation
in that area. In addition, there is a need for measures,
including psychosocial, medical and legal measures,
to be taken in the context of providing assistance to
victims, including children born out of sexual violence.
In the aftermath of its crisis, Côte d’Ivoire firmly
committed to fighting against sexual violence and
impunity. Those efforts have been acknowledged and
commended in the light of the fact that, since 2017,
it has been the first and only country to have been
removed from the annex to the Secretary-General’s
report on conflict-related sexual violence. The Ivorian
Government has also adopted a national strategy to
combat gender-based violence, which has resulted
in the establishment of a national committee to fight
conflict-related sexual violence and the establishment
of a specific mechanism to combat rape.
The adoption of that strategy by the armed forces
of Côte d’Ivoire and the inclusion of the issue of sexual

S/PV. 8514

violence in the training modules of training offices
and military academies have been decisive in the fight
against that scourge by reducing the number of sexual
violence from 478 cases in 2012 to 30 in 2014, 3 in 2015,
1 attempted rape in 2016 and then zero cases in 2017 and
2018. The revised code of conduct of the armed forces
of the Côte d’Ivoire also places particular emphasis on
crimes related to sexual violence and the ongoing zerotolerance policy on those crimes.
Aware that there is a correlation among peace,
social cohesion and the empowerment of women,
the Government of Côte d’Ivoire attaches particular
importance to financing microprojects through
microcredits. That policy of supporting women’s
empowerment has enabled more than 200,000 women
to emerge from the clutches of insecurity. At the
political level, the Government is working towards
greater involvement of women in the country’s political
life, through a law on the representation of women in
elected assemblies, which imposes a minimum quota of
30 per cent of women of the total number of candidates.
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire notes that, despite the
general awareness of the situation of women and the
subsequent progress made through the adoption and
strengthening of national and international normative
frameworks, multiple challenges remain in the fight
against sexual violence in times of conflict and the care
of victims. My country commends the leadership of
the United Nations and the support of its specialized
agencies, and reaffirms its ongoing commitment to the
fight against gender-based sexual violence.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
welcome you, Mr. President, in convening and presiding
over this meeting. We also welcome the Ministers from
Equatorial Guinea and the United Kingdom.
I would like to express our condolences to
the families of the victims of the recent heinous
terrorist attacks. We affirm our sympathy and solidarity
with the Government and the people of Sri Lanka at
this time.
We would like to begin by thanking the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2019/280) and his valuable
briefing. We would also like to thank Nobel Peace Prize
laureates Ms. Nadia Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege
for their tireless efforts to combat sexual violence in
conflict and empower survivors, and Ms. Inas Miloud,
a representative of civil society, and Ms. Amal Clooney
for their valuable briefings.

19-1175623/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

I would like to focus my statement on three
fundamental issues. The first is sexual violence in
conflict as a violation of human rights and a threat
to international peace and security. The second is the
importance of ensuring accountability and ending
impunity for perpetrators. The third relates to ensuring
justice for the victims of sexual violence in conflict.
With regard to sexual violence in conflict, more than
10 years ago the Security Council adopted resolution
1820 (2008), in recognition of the fact that sexual
violence in conflict represents a threat to international
peace and security and requires a serious international
response. Since then, unfortunately, these heinous
crimes have been on the rise all over the world. They
are often used as a tool of intimidation and a tactic of
war for targeting specific communities based on their
ethnic, religious or political affiliations, with the aim
of forcibly displacing them and seizing their property.
A case in point is the situation and forced displacement
of the Rohingya, a minority in Myanmar. Displacement
makes refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs), especially women and girls, more vulnerable
to sexual exploitation, human trafficking and sexual
violence in conflict. Crimes of sexual violence in
some conflict zones represent part of the political and
terrorist economy of extremist groups, including the
terrorist group Da’esh.
With regard to ensuring accountability and
ending impunity, and in order to prevent sexual
violence in conflict from increasing, we have to hold
the perpetrators of these crimes accountable and end
their impunity, as laid down in local and international
law. These crimes have become a systematic tool of
war that can amount to war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The Security Council has established a
strong normative framework aimed at combating
sexual violence in conflict and ensuring accountability
for perpetrators, while another important tool at its
disposal is the integration of specific measures into
the mandates of peacekeeping operations in order to
send the message that combating such crimes is one of
its priorities. The Council also plays a pivotal role in
addressing crimes of sexual violence by strengthening
the mandates of peacekeeping operations and United
Nations political missions to include the empowerment
of women in conflict and post-conflict situations,
ensuring accountability for sexual violence crimes and
reporting any violations that amount to war crimes and
crimes against humanity.
24/103

23/04/2019

Ensuring justice for the victims is a prerequisite
to achieving sustainable peace. Sexual violence
undermines victims’ psychological and physical health
and has cumulative effects on societies and generations.
Its implications can also undermine the sustainability
of peace. In the absence of accountability, conflicts
can become protracted and refugees and IDPs may not
be able to return to their homes in a safe, dignified
and voluntary manner. There are multiple forms of
sexual violence in conflict, as well as multiple ways to
achieve justice in all its dimensions. That can be done
by dealing with the health, psychological, physical,
economic and social impact on victims in the short
and long terms as well as by treating survivors and
their children as victims. In adopting a victim-focused
approach, it is vital to take into consideration their
culture, values, and social characteristics. We have to
improve Member States’ capacities to address these
situations, enable survivors to receive compensation
and justice in a manner that respects their culture as
well as their psychological, physical and social health,
and ensure that any justice mechanisms are sustainable
and enforceable. States have the primary responsibility
to provide protection for civilians in conflicts, facilitate
victims’ access to justice and ensure that the perpetrators
of sexual violence crimes are held accountable.
At the international level, we commend the role of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. This year marks a decade
since the establishment of her mandate pursuant to
resolution 1888 (2009). We support her role, based on
her mandate, in dealing with the parties to conflicts
and exchanging best practices in a manner that
strengthens national security and judicial systems with
a view to ensuring justice and accountability. We also
welcome the serious steps that the Secretary-General
has taken to implement his zero-tolerance policy on
sexual exploitation and abuse. The commitment of the
United Nations to holding itself accountable for sexual
exploitation and abuse strengthens its credibility and
helps efforts aimed at ending sexual violence in conflict.
In conclusion, we stress the importance of
ensuring that the Council maintains its unity and
that the international community generally addresses
the problem of sexual violence in conflict. We are all
unquestionably acting on the same principle, which
is the condemnation of all forms of sexual violence,
especially when committed during conflict. The
international community must therefore send a united
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

message and work collectively to reduce and ultimately
end sexual violence in conflict, while ensuring
justice for its victims based on the social and cultural
specificities of all Member States.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank the German presidency
for organizing today’s meeting and to express our
profound gratitude to the participants and briefers for
their information about various aspects of the fight
against sexual violence and armed conflict.
This year marks a decade since the Security
Council established the post of Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. Since then the Special Representative and her
Office have done extensive work on eliminating this
form of crime. They have gained useful experience in
cooperating with Governments and other parties to
armed conflicts and developing an effective toolkit for
combating this type of crime.
The Russian Federation is committed to international
cooperation in combating sexual violence in conflict,
which is a disgusting crime of war. We firmly support
the work of Special Representative Patten and appreciate
her personal contribution to efforts to develop and
support dialogue with parties to armed conflicts in
addressing this issue, help victims and assist in their
rehabilitation, as well as to draw public attention to
the problems caused by such crimes. We thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing and his report on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280), which
is enabling us to discuss the issue in a productive and
comprehensive debate. We have studied with interest
the report’s very extensive recommendations on ways
to cooperate further in combating sexual violence in
conflict. Many of the proposals deserve careful and
detailed study, and we believe that today’s debate is a
good opportunity for an open exchange of views on that.
We firmly believe that the key to success in
combating sexual violence in conflict is in developing
effective measures to eradicate violence against
civilians during armed conflicts. But that is just one of
the possible crimes that could be committed during an
armed conflict. In our view, putting a definitive end to
every form of violence against civilians is possible only
by resolving armed conflicts through peaceful means
and eradicating their root causes. We need concerted
work at both the national and international levels if we
are to reach that goal as quickly as possible.

S/PV. 8514

In that regard, we want to emphasize once
again how important it is to ensure that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict continues to adhere to the mandate
established by resolution 1888 (2009). The central focus
of her efforts should be situations of armed conflict,
and specifically those where sexual violence is
widespread. Every conflict situation has specifics that
must be taken into account. It is also important not to
underestimate the significance of maintaining a united
approach to understanding the scope of the Security
Council’s mandate on combating sexual violence in
conflict and of refraining from attempts to broaden its
interpretation and take the Council beyond its remit of
maintaining international peace and security. A strict
distinction should be made between sexual violence as
a war crime and as an ordinary criminal offence.
We should remember that the effectiveness of the
Council’s work in eliminating sexual violence in conflict
is directly dependent on overcoming differences,
promoting constructive cooperation and preventing the
issue from being politicized. We call on everyone to
unite their efforts to combat this repugnant crime in the
interests of maintaining peace and assisting victims,
and for the sake of building a just society where there is
no place for any kind of violence at all.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by warmly thanking Germany and in
particular you, Mr. President, as its Foreign Minister,
for your commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda and to eliminating sexual violence
in times of conflict. I thank you for this initiative,
Mr. President, and for being with us in the Chamber
today. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and his Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for
their valuable briefings, and to reiterate our full support
for them in their and their teams’ daily struggle. On
behalf of France, I want to express special thanks to
Ms. Murad and Dr. Mukwege, whose commitment,
courage and vision command our admiration. It is an
honour for the Security Council to hear them today
and see them side by side before us. They know that
they can count on France to support them in the fight
against sexual violence, as we have done for many
years. Finally, I would like to warmly thank Ms. Amal
Clooney and Ms. Inas Miloud for their unwavering
commitment to this fight and for their powerful and
informative briefings.

19-1175625/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

23/04/2019

At the outset, I want to make a short but worrying
comment before returning to possible courses of
action that we can take in our work. We must be
uncompromising, given that in 2019 we are still facing
an intolerable situation. As various of our speakers
have eloquently stated, it is our shared responsibility
to condemn as firmly as possible the use of sexual
violence as a tactic or weapon of war, often on a large
scale and sometimes systematically. In 2018, this type
of violence once again threatened first and foremost
the most vulnerable, the women and girls who continue
to be the primary victims of discrimination. It has
forcibly displaced them, as happened in South Sudan
and Burma. It has been used to repress, terrorize and
control populations, as in Syria. Terrorist groups such
as Boko Haram have made sexual violence a strategy
of action in its own right, understood as such and
methodically executed. Migrant women and girls are
also particularly vulnerable, as we have seen in Libya
and elsewhere.

As we mark the tenth anniversary of the mandate
on sexual violence in conflict situations, we have a
priority both to consolidate that mandate, of course, but
also and above all to strengthen its implementation. I
would like to briefly touch on four areas of action in
that regard.

There are still 47 parties remaining on the SecretaryGeneral’s blacklist. While some progress has certainly
been made, such as the revised legislation enacted in
Afghanistan and the signing of a joint communiqué in
Mali, so much remains to be done, including putting
a definitive end to issues such as forced marriage,
the practice of bacha bazi in Afghanistan and the
association of rape with adultery. We must seize every
political opportunity to make progress in the fight
against sexual violence, as in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo today, for example.

In spite of the threats that some have made, I
nevertheless want to emphasize how essential it is for
France, and for the victims, to ensure that they have
access to sexual and reproductive health. That is crucial.
The Council should also continue working to impose
sanctions on those who are responsible for this type of
violence. In that regard, we welcome the explicit criteria
added to the mandates of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013) concerning the
Central African Republic, the Committee pursuant
to resolution 751 (1992) concerning Somalia and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya. We also think that the Council
should invite Ms. Patten to brief us more regularly on her
remarkable efforts to intervene in specific situations.
We met with her twice in March and we invite other
Council members to do the same.

Combating impunity is an indispensable weapon for
deterrence as well as justice in this fight. International
tribunals, including the International Criminal Court,
to which France affirms its full support, and national,
regional and mixed courts must be able to prosecute the
perpetrators of these crimes. It is unacceptable, if not
inconceivable, that not a single individual associated
with Da’esh or Boko Haram who has used sexual
violence as a weapon of war on a large scale has ever
been convicted. To take just two more examples, full
light must be shed on the sexual violence committed in
Rakhine, Kachin and Shan states, and those responsible
must be prosecuted, as the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/280) recommends. Investigative mechanisms
should also be able to begin collecting the necessary
information immediately so that justice can eventually
be done, as in Syria.
26/103

First of all, the Security Council has a decisive role
to play in fighting sexual violence, which implies that
it must be mobilized and united. That is why France
supports draft resolution S/2019/328, proposed by
Germany. This important draft resolution should make
it possible to make major progress on expanding on the
declaration adopted by the Group of Seven in Dinard
on 5 March, particularly with regard to recognizing
a victim-centred approach, emphasizing the fight
against impunity and including gender-related crimes,
for example, among the most serious types. The draft
resolution also requests the Secretary-General to
produce a report by 2021 on children born of rape,
which is a top priority for France.

The second line of action that I would like to highlight
is the United Nations itself, which must continue to
play a major role in monitoring and implementing
this agenda. We want to once again express our full
support for Ms. Patten, especially in the often difficult
dialogue she has with parties to conflicts. The results
she has achieved, for example in Mali and South Sudan,
in convincing Riek Machar to give orders to prevent
and punish this type of violence, are all illustrations
of the effectiveness of her commitment, even if we
know that the war is never won and must continue to
be waged on a daily basis. We also support the team of
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

experts working under Ms. Patten’s auspices, including
by funding its staff as they work to strengthen States’
judicial capacities. That is a key element. While
much remains to be done, we must strengthen and
improve mechanisms such as the mixed unit for rapid
intervention and suppression of sexual violence against
women and children in the Central African Republic,
which should result in trials. Peacekeeping operations
must also have the necessary means to protect women
in armed conflict, including the deployment of women’s
protection and gender advisers.
Thirdly, the elimination of sexual violence in
conflict can be achieved only with strong support for
the members of civil society who work and resist so
bravely on the ground. Needless to say I am thinking
here of Ms. Murad and Dr. Mukwege, both of whom
are a source of inspiration and admiration for the entire
international community and with whom we continue
to work closely. France is proud to have been the first
country to pledge funding for the establishment of a
fund for survivors of sexual violence, announced by
Mr. Jean-Yves Le Drian, our Minister for Europe and
Foreign Affairs, and Ms. Marlène Schiappa, Secretary
of State to the Prime Minister for Equality between
Women and Men. France will continue its commitment
to providing appropriate assistance to victims of sexual
violence as part of its presidency of the Group of Seven
(G-7). Ms. Murad and Dr. Mukwege can count on
France’s support. Our presidency of the G-7 is also a
framework for strengthening the monitoring of sexual
violence. In the past few years we have cooperated
on projects with civil society in Yemen, Nigeria, the
Central African Republic, Cameroon, Lebanon and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo designed to provide
holistic care for victims of sexual violence.
Lastly, and we have hammered away at this point in
every Security Council debate, only a holistic approach
can ensure that the women and peace and security
agenda is effectively implemented. Women, who are
the primary victims of sexual violence, will be better
protected if they can be significant participants in
political processes and if they have the same economic
and social rights and opportunities as men. It is
therefore crucial that we work relentlessly in our fight
against sexual violence to address gender inequalities
and stereotypes, its underlying causes. Support for
stakeholders on the ground is also essential in that
regard, which is why President Macron has announced
the establishment of a fund of €120 million to support

S/PV. 8514

women’s movements in countries of the South. That is
also why France, in partnership with Mexico, will host
a forum commemorating the twenty-fifth anniversary
of the Beijing Declaration, which will bring together
States, regional organizations and civil-society actors.
Combating sexual violence is a crucial fight. It is
also a fight that should unite us over the long term. On
behalf of France, I once again call for unity among all
the members of the Council.
Mr. Nkosi (South Africa): At the outset, I would
like to thank and commend you, Mr. President, and
the Permanent Mission of Germany for organizing this
important and pertinent debate. Like other speakers,
I also want to take this opportunity to express South
Africa’s condemnation of the recent terrorist attacks in
Sri Lanka and to express our solidarity with the people
and Government of Sri Lanka as they mourn their
deaths and their loss.
I would like to express South Africa’s gratitude to
Secretary-General António Guterres and his Special
Representative, Ms. Pramila Patten, as well as to our
distinguished briefers, Dr. Denis Mukwege, Ms. Nadia
Murad, Ms. Amal Clooney and Ms. Inas Miloud, for
their extremely informative and enlightening briefings
and for the heart-wrenching testimonials that we heard
this morning.
I also associate my delegation with the statement
to be delivered on behalf of the 54 member States of
the African Union (AU) on this very important subject.
South Africa believes that violence against
women is a serious crime that warrants more urgent
and decisive action by the international community.
Sexual violence, wherever it occurs, fundamentally
dehumanizes its victims and irreparably damages their
human dignity. Sexual violence in conflict is often used
as an act of war to achieve psychological, military and
political objectives and control. In areas rich in natural
resources such as our continent, sexual violence is used
to depopulate, displace and terrorize communities. The
devastating effects of sexual violence have a lasting
impact on survivors, who have to deal with postconflict challenges that include trauma, revictimization
and stigmatization in their communities.
While we know that anyone can fall victim to
sexual violence, we find it deeply disturbing that
women and girls continue to be disproportionately
affected. Many also live through the prolonged

19-1175627/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

trauma of raising children born of rape, who are often
rejected by society and deprived of their rights and
access to social services. That is why gender-sensitive
responses and programmes must be tailored to be
survivor-oriented. South Africa firmly believes that
the survivors of sexual violence must be provided with
essential services, in line with our long-held position
that sexual and reproductive health services are not
only an important component of the right to health
but are critical to women’s empowerment generally.
In the context of sexual violence in conflict, a lack of
access to such services threatens the most sacrosanct of
all human rights, the right to life itself. In spite of the
lateness of the hour, South Africa still hopes that the
Council can agree on a consensus draft resolution that
protects survivors, holds perpetrators accountable and
metes out appropriate punishment to the perpetrators of
sexual violence in conflict.
To effectively address sexual violence in conflict,
South Africa believes that we need an integrated and
comprehensive approach. That includes providing
multisectoral services to ensure reintegration support
for survivors, including shelters. We must develop
appropriate
economic
livelihood
programmes.
That is an integral part of societal prevention
mechanisms, conflict resolution, transitional justice
and peacebuilding. In line with the Framework of
Cooperation between the United Nations Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the African Union
Commission, South Africa acknowledges accountability
mechanisms as an important aspect of ways to prevent
sexual violence in conflict. The Framework is aimed at
assisting AU member States in combating impunity for
sexual violence in conflict and enhancing the capacity
of criminal justice systems in countries in conflict and
post-conflict to respond to suspected cases of sexual
violence in conflict.
The Council must show that it can make a perceptible
transition from rhetoric to reality when it comes to
dealing with the challenges that victims are confronted
with in their daily lives during armed conflict. We
need to strengthen accountability for perpetrators, with
survivors at the heart of our efforts.
South Africa supports the more frequent use of
measures under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations and the capacity-building of States to address
the matter at a national level in an integrated manner.
28/103

23/04/2019

South Africa commends the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We call
for the strengthening of their capacity so that they
are able to deliver on the mandate given to them by
the Council.
South Africa supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to strengthen our efforts aimed at
addressing sexual violence in armed conflict. That
includes, inter alia, first, sexual violence as part of the
designation criteria for sanctions; secondly, addressing
the nexus between trafficking in persons and conflictrelated sexual violence, in accordance with resolutions
2331 (2016) and 2388 (2017); thirdly, using field visits
to draw attention to concerns about sexual violence;
and, lastly, putting in place constitutional, legislative
and institutional arrangements to comprehensively
address conflict-related sexual violence.
The security sector of conflict and post-conflict
countries must be reformed so as to prevent and better
respond to sexual violence. In order to build effective,
non-discriminatory and representative security
institutions, it is essential that we provide personnel with
effective and sustainable gender training and capacitybuilding. Access to justice for survivors of sexual
violence would also significantly contribute to a wellfunctioning and gender-sensitive security framework.
Given the inextricable link between sexual
violence in conflict situations and gender inequality,
South Africa therefore advocates for the equal and
meaningful participation and full involvement of
women in all efforts for the maintenance and promotion
of peace and security. In that regard, Member States
must continually look at measures to strengthen the
full and effective implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security, pioneered by
the sister Republic of Namibia, to whom we pay tribute
today. The resolution provides the basis for forming
partnerships with civil society, the private sector and
community-based organizations.
Finally, South Africa looks forward to continuing
this debate during our presidency in October as we
prepare for the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325
(2000) in 2020.
Mr. Radomski (Poland): Let me join other
speakers in expressing our deepest condolences to the
people and the Government of Sri Lanka following the
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

tragic terrorist attacks that took place this past Sunday.
Poland strongly condemns such heinous acts of terror.
We commend Germany for convening this important
debate. We would also like to thank you personally,
Mr. President, for chairing this meeting. Allow me also
to extend our gratitude to today’s excellent briefers.
We are truly honoured by their presence with us here
today, and we deeply appreciate their inspirational and
encouraging presentations. On the tenth anniversary
of the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
we would like to take this opportunity to thank
Special Representative Ms. Pramila Patten and all her
predecessors for their dedication and service. We fully
stand behind her mandate.
We are outraged by the persistent and widespread
sexual violence in armed conflict committed by State
and non-State actors, as documented in the latest
report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/280). Sexual
violence is a universal tragic phenomenon that needs
to come to an end, whether it be in conflict or postconflict situations. International cooperation is needed,
especially now at a time of increased violence against
women and girls and men and boys, to combat the use
of sexual violence as a tool of terror and humiliation
during war. We would therefore like to commend the
efforts of the German presidency to present the new
draft resolution on conflict-related sexual violence
contained in document S/2019/328, which, in Poland’s
view, will strengthen this important agenda.
The recent report of the Secretary-General
highlights the various challenges we face in addressing
conflict-related sexual violence. Allow me to emphasize
two areas that we believe need our particular attention
today, namely, accountability and the situation of
children born of sexual violence.
First, we welcome the focus on accountability of
the current report and of our debate today as one of
the means to fight and eliminate conflict-related sexual
violence. The issue of accountability for conflictrelated sexual violence should be of crucial importance
to the work of the Security Council, as it reflects the
effectiveness of its work. Despite all the challenges,
the accountability measures for conflict-related sexual
violence committed by both non-State and State actors
should be implemented decisively by the international
community. Otherwise, the lack of accountability
encourages and increases tolerance towards gender-

S/PV. 8514

based violence in conflicts. In that context, we would
like to stress the significant progress in ensuring
accountability for sexual and gender-based violence
achieved by the International Criminal Court (ICC),
as well as the non-permanent international criminal
tribunals and similar courts. Nonetheless, it is important
to stress that the primary responsibility to act and
pursue accountability resides within States, as the ICC’s
jurisdiction is complementary to national jurisdictions.
On the other hand, accountability cannot be
achieved without knowledge of the crimes. Regrettably,
the vast majority of victims do not report rape and other
forms of sexual violence because of the discrimination
and stigma behind them. That not only contributes to
the culture of impunity but also prevents survivors of
sexual violence from accessing medical care and legal
assistance. In that regard, we support the SecretaryGeneral’s call on traditional and religious leaders to
engage, in particular to mitigate the stigma suffered
by survivors of conflict-related sexual violence and to
facilitate their reintegration and that of their children.
Let me now turn briefly to the issue of children
born of sexual violence. Supporting victims of sexual
violence should be as important as preventing such
crimes in times of conflict. The voices of survivors
need to be heard in order to effectively implement
policies that protect them. The traumatic experiences
haunt victims for their whole lives and, unfortunately,
psychological and mental support is often omitted.
Sexual
violence
has
massive
long-term
repercussions. That is particularly true for children
born of sexual violence. It is difficult to think of a more
tragic situation than that faced by innocent children
who, through no fault of their own, suffer not only
discrimination but also the most extreme forms of
stigma by their families and their communities. They
are often denied nationality, excluded from school,
deprived of medical treatment and subjected to physical
and psychological violence only because they were born
of sexual violence. Such children are as much victims
of sexual violence as their mothers.
We are pleased to see that, with the latest SecretaryGeneral’s report and the proposed draft resolution,
some light has been shed on the need for the protection
of children born of sexual violence and that the issue
has been receiving the attention of the international
community, including the Security Council. We hope
that the Arria Formula meeting organized by Poland

19-1175629/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

last October on children born of sexual violence
contributed to those efforts.
Let me conclude my statement by reiterating our
strong support for the important role of civil society
groups, human rights defenders, journalists and media
workers who assist victims and report on sexual
violence in conflict. Without their courage, passion and
dedication, the progress achieved by the international
community would not be possible.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today’s meeting. I take this opportunity to acknowledge
the leadership and eminent work of Ms. Pramila Patten
and her Office, and to thank her for her informative
briefing. I also thank the Secretary-General, Ms. Amal
Clooney, Dr. Denis Mukwege, Ms. Inas Miloud and
Ms. Nadia Murad, to whom I would like to express my
admiration for their struggles and deep convictions. Let
me recall what the Norwegian Nobel Committee said in
its considerations in awarding that defender of women’s
rights the Nobel Peace Prize:
“Nadia Murad is herself a victim of war
crimes. She refused to accept the social codes
that require women to remain silent and ashamed
of the abuses to which they have been subjected.
She has shown uncommon courage in recounting
her own sufferings and speaking up on behalf of
other victims.”
In analysing the valuable report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/280), we are shocked to note that, even
taking into account the significant advances of the past
10 years, sexual violence remains a cruel scourge and
has even worsened in conflict scenarios.
In anticipation of the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption resolution 1325 (2000) and the tenth
anniversary of the creation of the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, it is even more crucial to
make greater efforts to implement the resolutions of the
Security Council. Sexual violence in conflict is used to
displace communities, as a means of repression and as a
tactic of terrorism. We cannot therefore hope to mitigate
or eliminate conflicts if we do not recognize and face
in their full measure the impact and consequences
of these crimes on the search for and maintenance of
peace. There are several urgent aspects in particular
that deserve special attention.
30/103

23/04/2019

The first is ensuring that victims participate in
decision-making processes so as to ensure that the
initiatives promoted address their concerns fully,
including in post-conflict situations. In this regard,
we applaud the progress of the United Nations Action
Against Sexual Violence in Conflict, and we hope that
the number of projects in the process of implementation
can be expanded.
Secondly, we must insist on all possible measures
to end impunity for crimes of sexual violence, since
such impunity also generates space for new violations.
We must therefore support all reforms that increase the
effectiveness of justice systems, such as reforms of legal
frameworks to take these crimes into account, always
ensuring that survivors and witnesses are protected.
Only then will we create the conditions for victims to
be heard and receive support without being stigmatized.
Thirdly, it is essential to incorporate sexual violence
into the criteria for imposing sanctions and that the
perpetrators of sexual violence listed in the annex to
the report of the Secretary-General on this issue. It is
vital that gender experts be mandated to the sanctions
committees and that the Special Representative on
Sexual Violence in Conflict report regularly to them.
We consider it essential that the Security Council carry
out missions to conflict areas, concentrating especially
on learning first-hand the concerns of victims of sexual
violence. Likewise, the Informal Expert Group on
Women, Peace and Security is a platform of immense
value in monitoring the compliance of State and
non-State parties to conflict.
Fourthly, it is a priority for victims of sexual
violence to have access to health-care services,
including sexual and reproductive health services,
since we know that women and girls in conflict are
at greater risk of unwanted pregnancies, mortality
maternal, severe sexual and reproductive injury and of
contracting sexually transmitted infections.
For the Government of President Danilo Medina
Sánchez, efforts to end gender-based violence and
extend access to sexual and reproductive health
services involve not only access to clinical services
but also protection against forced and early marriage
of boys and girls and all other prejudices resulting
from the backwardness of the patriarchal mentality.
I am referring to primordial components of our
sociopolitical agenda.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

Denying women and girls access to sexual and
reproductive health care is exposing them to degrading,
cruel and inhuman treatment, leading only to more
suffering for the victims of sexual violence. I affirm
that for our Government and President Medina, these
are matters of non-negotiable principles, regardless
of the political consequences in terms of criticism or
disagreement on the part of traditional sectors. For
us, the issue of gender is and will be a matter of the
first order — simply, the adaptation of the Dominican
Republic to the modern currents of action and thought
in relation to women, their rights and the respect that
has long been withheld from them.
Finally, we welcome the fact that the Special
Representative is working in coordination with other
United Nations bodies in this regard, and we welcome the
Secretary-General’s recommendation to strengthen the
collaboration of regional and subregional organizations
with the United Nations in this area. I wish to highlight
here the goals outlined by the Spotlight Initiative as
an example of a strategic alliance that we believe will
promote peace and security for women and that we hope
will make important contributions towards prevention.
Facing a problem of this magnitude requires efforts
on the part of all. Therefore, we appeal to all Member
States to fully meet their commitments to international
human rights law and international humanitarian law.
We recognize the invaluable work of civil society,
youth organizations and defenders of women’s rights,
and we appeal for their ongoing support and leadership
in this crucial struggle for the future of humankind.
The President: The Council has before it a draft
resolution contained in document S/2019/328, submitted
by Germany.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic,
Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany, Indonesia,
Kuwait, Peru, Poland, South Africa, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
Against:
None

S/PV. 8514

Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received
13 votes in favour and two abstentions. The draft
resolution has been adopted as resolution 2467 (2019).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements on the resolution
just adopted.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We were unable to support resolution 2467
(2019), submitted by Germany.
The Russian Federation firmly condemns sexual
violence in armed conflict. We have consistently
advocated eradicating that abhorrent war crime.
Any type of violence against civilians in wartime is
absolutely unacceptable, and sexual abuse is equally
unacceptable at any time, not just during armed conflict.
In the circumstances, we are truly disappointed with
the approach of the coordinators of the negotiation
process, who in hastily preparing for today’s open
debate submitted a non-consensus draft text. That is
a dangerous precedent that could have an extremely
negative effect on the Council’s working methods in the
future. It was only at the last minute that we succeeded
in agreeing to exclude the provisions that were wholly
unacceptable, enabling us to abstain in the voting.
The previous version of the resolution could
have taken the Council’s mandate beyond its remit
of maintaining peace and security and expanded the
powers of the Secretary-General and the functions
of his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. There was no explanation of the attempts
to use a thematic resolution to intrusively expand
the mandates of various United Nations mechanisms
and bodies by directing the9m to tackle the issue of
combating sexual violence. Nor did we see any reason
for the request for numerous reports from the SecretaryGeneral on various aspects of sexual violence. We are
concerned about the efforts to increase the number of
bureaucratic United Nations bodies in order to create
the appearance of robust activity. It is unacceptable to
constantly promote concepts and terms that have either
previously failed to achieve consensus or been rejected
by the Council.
No one should even try to set us up as adversaries
in the fight against sexual violence in conflict. Our
position on the issue remains firm and unwavering. It

19-1175631/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

is an evil that must be eliminated. But as a permanent
member of the Security Council, we have a special
responsibility to the international community not to
allow the issue of sexual violence in conflict to be
exploited and manipulated. The Council is a serious
body, and we cannot damage its reputation in the eyes
of the international community. It must make balanced
decisions, set clear, achievable objectives and leave no
room for arbitrary or biased interpretations of them.
Together with China we drafted our own alternative
text on the subject of sexual violence in conflict, which
in our view corresponded much more accurately to the
objectives of today’s meeting. However, following the
adoption of the resolution submitted by Germany, we
decided not to take it further.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China attaches great importance to combating sexual
violence in conflict and has alwaysfirmly supported the
international community in its efforts in that regard.
The Chinese delegation participated constructively
and responsibly in the consultations on the related draft
resolutions, proposing a number of recommendations
and amendments. We believe that the Council should
address sexual violence in conflict in line with its
mandate, instead of going too far to address what should
have been entrusted to other bodies. consideringWith
regard to the establishment of special mechanisms,
it is important to have extensive discussions well in
advance. It is vital to fully respect the sovereignty of host
countries and support their Governments in playing a
leading role. We also believe that any related sanctions
measures should strictly comply with the Council’s
mandates and be subject to case-by-case deliberations.
Regrettably, those propositions and concerns were
not fully reflected in resolution 2467 (2019). China
therefore had no option but to abstain in the voting on
it. I want to reiterate that China is willing to continue to
cooperate constructively with all the relevant parties in
order to tackle sexual violence in conflict.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019),
submitted by Germany, which we thank for its initiative
and efforts. The resolution enables several important
advances, including strengthening the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, as well
as recognizing an approach focused on the survivors of
sexual violence and including a request that by 2021 the
32/103

23/04/2019

Secretary-General produce a report on children born
out of rape. That is my first point.
Secondly, it must be acknowledged that important
concessions were made under pressure from several
permanent members of the Council who did not allow
the text to go as far as we would have liked. We were
particularly shocked that one State demanded the
removal of the reference to sexual and reproductive
health, which had been agreed on in resolutions 1889
(2009) and 2106 (2013). We deplore the fact that
permanent members of the Council should threaten to
use the veto to challenge 25 years of progress on women’s
rights in situations of armed conflict. It is inexplicable
that access to sexual and reproductive health care is not
explicitly acknowledged for victims of sexual violence,
who are often the targets of atrocities and barbarous
mutilations. The victims clearly need that care. We are
aware of the differences of opinion among members of
the Council on that point, but in the specific context
of sexual violence in times of conflict, that omission
is unacceptable and undermines the dignity of women.
It is also intolerable and incomprehensible that the
Security Council is unable to recognize that women
and girls who have been victims of sexual violence in
times of conflict and have clearly not chosen to become
pregnant should have the right to decide to terminate
their pregnancies. France will maintain its position that
we should ensure that women have full access to sexual
and reproductive health care and rights in every context.
We will continue to support and promote that approach
in the Security Council, in other United Nations bodies
and elsewhere. Women must be able to make decisions
freely about their own bodies.
My third and final point, and I would like to conclude
on a positive note, is that there is no ambiguity. All of
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council on the
women and peace and security agenda, which have
been reaffirmed in the resolution we have just adopted
(resolution 2467 (2019)), constitute the framework
for our collective action, including paragraph 19 of
resolution 2106 (2013) and paragraph 10 of resolution
1889 (2009) on sexual and reproductive health. The
text we have just adopted is therefore a significant
milestone resolution, but it is not the end of our journey.
On behalf of France, I would like to issue a renewed
call that we continue together the fight against sexual
violence in conflict.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8514

Mr. Kenes (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to reiterate that my country also welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019). I believe that the
main message retained from that adoption is that the
resolution confirms the responsibility and legitimacy
of the Security Council in the fight against cases of
sexual violence in conflict — there is no doubt about
that for my country.

and a survivor-centred approach. In that regard, South
Africa advocated the provision of comprehensive
essential services, in particular for sexual and
reproductive health, given the importance of those
services to the lives of victims of sexual violence. In
that regard, we wish to reiterate our belief that everyone
has the right to have access to health-care services,
including reproductive health care.

We welcome the adoption of today’s resolution
and, as indicated in my statement earlier, Belgium
commends the progress represented by the resolution,
which also serves to explain our voting in support of the
resolution proposed by Germany. We regret, however,
that it has not been possible to respond to the needs of
victims with regard to sexual and reproductive health.
I can identify to a great extent with the statement just
made by the Ambassador of France.

It is regrettable that the adopted text does not
take into consideration the gains made over the past
number of years in this very important area. We are
disappointed that the adopted text has departed from
the initial objective and intention expressed by the
penholder, which was aimed at providing maximum
protection for the victims of sexual violence and
ensuring full accountability for the perpetrators of such
grave and inhumane violations.

I also wish to add that we regret that the essential
role of civil society in uncovering atrocities could not
be adequately reflected in the text. Other less important
issues are also worthy of our attention, but like the
Permanent Representative of France, I would also like
to conclude on an essential point that I made in my
earlier statement — for us, this resolution represents
an important step, but above all in view of the needs
of the victims, I believe that the Security Council
should continue its work and shift into a higher gear
going forward.

It is unfortunate that the Council could not uphold
its own consensus reached in previous resolutions in
the area of sexual and reproductive health. On the one
hand, the text calls for a survivor-centred approach,
while on the other hand it is denying survivors essential
sexual and reproductive health services when they need
them most. The Council is therefore telling survivors
of sexual violence in conflict that consensus is more
important than their needs.

Mr. Nkosi (South Africa): On behalf of my
delegation, let me take this opportunity to thank
you, Mr. President, for your personal conviction and
outstanding leadership on this very pertinent subject.
At the same time, I wish to thank the Permanent
Mission of Germany for submitting the resolution on
this matter (resolution 2467 (2019)), the adoption of
which we welcome here in the Chamber.
South Africa’s vote in support of the German text
on sexual violence in conflict is a strong indication
of its unwavering commitment to a zero tolerance for
sexual violence in conflict settings. That is despite
the Council’s inability to advance this agenda in a
meaningful way that would protect the victims of
sexual violence and restore their dignity.
We engaged constructively in this process in order
to advance a principled position focusing on three
areas — the critical link between illicit trade in natural
resources and sexual violence, which continues to fuel
that heinous crime; accountability for the perpetrators;

We will continue nevertheless to advocate a
survivor-centred approach in the discussions on sexual
violence in conflict in order to ensure that the Council
remains committed to its obligations, including — and
most importantly — the protection of victims.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
of State for the Commonwealth and the United
Nations of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland.
Lord Ahmad (United Kingdom): May I first
extend my congratulations to Germany on behalf of
the United Kingdom for having achieved a successful
outcome to resolution 2467 (2019). In doing so, may
I also attach myself totally in support of the remarks
made by the Ambassador of France in connection
with the achievements behind this resolution, while
also recognizing the important steps that remain for
the Security Council in ensuring that we truly do put
survivors at the heart of our approach. There are many
achievements behind this resolution, including three key
elements that I highlighted during my earlier statement.

19-1175633/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

First, there is a recognition of the survivor-centred
approach, although as our colleague from South Africa
has just pointed out, more steps need to be taken to
achieve true justice and accountability in that respect.
Secondly, the resolution does acknowledge conflictrelated sexual violence and its disproportionate impact
on women and girls. Thirdly, it acknowledges the
important role that civil society plays.
But again, it must be made clear — and that is why
I made this point in my original statement — that we
deeply regret the language on services provided for
survivors of sexual violence, recognizing the acute
need for those services to include comprehensive
reproductive and sexual health care. We were very clear
in that regard in my earlier statement.
I support the efforts made by other Security Council
members, including yourself, Mr. President, and the
efforts that Germany and France will continue to make,
as well as other colleagues, in ensuring that we keep
this important priority on our agenda. I assure you that
the United Kingdom will continue to support access
to sexual and reproductive health care for survivors of
sexual violence around the world — that is a priority. If
we are to have a survivor-centred approach, we cannot
ignore that important priority.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
Ms. Murad to make a statement after the voting.
Ms. Murad (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
once again thank the German delegation for having
organized this important meeting, as well as the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten.
Earlier, I asked that all members of the Security
Council vote in favour of resolution 2467 (2019), which
supports all victims of sexual violence. As a victim
myself, I believe that the resolution is a step in the right
direction. The adoption of the resolution must now be
followed by practical steps in order to achieve radical
changes on the ground. I stand together with male and
female survivors throughout the world in saying that
we depend on all present here in the Chamber to uphold
this resolution. Impunity is no longer an option. All
programmes and initiatives must focus on survivors as
their basis.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Miloud.
Ms. Miloud: I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the opportunity to voice the concerns
34/103

23/04/2019

of my fellow Libyan women and indigenous people. I
would just like to respond by saying that a survivorcentred approach does mean the availability of services
related to sexual and reproductive health, but it also
means the inclusion of those services for everyone and
leaving no one behind.
I also want to add that I may not know the destiny
that might face me or my colleagues when I leave the
Security Council today. This is a very critical moment
in our country and, as I said earlier, attacks against
women human rights defenders are on the rise. I would
just like to say that we are facing that risk today and we
are relying on the Security Council to take firm action
to protect women and girls and women human rights
defenders in Libya.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Patten.
Ms. Patten: I would like to thank Germany for its
leadership in spearheading this resolution (resolution
2467 (2019)), which marks the tenth anniversary of
this mandate. I would also like to thank all members
of the Council for the resolution and the way in
which the resolution has demonstrated the Council’s
receptiveness to many of the recommendations of the
Secretary-General.
From the perspective of mandate-holder, I want
to thank all members of the Council because despite
the limitations that many members have highlighted I
see the resolution as a step in the right direction and,
in my view it is very operationally oriented. The main
focus of the resolution is on prevention, full justice and
accountability, and a survivor-centred approach, which
is fully in line with the strategic priorities that I set for
the mandate.
The resolution has significant value in the
sense that it is operationally oriented. Both its
preambular and operative paragraphs reaffirm and
recognize some new elements that are critical for my
mandate — the recognition that women and girls are
specifically targeted; the recognition that the violence
is not only widespread and systematic but has also
become very brutal; the recognition of different
vulnerable groups, so that we have departed from
treating victims as a homogeneous group and recognize
that men and boys are also being affected; the focus
on the consistent and rigorous prosecution of sexual
violence; and the focus on the root causes of sexual
violence — which will all be very helpful to me in
taking this mandate forward.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

I wish to sincerely thank the members of the
Council for the focus that they have brought on the
root causes of gender inequality and discrimination,
as well as a range of other factors that exacerbate the
disproportionate impact of sexual violence. In spite of
its limitations, the resolution is groundbreaking to the
extent that it is the first resolution that emphasizes the
need for a survivor-centred approach. It is also the first
resolution that recognizes the plight of children born
out of sexual violence and calls for respect for their
rights, in line with the Convention on the Rights of
the Child.
Last but not least, I want to emphasize the
important recognition by the resolution of the use of
sexual violence as part of the strategic objectives and
ideology of certain terrorist groups and the importance
of survivors being treated as victims and not as
intelligence assets or affiliates of such terrorist groups.
From my side, we look forward to submitting a gap
assessment and recommendations to the Council in
next year’s report.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to
limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements
are kindly requested to circulate the text in writing
and to deliver a condensed version when speaking in
the Chamber.
I also wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour, as
we have a very large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for the opportunity to address this
respected audience.
I would first like to underline that Hungary is
committed to gender equality, to promoting the social
and political position of women and to implementing
the women and peace and security agenda as well as
resolution 1325 (2000). Sexual violence against women
in conflict is an important issue for and in Hungary.
It is also a sensitive issue because my grandparents’
generation had first-hand experience in that regard
during the Second World War — we do not want to see
those times repeated. That is why we consider resolution
1820 (2008) as a milestone resolution that considers

S/PV. 8514

sexual violence to be an obstacle to maintaining
international peace and security.
We believe that it is absolutely unacceptable and
outrageous that according to UNICEF’s annual report of
2017, there are still more than 15 million girls between
the ages of 15 and 19 who are victims of sexual violence.
I would also like to draw the attention of members of
the Council to the Global Report on Trafficking in
Persons 2018 of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, which states that 71 per cent of the victims
of human traffickers are women and girls and that three
quarters of them are kidnapped for sexual exploitation.
I would like to ask the Council to consider the
establishment of a solid legal framework to be able
to address the issue of sexual violence in conflict
situations. I truly believe that the fight against the
impunity of those who have committed such crimes is
a common responsibility of the United Nations and its
States Members. We believe that if there is impunity for
those who commit such terrible crimes, that may serve
as encouragement for further terrible crimes, which
we must definitely prevent and avoid. That is why we
believe that there is a necessity to involve more and
more experts in international monitoring committees,
United Nations fact-finding missions and the sanctions
committees of the Security Council.
I would like to inform the Council that Hungary
has been elected to the Executive Board of UNWomen. After having signed a donor agreement, we
paid $100,000 to the United Nations Trust Fund to End
Violence against Women. Last but not least, I would
like to inform the Council that we are considering the
establishment of a national action plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000) and we have already begun to
prepare the guidelines attached to the women and peace
and security agenda.
We will support Ms. Nadia Murad’s initiative to
help the survivors of massacres and sexual violence.
We have already helped communities living in Iraq and
the neighbourhood to be able to stay there or return to
the places from which they previously had to escape.
The President: I now give the floor to the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Finland.
Mr. Soini (Finland): I wish to express my
appreciation to Ms. Nadia Murad, Dr. Denis Mukwege
and Ms. Inas Miloud for their statements today. I also

19-1175635/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

want to thank the Secretary-General and Foreign
Minister Maas for organizing this important debate.
Violence against innocent people is used as a weapon
of war to cause fear and shame. Ending the abuse of
civilians in conflicts is possible; it is a question of our
resolve. The international norms exist; we just need to
make sure they are respected. This very Chamber is the
place where change can and must start. The members of
the Security Council bear an enormous responsibility.
There can be no excuses. Every act against civilians in
every conflict must be condemned by all actors.
Sexual violence in conflicts affects not only those
directly targeted, but also their families, communities
and entire societies. Actors such as Ms. Murad and
Dr. Mukwege have helped to bring the consequences
of these dreadful crimes to light. They deserve our
respect, but they deserve action even more. Preventing
conflict-related sexual violence starts during times of
peace. Respect for the human rights of women and men
and the rule of law are of utmost importance. Enhancing
women’s full and effective participation in society is
also a foundation for preventing sexual violence. Most
victims are women and girls, but we should not forget
that men and boys are targeted as well. All survivors
have their own experiences of conflict and their own
specific needs. That is why we need survivor-centred
responses, as has been pointed out today.
Efforts to fight impunity for the most serious
international crimes must be strengthened. This
requires capacity-building of national authorities in
order to bring perpetrators to justice. The United
Nations Team of Experts on Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict is doing valuable work in this
regard. Finland, for its part, has supported the work
of Justice Rapid Response and UN-Women to train
experts in investigating these crimes. Measures to
combat and prevent sexual violence should be part of
all international crisis management operations and
humanitarian aid. For example, Finland, together with
Norway, has deployed a specialized police team to the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan. What we want
them to do is strengthen the capacity of local police in
prevention and prosecution.
Amnesty for these crimes in ceasefires or peace
agreements must be ruled out. Perpetrators need to be
held accountable, otherwise peace can be interpreted
as condoning crime. We need to improve assistance to
victims and access to health care and other services.
36/103

23/04/2019

I would like to commend the important work of the
International Criminal Court and its Trust Fund for
Victims. Finland will continue to support its work;
our latest contribution was earmarked for victims of
sexual violence.
Protecting innocent civilians is our first priority.
Other considerations must come afterwards. This is
possible, but a change in our attitude is needed and
needed now.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Lee Taeho (Republic of Korea): I would like
to extend my deepest condolences, on behalf of the
Government of the Republic of Korea, to the victims of
the recent terrorist attacks in Sri Lanka, which Korea
condemns in the strongest terms. At the same time, my
Government would like to express a sense of solidarity
with the victims’ families and the Sri Lankan people at
this difficult time.
I would like to express my sincere appreciation
to you, Mr. President, for the initiative you have
taken to convene today’s open debate. I also extend
my appreciation to the briefers for their presentations
and testimonies, which have taken us to the heart of
the harsh realities on the ground. This year marks the
tenth anniversary of the establishment of the mandate
of the Special Representative and, with the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000)
fast approaching next year, today’s meeting could not
be more relevant.
One of the foremost achievements we have made
over the years, in my view, is that we increasingly
recognize that sustaining peace is inextricably linked
with gender equality and women’s leadership. More
importantly, this recognition is steadily transforming
into global norms and being mainstreamed in our
societies. However, much still needs to be done. In this
regard, I would like to highlight some points on this
important topic.
First, we must renew our commitments on the
importance of the prevention of conflicts. Responding
to conflict-related sexual violence is important, but
it is more important to make efforts to stop it from
happening in the first place. Enhancing women’s roles
and leadership across the entire continuum of conflict
should be one of the most effective ways to prevent
sexual violence. Obviously, it is through women’s
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

participation and empowerment that this could be
achieved. In recognition of this, my Government places
great emphasis on increasing women’s participation in
peacekeeping operations. As of 2019, we have filled
approximately 17 per cent of our peacekeeping staff
officer and observer positions with women, exceeding
the previous United Nations target of 15 per cent. We
are seeking to do more, aiming to reach the new target
of 25 per cent over the next 10 years, by 2028.
Secondly, we should not forget that resolution
1325 (2000) is fundamentally a human rights mandate.
Sexual violence should never be a tactic of war and
should be seen through the lens of a survivor-centred
approach. Focusing on survivors’ needs and demands
is indeed a prerequisite for a more holistic approach to
protecting individuals from sexual violence in conflict
and preventing the survivors of sexual violence from
being further victimized and stigmatized.
As a key pillar of Korea’s new Action with Women
and Peace initiative, launched last year, Korea is
supporting projects that address the needs of women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations in
certain countries in Asia and Africa through the United
Nations Population Fund and UNICEF. Korea will
contribute a further $8 million by 2020 to support these
projects. A survivor-centred approach will be at the
centre of all these activities.
Thirdly, we should engage all key actors and
stakeholders, including civil society. Every actor has a
vital role to play in implementing the women and peace
and security agenda. As such, they need to shoulder
and fulfil their respective commitments so that their
engagement will eventually contribute to ending
impunity of conflict-related sexual violence.
My Government is working closely with experts
and civil society both at home and on the ground in
target countries on the implementation of its Action with
Women and Peace initiative. As part of this initiative,
we plan to convene the first annual international
conference on Action with Women and Peace this
coming July in Seoul. I look forward to it proving to
be an excellent platform for various actors to discuss
issues of critical importance on the women and peace
and security agenda.
Combating conflict-related sexual violence and
addressing the women and peace and security agenda
is very close to the hearts of Koreans. The Republic of
Korea is still engaging in efforts to support and help

S/PV. 8514

recover the honour and dignity of so-called comfort
women victimized during the Second World War. Many
of them are passing away without having their lifelong
agony fully addressed. We believe it is crucial to ensure
that lessons are learned from their painful experiences.
The instruments, strategies and political
commitments are in place; now it is time to translate
them into action. On this meaningful occasion, I
would like to reaffirm the Republic of Korea’s full
commitment to engaging in international efforts to
advance the women, peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Serbia.
Ms. Atanacković (Serbia): I address the Council
today on behalf of the Deputy Prime Minister of
Serbia, Mrs. Zorana Mihajlović, who is also Minister
for Construction.
Before I proceed with my statement, I would like
to express my profound condolences to the Government
and people of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka for the tragedy caused by the terror attacks on
Easter Sunday. We condemn those despicable acts in
the strongest terms.
Serbia strongly supports activities aimed at
preventing all forms of violence, including sexual
violence, in armed conflicts. Considering that issue
at the United Nations, with full cooperation by all
relevant actors — States, international organizations
and civil society — is a prerequisite for a wider, more
efficient and effective engagement. The first steps in
that direction were made with the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000). Serbia supports the efforts of the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and other United
Nations mechanisms created to further those goals. We
welcome the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019) today.
Recognizing the importance of global efforts to
combat sexual violence in conflict, Serbia endorsed the
Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in
Conflict proposed by the United Kingdom in a meeting
held on the margins of the sixty-eighth session of the
General Assembly in September 2013. On the basis
of resolution 1325 (2000), Serbia adopted a national
action plan for its implementation for the period 20172020. After all, our common goal at the global level
cannot be achieved without adequate measures at the
national level. Those national measures are aimed, inter

19-1175637/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

23/04/2019

alia, at establishing an effective prevention system and
punishing perpetrators.

including exclusion of the public from the process and
the protection of witness and victim identities.

Serbia is a State party to the Rome Statute and
supports the efforts of the International Criminal Court
to prosecute crimes of sexual violence in conflict.
Serbia also fully cooperated with the Hague Tribunal in
the prosecution of crimes of sexual violence in conflict
in the territory of the former Yugoslavia, while the
Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of
Serbia is charged with the prosecution of such crimes at
the national level.

The international community should support
countries through various programmes to strengthen
existing institutions and help establish new institutions,
including ad hoc tribunals for violence of any kind,
especially sexual violence, in conflict areas. Other
relevant measures include mediation training and
conflict negotiations at local and national levels. All
parties involved in armed conflict should provide for
the necessary measures; after all, it is never too late
to punish perpetrators and achieve the justice that
victims deserve.

There is no doubt that each and every crime deserves
punishment. That is true of the crimes committed during
armed conflict, as well as of the crimes committed in the
aftermath of conflict, when the vulnerability of certain
categories of persons — such as women, children and
the elderly — is patently evident. The stigma, as well
as the profound psychological consequences, are felt
long after the occurrence of such crimes and victims
avoid speaking about their suffering for many years.
Serbia supports a victim-centred approach aimed at
providing comprehensive medical, psychological, legal
and socioeconomic assistance.
Encouraging victims of sexual violence to report
the crime is the first step towards investigating and
punishing perpetrators, as well as in efforts to prevent
those crimes. It is therefore important to ensure that
victims have an opportunity to report cases of sexual
violence both during and after conflict. Serbia is
committed to establishing a system of prevention
through the inclusion of the gender dimension in its
national security forces, as well as its international
peacekeeping missions.

Once again, I would like, on behalf of Serbia,
to thank all Council members for their continued
dedication to this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ghana.
Mrs. Pobee (Ghana): It is an honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the Group of Friends of
the African Women Leaders Network to the United
Nations, which is co-chaired by Ghana and Germany.
At the outset, the Group of Friends of the African
Women Leaders Network wishes to thank the Federal
Republic of Germany for convening today’s open
debate on the women and peace and security agenda,
with a focus on sexual violence in conflict. I also wish
to express the Group’s appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report on the subject
(S/2019/280) and to all the briefers for their informative
briefings and contributions.

One victim of such violence is one too many and
each victim is entitled to have access to justice. At the
same time, speculating on the numbers of victims and
insisting on a hierarchy of victims according to ethnic,
religious and other affiliations, or indeed by the gender
of the victim, often leads to politicization and does not
contribute to the achievement of reconciliation in postconflict societies.

It is a sad fact that, throughout history, sexual
violence has been used as a weapon of war, often
employed as a deliberate strategy by State and non-State
actors. It is even more disheartening that, in spite of the
landmark Security Council resolutions that condemn
such horrific crimes and acknowledge the threats
they pose to international peace and security, sexual
violence continues to be a common feature of armed
conflicts around the world.

Witness protection is of particular importance
for determining accountability and for punishing
perpetrators. In the absence of written documents,
the most important sources of evidence are witness
testimonies. Governments, therefore, as well as other
international institutions involved in the prosecution of
those crimes, must provide adequate witness protection,

It is significant, therefore, that this debate is taking
place in the tenth year of the establishment of the
mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence and in the lead-up to the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000). It is an opportune
moment to explore the root causes and effects of

38/103

19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

conflict-related sexual violence and how to enhance
preventive mechanisms, promote survivor-centred
responses and ensure justice and accountability.
The Group of Friends of the African Women
Leaders Network wishes to focus this intervention
on five major areas of this issue. First and foremost,
we share the view that structural gender inequality
and discrimination are at the heart of conflict-related
sexual violence and must be given due primacy in our
collective and national preventive efforts. Addressing
the imbalances in power relations between men and
women and promoting gender equality and women’s
full inclusion in all aspects of national life cannot be
discounted in that effort.
We encourage Member States to pursue the
necessary national policies, legislation, education and
advocacy at all levels of society in that regard. We
also call upon the international community to continue
providing strong support to Member States, particularly
in conflict and post-conflict situations, to enable them
to fulfil their national responsibilities and deliver on
their commitments in response to the scourge of sexual
violence in conflict.
Secondly, the Group is of the view that the nexus
between sexual violence, human trafficking, terrorism
and violent extremism is critical and must be clearly
understood in order to inform strategies in dealing with
that scourge and to better address specific vulnerabilities
in specific conflict situations. We share the view that
victims are not a homogeneous group and that a better
appreciation of the scope, patterns and emerging trends
in the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war would
enhance our responses and preventive mechanisms.
The
high-level
United
Nations-African
Union-African Women Leaders Network joint factfinding missions to conflict zones in Africa in 2017
and 2018 provided significant outcomes to better target
appropriate responses in those situations. We wish to
advocate continuing support for that unique partnership
and collaborative effort between the United Nations,
the African Union and the African Women Leaders
Network for African conflict situations.
Thirdly, it is critical that the international
community supports a survivor-centred and communityled approach in prevention efforts and responses to
sexual violence in conflict situations. Enhanced support
for survivors must include strengthening medical,

S/PV. 8514

psychosocial, physiological and rehabilitation platforms
that prioritize the rights and needs of survivors.
We must engage religious and traditional leaders
within affected communities to mitigate stigma and the
reintegration of victims and their children in society.
Women-led organizations, especially in Africa, have
demonstrated a real potential for impact in those
interventions and, with predictable funding and
capacity-building, they can also be mobilized to provide
a reliable vehicle to enhance informal community-level
protection and response mechanisms. In that regard,
the Group of Friends is pleased to report that members
of the African Women Leaders Network initiative are
being proactive on the ground in that direction by
providing health services, psychological support, legal
aid, economic opportunities and other forms of support
to victims and survivors of sexual violence in conflict.
Fourthly, protection, relief and rehabilitation
efforts must be complemented by the urgent creation
of an enabling environment for women’s participation
and leadership in prevention, peace, security and
governance processes.
Lastly, the Group of Friends of the African Women
Leaders Network wishes to stress the need for zerotolerance in dealing with incidence of sexual violence
in conflict, as they constitute a violation of human
rights and a crime under international humanitarian
and human rights law.
While it is widely acknowledged that perpetrators
must be held accountable, criminal accountability in
the face of those violations remains elusive, with little
chance for survivors to see their offenders face justice.
Victims’ fear of reprisals and rejection, as well as a
lack of access to justice systems and other structural
barriers to reporting, should not be underestimated and
must be addressed.
The Group of Friends urges Governments to
reinforce the capacity of their justice and security sectors
to deal effectively with these challenges, working in
close partnership with community and faith-based based
organizations. We advocate the sensitization of national
security agencies and an increase in the representation
of women. In addition, gender-sensitive transitional
justice should be an integral part of peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconstruction processes.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Spain.

19-1175639/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

Mr. Santos Maraver (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Spain aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union, as well as the
statement just delivered by the representative of Ghana
on behalf of the Group of Friends of the African Women
Leaders Network.
In the open debate on 11 April (see S/PV.8508),
we emphasized that the women and peace and security
agenda is, for Spain, one of the main axes of the Council’s
work. Today, we wish to reiterate that message further.
Spain is a pioneer in the implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda and its
fundamental pillars of participation, prevention and
protection. Participation reaffirms the principle that
a lasting solution to a conflict is only possible with
the effective and full participation of women. With
prevention and protection, we seek to prevent sexual
violence and the exploitation of women, as well as
guarantee reparation to survivors and move forward in
the fight against impunity.
Moreover, violence impacts women’s access to
basic social services and the enjoyment of their rights,
especially their sexual and reproductive rights. Together,
we must continue to make progress in investigating cases
of sexual violence in conflict and holding perpetrators
to account in order to achieve effective prevention and
a strong, survivor-centred response.
In that regard, Spain strongly supports the work
of the German presidency on that issue in their efforts
to achieve the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019),
which includes elements of great importance such as
accountability and drawing attention to cases of sexual
violence against men and boys. However, Spain regrets
the fact that resolution 2467 (2019) does not reflect
the need to provide assistance to survivors, through
non-discriminatory and comprehensive health services,
including sexual and reproductive health, as stated in
resolution 2106 (2013), the text of which we consider
to be fully relevant and a key reference point for the
women and peace and security agenda.
Spain will continue to financially support
initiatives to combat sexual violence in conflict and
will take gender indicators into account in the process
of earmarking funds. We also support the International
Committee of the Red Cross special programme to
combat sexual violence, as reflected in the Humanitarian
Action Strategy of the Spanish Cooperation for the
period 2019-2026. We ask the Security Council to
40/103

23/04/2019

include sexual violence in its sanctions regimes, as we
believe it is crucial to ensure interaction between the
sanctions committees and the Special Representative
for Sexual Violence in Conflict.
In a month’s time, Spain will hold the third
Conference on Safe Schools in Palma de Mallorca,
which will address the gender impact of attacks on
access to education, as girls and women are especially
vulnerable to such attacks. We believe that women
and peace and security and safe schools are intimately
linked with each other. Spain strongly supports the
Safe Schools Declaration, which is a useful instrument
to facilitate safe access to education. It is also a
fundamental element for the effective participation
of women in public life and the eradication of gender
violence. We therefore urge the entire international
community to endorse the Safe Schools Declaration.
Furthermore, I reiterate my Government’s
invitation to all Member States to participate in the
Third Conference on Safe Schools. Our goal is for
the Conference to serve as a driving force for further
developments. In that context, we demand that parties
to conflicts put an end attacks on schools, universities,
students and teachers, which result in an increased risk
of sexual violence.
We wish to see the adoption of concrete national
deterrence measures against the use of schools by
armed forces and armed groups, which also increases
the risk of sexual violence against students and teachers.
We would like disaggregated data on cases of sexual
violence impacting access to education, as a form of
prevention, mitigation and accountability.
In conclusion, Spain will continue to fight against
sexual violence in conflict as part of our efforts
to eradicate gender-based violence everywhere.
Prevention begins in times of peace, with robust national
legislation that has a clear deterrent effect. Those same
legal instruments must allow for effective reparation
for survivors, as well as prosecute and sentence those
responsible. Our ultimate goal is to eradicate genderbased violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Albania.
Ms. Kadare (Albania): Albania aligns itself with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union. I wish to add the following remarks
in my national capacity.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

I would like to thank Germany for its leadership
on the women and peace and security agenda and for
convening this important debate. I would also like
to thank the briefers from civil society, who bring
perspectives from the reality on the ground perspective
to this Chamber.
Conflict-related sexual violence is a grave human
rights violation and a security challenge that is certainly
as destructive as any weapon. It inflicts unimaginable
suffering, endangers families and communities and
erodes social and political stability. In the pervasive
way in which it impedes reconciliation and undermines
the prospect of peace and reconstruction, sexual abuse
is among the worst of crimes. The landmark adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) created a strong global
normative framework and triggered an important
paradigm shift. Sexual violence in armed conflict is
now clearly considered to be a threat to international
peace and security.
Yet, despite greater political will and efforts,
progress is slow and conflict-related sexual violence
has not diminished. Putting an end to impunity, which
continues to be the norm, is a priority. The message
that we send today should be clear: there must be zero
tolerance for rape and other forms of sexual violence
in conflict. In addition, Member States should also
implement policies that redirect the stigma from
victims to perpetrators.
We also recognize the important role that civil
society and women’s organizations play in documenting
abuses and providing survivor-centred responses. A
good example of that is the partnership of Justice Rapid
Response with UN-Women to ensure criminal justice
and accountability for sexual violence.
In September 2018, the Albanian Government
approved its first national action plan on resolution
1325 (2000). The national action plan aims to integrate
the gender perspective into our national, foreign
and security policy, providing a comprehensive
legal framework to promote and increase women’s
participation in political and public life, as well as
in the security sector. Particular attention has been
paid to mainstreaming a gender-sensitive approach in
the training of civil, police and military personnel,
with a special focus on prevention and response to
sexual violence.
I come from a region that, in its recent past, has
witnessed first-hand the devastating legacy of sexual

S/PV. 8514

violence being used as a tactic of war. Here, I would
like to mention the case of Kosovo, where rape targeting
civilians was deliberately and repeatedly used as a
weapon during the war of the late 1990s. More than
20,000 survivors are still suffering the consequences
in silence, isolated by stigma, discrimination and fear.
They have to struggle with social ostracism, physical
and psychological damage and emotional torment.
Despite substantial evidence, not a single case of warrelated sexual violence has been prosecuted.
We regret that the current report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/280) continues to fail to list Kosovo
among the post-conflict countries that are suffering
the consequences of sexual crimes, and we call upon
the Secretary-General to include Kosovo in his future
reports. That would help to acknowledge the survivors
and combat the prejudice and shame that they face.
It would also highlight Kosovo’s valuable experience
in supporting them as a good example in the region
and beyond.
It is our collective responsibility to closely
cooperate and take concrete actions to prevent sexual
violence, protect survivors and bring perpetrators
to justice. Albania fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendations in his report, as well as
resolution 2467 (2019), presented by Germany and just
adopted, and remains committed to playing its part in
implementing the resolution.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Romania.
Mr. Necula (Romania): First, I would like to
present our heartfelt condolences to the people of Sri
Lanka following the attacks on Sunday, which Romania
strongly condemns. Our thoughts and prayers go to the
families of the victims.
Romania aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
We would now like to add a few remarks in our
national capacity.
At the outset, allow us to commend the presidency
of the Security Council for its initiative to host this open
debate on women and peace and security and conflictrelated sexual violence. We salute the presence of the
two Nobel Peace Prize laureates, Ms. Nadia Murad and
Dr. Denis Mukwege, and of the human rights lawyer
and the activist who are committed to putting an end
to sexual violence and related crimes as weapons of

19-1175641/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

war. Their tireless efforts to speak and act against
abominable practices targeting women and girls who
are affected by conflicts should be an inspiration as
we collectively strive to achieve international peace
and security.
The scourge of sexual and gender-based violence
in conflict must be brought to an end. Those terrible
tactics of war take a toll not only women and girls,
but on whole communities, leaving both visible and
invisible permanent scars for many future generations.
The enslavement and trafficking of victims provide a
source of financing to terrorist cells and other culprits,
enabling the continuation of abominations, while the
stigmatized and marginalized children born of war rape
are particularly vulnerable to being recruited from a
very young age by armed groups, thereby maintaining
a circle of perpetual violence and insecurity.
As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/280)
shows, facts such as underreporting and the prevalence
of non-State actors as principal perpetrators are
considerably impacting on the success of efforts to
fight against those crimes, altogether weakening the
confidence of victims that they will ever receive the
appropriate reparations.
The United Nations community and all Member
States ought to direct their attention to identifying
and holding offenders accountable, seeking justice,
compensation and psychosocial support for victims
and, last but certainly not least, enabling survivors
to testify against such terrible gender-based violence
and harmful practices. We particularly commend the
key role played by the International Criminal Court
(ICC) in that regard. As a court of last resort whose
jurisdiction is complementary to that of States, the ICC
plays a determining part in fighting against impunity
for the most serious crimes of international concern,
including in cases of conflict-related sexual violence.
We are deeply concerned about the shrinking space
for civil society and its negative impact on the capacity
to prevent and resolve conflicts and to build and
maintain peace and security. Intimidation and reprisals
against women peace activists, humanitarians and
relief workers and women human rights defenders are
truly worrisome. Their work and support for victims of
conflict-related sexual violence is often the only type of
assistance that the afflicted persons get, and we should
contribute to enabling them to continue providing their
essential services, including by giving them greater
42/103

23/04/2019

visibility in the public space, which is long overdue for
those women.
As a candidate country for a non-permanent
seat on the Security Council for the term 2020-2021,
Romania pledges to focus on providing support to
the most vulnerable groups afflicted by violence and
hostilities, including to the victims of conflict-related
sexual violence, and to work together with all relevant
governmental, humanitarian and civil society partners
towards their destigmatization, reinclusion and full
participation in peacebuilding efforts.
Women’s presence in peacekeeping operations
often proves to be key in building trust and developing
positive relationships and solid cooperation with the
afflicted local communities, especially in the ranks of
the most vulnerable groups, including those likely to
be subjected to sexual violence. The image of women
as protectors is often associated with reassurance and
empathy, and their ability to fill this gap in the needs of
the communities they serve is a major asset. Romania
proudly has seven female officers participating in peace
operations at the present time.
As we work towards the adoption of a national
action plan on women and peace and security, we
are devoting special attention to creating awareness
and equipping all military personnel to be deployed
in peace operations with knowledge and relevant
skills on gender-related issues, as well as to ensuring
compliance with the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians and those enshrined in the United Nations
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse.
Today, we are honoured to be presenting a series
of commitments that Romania has decided to assume
in the perspective of next year’s twentieth anniversary
of resolution 1325 (2000) at the special high-level event
organized in the margins of this meeting. As always, we
are ready to do our best and deliver our most to advance
the women and peace and security cause.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I wish to thank Germany for
organizing this open debate. Uruguay aligns itself with
the statements to be delivered by the representatives of
Canada, on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

Peace and Security, and of the State of Qatar, on behalf
of the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.
Today’s speakers have depicted a tragic and
devastating state of affairs. Sexual violence, which
is perpetrated by non-State armed groups and
Government forces, continues to prevail in conflict
situations and is often systematically used as a tactic
of war and terrorism. Sadly, despite efforts, it has not
been possible to stamp out that crime, which violates
the most basic principles of human dignity. We must
therefore undertake effective action to combat such
activity. Resolution 2467 (2019), proposed by Germany,
covers a wide range of provisions that will allow for
progress against sexual violence and breath a new lease
of life into the women and peace and security agenda.
That is why Uruguay chose to co-sponsor the resolution.
The most effective way to combat sexual violence
in conflict is through prevention. The common
denominator of sexual violence is that it finds fertile
ground where there are pre-existing patterns of
inequality and discrimination. States must therefore
take measures to promote respect for victims’ rights and
foster access to education, work and decision-making
processes for women.
Uruguay believes that that requires ongoing efforts
to strengthen progress, including by peaceful countries.
With that in mind, laws relating to human trafficking,
sexual violence and other violations of human rights,
as well as the care and reparation of victims, were
recently adopted in Uruguay. All of those issues will
be included in the next national action plan on women
and peace and security, which will also establish new
future goals. Moreover, Uruguay will present its tenth
periodic report to the Committee on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women in 2020.
When prevention fails, it is essential that States
equip themselves with effective mechanisms that allow
for victim recovery. In particular, they must provide
medical assistance that includes comprehensive sexual
and reproductive health services, such as access to
emergency contraception, the safe termination of
pregnancy and the prevention and treatment of HIV, as
well as psychological care that allows victims to cope
with trauma. Programmes for effective reintegration
into society must also be provided.
All of those measures need to be victim-centred
and address the specific needs of different groups,
such as women and girls and men and boys who have

S/PV. 8514

been victims of sexual violence, children born out
of war, refugees and stigmatized and marginalized
communities, including lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex individuals — a group that
is especially susceptible to that type of violence.
Accountability is another priority. Governments must
exert efforts to strengthen their justice systems and
ensure the prosecution of perpetrators, both nationally
and internationally, and must promote the reporting of
such crimes.
There are very few weapons with the same
destructive capacity and devastating effect on social
structures as sexual violence. We must therefore
address the issue together. States have the primary
responsibility to prevent sexual violence, but the
seriousness of such crimes, their complex causes and
serious and persistent consequences require the support
of the international community.
Uruguay values the fundamental role of civil
society organizations that help victims and emphatically
condemns the threats and attacks perpetrated against
them. My country also wishes to express its support
for the work of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
her dedicated team.
The Security Council, for its part, has a fundamental
role to play. It must use all the tools at its disposal to
eradicate sexual violence in conflict, ensuring that
the topic is examined in its sanctions committees
and that they systematically include the names of the
perpetrators of such crimes on their lists. It must also
refer such cases to the International Criminal Court and
include the prevention of those crimes in the mandates
of its peace missions.
Uruguay has set an imperative to collaborate with
the Security Council as much as possible in order to
ensure the proper functioning of peace operations,
including troop training before deployment in the areas
of human rights and international humanitarian law,
with an emphasis on protecting children and on sexual
and gender-based violence.
Uruguay is of the view that further concerted action
among the various bodies, agencies and mechanisms
of the United Nations would be beneficial, within the
framework of their respective powers to strengthen
research initiatives and ensure accountability.

19-1175643/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

To conclude, the moving stories of Ms. Nadia
Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege are vivid and firsthand reminders of the reason why we must all fulfil our
responsibility to combat sexual violence in all its forms.
For every survivor’s shocking story, there are many
silent stories of anonymous victims who are waiting for
us to put an end to those crimes. The time has come to
show them that they are not waiting in vain.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): Let me point out that I
have two statements to deliver today. The first will be
made on behalf of a group of countries and the second
in my national capacity.
I am pleased to speak on behalf of 55 Member
States, representing all five regional groups of the
United Nations.
On the tenth anniversary of the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, we applaud the critical
work carried out by Ms. Patten and pledge our full
support to her office.
We remain outraged by the persistent and
widespread occurrence of sexual violence in armed
conflict, committed by State and non-State actors.
Sexual violence in conflict is not inevitable and is never
acceptable. We underline that a climate of impunity
discourages reporting, undermines assistance and abets
further violations. Therefore, we are gravely concerned
that, despite the systematic use of sexual violence by
groups such as Da’esh and Boko Haram, no individuals
from such groups have been convicted for sexual
violence crimes.
Responsibility for the fight against impunity lies
with us, the Member States. Addressing and preventing
sexual violence is a core commitment of the women and
peace and security agenda. We must ensure that robust
legal and institutional arrangements are in place to
address sexual violence in armed conflict and that steps
are taken to investigate and prosecute perpetrators.
As information is an essential prerequisite for
accountability, we support survivor-centred efforts
to more systematically document and report sexual
violence in armed conflict and post-conflict situations.
In that regard, we urge the Secretary-General to ensure
that gender and sexual violence expertise is included
in international procedures, such as investigative
44/103

23/04/2019

mechanisms, commissions of inquiry, United
Nations fact-finding missions and Security Council
sanctions committees.
We repeat our call on the Security Council to
systematically and explicitly incorporate and apply
sexual violence as a designation criterion in United
Nations sanction regimes, where such crimes are
persistently perpetrated. We reaffirm that amnesty
should not be granted to perpetrators of sexual violence
and that sexual violence should be explicitly prohibited
by the terms of ceasefires and peace agreements.
In all our efforts to ensure accountability, we must
not lose sight of the needs and rights of survivors of
sexual violence in conflict. As a starting point, the
United Nations and its Member States should place a
greater emphasis on listening to the diverse voices of
survivors, as well as collaborating with the civil society
organizations working to address sexual violence
in armed conflict. That approach helps to empower
survivors, identify barriers to assistance and justice,
avoid further harm and improve our collective response
and accountability.
Sexual violence against men and boys is also an
expression of unequal gender norms. Responses must
take into account the diverse and intersecting experience,
identities and needs of all victims and survivors.
Greater efforts are also needed at all levels to
ensure that survivors of sexual violence and children
born of rape have access to non-discriminatory and
comprehensive health services, including sexual and
reproductive health, psychosocial, legal and livelihood
support and other multisectoral services, taking into
account the specific needs of persons with disabilities
and in line with resolution 2106 (2013).
As part of our efforts to secure both accountability
and victim support, we want to emphasize the
importance of providing reparations to survivors of
sexual violence in armed conflict.
Finally, sexual violence in conflict is part of a
continuum of violence, including in peacetime, that is
fuelled by gender inequality. We believe that systemic
gender-based discrimination, such as women’s exclusion
from political life and economic marginalization, as
well as discriminatory legal systems and customs, is
conducive to sexual violence in conflict. Any serious
effort to prevent and address sexual violence in conflict
must move beyond the immediate symptoms and
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

confront structural inequality itself. Such an approach
should include the protection of women human rights
defenders, who are themselves the target of attack.
(spoke in French)
I would now like to make a few additional remarks
in my capacity as the representative of Canada.
Today’s debate is of key importance to my
country. Canada’s feminist foreign policy puts gender
considerations at the core of its global engagement,
and the reason is simple. It is because the evidence is
irrefutable. Supporting gender equality is the best way to
build a more peaceful, inclusive and prosperous world.
Sadly, today the Council’s briefers confirmed what
we already knew. Sexual and gender-based violence
is widespread. Women, girls, LGBTI individuals and
other members of marginalized groups are targets. That
will change only through concerted efforts. My country
is not immune to that scourge. In Canada, the double
discrimination that indigenous women and girls endure
has increased our levels of sexual and gender-based
violence. Within the framework of the United Nations
Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, which is taking
place this week, I want to affirm my Government’s
strong commitment to addressing the issue.
Just as we seek to prevent sexual and gender-based
violence at home, we also support efforts around the
world. In Myanmar, we are working with UNICEF
and the United Nations Population Fund to remove
systemic barriers to sexual and reproductive health and
rights. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we are
supporting the work of the United Nations Development
Programme in providing survivors of violence with
legal, medical and psychosocial support. For the next
two years, Canada will lead the Call to Action on
Protection from Gender-based Violence in Emergencies.
We are also working to strengthen accountability at
the global level. The laws are indeed changing, even
if too slowly. In the meantime, the inability of existing
national legal frameworks to deal with such crimes in
no way diminishes the seriousness of those crimes. In
such cases, we therefore believe firmly that we have a
collective legal and moral responsibility to act.
(spoke in English)
A lack of political will, including in the Council,
should also not enable impunity. The shortcomings of the
systems in place should be recognized and addressed and
alternative approaches pursued. For example, Canada

S/PV. 8514

is supporting the deployment of experts through UNWomen to secure accountability for sexual and genderbased crimes in Myanmar, Syria, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Burundi, Yemen
and Mali. Such deployments make a difference. The
sexual and gender-based violence experts deployed
with Canadian support to the independent international
fact-finding mission on Myanmar directly contributed
to a finding that sexual and gender-based violence in
Myanmar’s Kachin, Shan and Rakhine states amounted
to war crimes and crimes against humanity. While
this work is critical, we know it is not easy. Canada’s
support for the collection of evidence of crimes by
Da’esh in Iraq and Syria has encountered a number of
challenges. Survivors and witnesses express legitimate
and growing frustrations about the delays in obtaining
justice, as well as a sense of psychological fatigue from
repeatedly having to share their experiences with media
outlets and non-governmental organizations.
International support for investigative bodies
documenting sexual violence is key, but we must
acknowledge our own responsibilities if we are to
prevent the revictimization of survivors. We must all
continue to ensure that the voices of victims and their
families are fully reflected in our efforts. All victims of
sexual and gender-based violence expect action. They
expect justice and accountability, and better efforts on
prevention. They are right. I would expect the same, and
I suspect Council members would too. Resolution 2467
(2019), adopted today, has many important elements,
and we commend Germany for its tireless efforts.
However, we are disappointed that it is silent on at least
two counts. We urge the Council to explicitly recognize
that LGBTI individuals are targets of sexual violence in
conflict owing specifically to their sexual orientation
or gender identity. That persecution is nothing new.
Homosexuals, branded with pink triangles by the
Nazis and pushed off buildings by Da’esh, have always
been targeted. Situations of armed conflict magnify
underlying discrimination against LGBTI individuals,
which can be manifested through sexual violence.
While such persecution is unfortunately long-standing,
what is new is the growing expectation of concrete
action. As my colleague from Uruguay just pointed out,
greater efforts are needed to monitor and report on such
violence and ensure that Member States strengthen
their national legislation to protect LGBTI victims.
Canada also very much regrets that consensus
could not be reached on a reference in the resolution

19-1175645/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

to sexual and reproductive health rights. The Security
Council should not be backtracking on conclusions that
it has itself reached in recent years. One step forward
cannot involve two steps back. To be clear, sexual and
reproductive health rights are essential to women’s
autonomy and human rights. That is as true now as it
was when the Council considered the issue previously.
We cannot promote gender equality, address sexual
violence in conflict or implement a survivor-centred
approach without ensuring sexual and reproductive
health rights.
Should Canada be elected to serve on the Council
as a non-permanent member for the period from 2021
to 2022, we will be deeply committed to continuing to
advance this agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Mr. Verdier (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
We would particularly like to thank your country,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate.
Argentina aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the representative of Canada on behalf
of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and
Security, and I would like to add a few remarks in my
national capacity.
At the outset, we welcome the positive efforts
that States, the United Nations, intergovernmental
organizations and local and international civil society
have made in recent years to prevent and respond to
sexual violence. In that regard, Argentina welcomes the
Council’s adoption just a few minutes ago of resolution
2467 (2019). However, we regret the text’s shortcomings
on some matters of importance to my country.
Argentina continues to strongly support the
efforts of the Secretary-General and the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s latest report
(S/2019/280) and fully share his recommendations that all
State and non-State parties make specific commitments
aimed at preventing and combating conflict-related
sexual violence, while also strengthening prevention
by supporting efforts designed to ensure criminal
responsibility for perpetrators and access to justice
for survivors. The increasing use and threats of sexual
violence by various State and non-State armed actors
and groups against particular groups are deeply
serious international crimes that must be prevented
46/103

23/04/2019

and sanctioned within a strict legal framework that
makes use of existing tools and mechanisms, including
the Security Council’s sanctions regimes, which
should include sexual violence as a specific criterion
for imposing sanctions and referring cases to the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court.
We believe that one of the key ways to prevent
sexual violence is by addressing the risk factors and
underlying conditions that put women and various
other groups in particularly vulnerable situations, while
actions and efforts aimed at promoting gender equality
and the empowerment of all women and girls in all their
diversity are equally important.
With regard to access to justice and accountability
for crimes of sexual violence, it is crucial to promote
greater cooperation and exchanges of good practices in
research and legal assistance. Argentina is a member
of the Justice Rapid Response international cooperation
mechanism, which does important work in investigating
international crimes professionally and impartially.
We highly value that mechanism’s partnership with
UN-Women, which ensures the inclusion of gender
specialists in the investigation of crimes.
At the national level, in 2009, we adopted a
comprehensive protection law to prevent, punish and
eradicate violence against women. In 2016, we launched
a national action plan for prevention, assistance and the
eradication of violence against women, which reflected
the resolute will of the executive branch to establish as
State policy the fulfilment of the right of all persons
to live a life free from violence. At the international
level, we reiterate our commitment to the zerotolerance policy of the United Nations with regard to
cases of sexual exploitation and abuse. In that regard,
together with more than 80 countries, we joined the
voluntary compact on preventing and addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse.
In conclusion, I would like to underscore the
important role of the Safe Schools Declaration, which
is an initiative led by Norway and Argentina. We invite
States to endorse that non-binding instrument, which
recognizes the various obstacles that affect education
during armed conflicts and establishes commitments
to improving the protection provided to students,
educational institutions and their staff.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Namibia.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I would like to start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate on the topic of sexual violence in conflict.
I would also like to thank Germany for its strong
commitment in support of the women and peace and
security agenda.
I thank all the briefers for their riveting, detailed
and comprehensive briefings. My delegation aligns
itself with the statement to be delivered by Ms. Fatima
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the Africa Union
(AU) to the United Nations, as well as that of the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Canada, who
spoke on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security.
As we mark the tenth anniversary of the establishment
of the mandate of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, the Secretary-General’s most recent
report on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280)
reminds us that, while there has been a paradigm shift
in how the Organization and Governments address
those crimes, there is much work to be done on the
ground. Accountability for those crimes must be
guaranteed. As the report of the Secretary-General
notes, “accountability remains elusive” (S/2019/280,
para. 22). The report further notes that
“[A]cross most countries, victims express reluctance
to report their experiences owing to stigma, the
fear of reprisal, rejection by their families and
communities, and their lack of confidence in
judicial and non-judicial responses”(ibid.).
That must change. Actionable change, first
and foremost, must come from Member States.
International and regional organizations must also
play a role. Furthermore, civil society organizations
can play a guiding role, given their presence on the
ground and contact with survivors and perpetrators.
A survivor-centred approach must be at the heart of
our programmes, interventions and investments. As
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report, sexual
violence results in multiple consequences for survivors
and their families. They often require immediate,
life-saving health care. Greater efforts also need to be
made to ensure their rehabilitation and reintegration
into their communities.
The African Union has taken a strong stance on
sexual violence in conflict and underscored its full
commitment to eradicating sexual and gender-based
violence on the African continent. In 2018, the AU and

S/PV. 8514

its member States endorsed the African Union Policy
on Prevention and Response to Sexual Exploitation
and Abuse for Peace Support Operations. The Policy
notably aims to strengthen leadership and management
engagement, roles and responses to sexual exploitation
and abuse. Member States of the AU have also adhered
to a number of instruments developed by the body. That
includes the Protocol to the African Charter on Human
and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa,
adopted in 2003, and the Solemn Declaration on Gender
Equality in Africa, adopted in 2004. The Women,
Gender and Development Directorate and the Office of
the AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security
led the operationalization of those various instruments.
On a larger scale, the AU-United Nations partnership,
especially in the area of women and peace and security,
has contributed to strengthening that partnership and
the work in that field.
Within the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) region, the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo continue to be faced
with conflict-related sexual violence. The report of the
Secretary-General clearly outlines the severity and
number of those crimes. In 2018, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) documented 1,049
cases of conflict-related sexual violence. There are no
doubt many more cases that have gone unreported.
The SADC-deployed Intervention Brigade, under
MONUSCO, and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are working together to combat
and eradicate sexual violence in conflict, notably with
the training of commanders and security officers on the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence.
In 2008, SADC adopted a Protocol on Gender and
Development. The Protocol sets out six specific targets,
notably the on need to enact and enforce legislation
prohibiting all forms of gender-based violence and the
need to ensure that the laws on gender-based violence
provide for the comprehensive testing, treatment and
care of survivors of sexual assault. The SADC Gender
Protocol Barometer is updated annually by the Southern
Africa Gender Protocol Alliance and measures the
success of those six commitments at the memberState level.
In Namibia, laws on gender-based violence have
been strengthened over the years, and a new clinical
handbook for survivors subjected to intimate partner
violence and/or sexual violence was recently approved

19-1175647/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

by the Ministry of Health and will be issued for
distribution shortly. The publication will be used by
medical professionals, social workers, counsellors, law
enforcement agencies and others to help and improve
services to victims and survivors.
Next year’s twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) should spur us to redouble our
efforts to strengthen the prevention of and response to
conflict-related sexual violence, to promote a survivorcentred concept of justice and accountability, and to
address the root causes of those violations. Survivors
of conflict-related sexual violence are very often
young women and men. They represent the future of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic, Mali and many other countries. We
must ensure and protect their future to enable them
to successfully contribute to the rebuilding of their
respective countries.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Italy.
Mr. Stefanile (Italy): We align ourselves with
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union and with the statement delivered
earlier by the representative of Canada on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
We welcome today’s open debate and thank the
briefers for their interventions. We are pleased to see
the continuous engagement of the Security Council
in addressing sexual violence in conflict and the
wider women and peace and security agenda, 10 years
after the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We
also commend the initiative and efforts of the German
presidency that led today to the adoption of resolution
2467 (2019). It represents indeed a further step in
countering the scourge of sexual violence in conflict,
although, like other Member States, we regret that it
was not possible to agree on a more comprehensive and
ambitious text.
The issue under discussion today represents a
top priority for Italy. In 2017, it was at the core of our
mandate on the Security Council and of our presidency
of the Group of Seven, and we are committed to
devoting our utmost attention to it as we plan further
initiatives in view of the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000).
48/103

23/04/2019

The picture emerging from the 2019 report of
the Secretary-General (S/2019/280) is, unfortunately,
still gloomy. Sexual-related crimes continue to be
used as part of a global war strategy by State and
non-State actors, and States continue to face setbacks
when exercising their responsibility to protect their
own nationals. Notwithstanding some progress in
some countries, much remains to be done in ensuring
accountability, as well as compliance with Security
Council resolutions on a wider scale.
In the light of that background, Italy is ready to
support the horizontal recommendations set forth
by the Secretary-General. In particular, we support
the inclusion of sexual violence as an automatic and
independent designation criterion in all relevant
sanctions regimes. We also consider that the work of the
Security Council should benefit from a more systematic
involvement of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
with the Office of the ICC Prosecutor receiving the
necessary resources to conduct swift investigations.
When national or international courts are unable to
act, the Security Council should create international
fact-finding mechanisms in order to conduct gendersensitive investigations and ensure the collection and
preservation of evidence.
Tackling the root causes of violence is indeed key,
as the prevention of systematic sexual violence begins
in times of peace, when national laws should be made
sufficiently robust to prevent permissive attitudes
in wartime. We need a paradigm shift based on the
dismantlement of those rules, including the patriarchal
ones, that are at the base of violence and the affirmation
of a full culture of gender equality, which can ensure
the complete and effective participation of women and
girls in the decision-making process. Our action should
be guided by a comprehensive and multidisciplinary
approach, with the aim of banning any form of gender
violence, including harmful practices. Training remains
an essential component of our efforts and should
encompass a wide range of actors, including youth,
leaders, military and police units and civilian personnel.
Establishing a stronger female presence in
United Nations missions should also be a priority in
order to facilitate dialogue with local populations
and encourage victims to speak out and enhance the
mandate’s delivery, particularly with regard to the
protection of civilians. At the same time, it is critical
to assist countries in situations of conflict in reforming
their judicial systems and strengthening the rule of law
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

and their accountability mechanisms. Let me recall, in
this respect, that Italy will host in Rome in late May the
preparatory conference for the review of Sustainable
Development Goal 16.
We also concur on the need to provide appropriate
reintegration support for the victims of sexual abuse
and exploitation. Our commitment in this respect is
well-documented, as Italy is the largest contributor to
the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of Victims
of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse and supports other
initiatives in this area. Last but not least, the involvement
of civil society actors is also key to achieving sustainable
results, and we have heard a clear reflection of that in
the interventions of today’s briefers.
Let me conclude by reaffirming Italy’s strong
commitment to the women and peace and security
agenda and, in this context, to the prevention and
tackling of sexual violence in conflict. We will
continue to support the work of the Secretary-General
and of his Special Representative to pursue better and
increasingly tangible results in this field.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Fachinotti (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks Germany for its leadership in
pursuing and stepping up the fight against sexual
violence in conflict within the context of this open
debate and next year’s twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). In particular, we
express our gratitude to this morning’s briefers for their
outstanding efforts in this area.
Switzerland welcomes the German initiative of
introducing resolution 2467 (2019), a new resolution on
sexual violence in conflict, which aims to strengthen
monitoring and accountability mechanisms while
identifying a survivor-centred approach. Switzerland
is concerned, however, about the weakening of agreed
language on key issues.
Switzerland reaffirms the primary responsibility of
States Members to protect men, women and children
from sexual violence and rape. Any response must
address as a priority the needs and rights of survivors,
the prevention of violations and abuse and the
accountability of the perpetrators of such crimes. Three
aspects are of particular importance to us.
First, sexual violence is not only a feature of
contemporary conflicts; it is also foreshadows them.

S/PV. 8514

The higher the rate of sexual violence is in a given
society, the more likely it is that violence will be
used in conflict situations. Gender inequality and
discrimination are at the heart of sexual violence.
Combating that scourge therefore requires the inclusion
and empowerment of women, the protection of women
human rights defenders and the willingness of men to
create a climate of mutual trust and respect.
Secondly, it is important to acknowledge that,
while women and girls are the main targets of sexual
violence in conflict, men and boys are also victims of
those terrible acts of violence, but the subject remains
taboo. Cases of violence against men and boys are
rarely reported, as those who have been subjected to
such acts are even more fearful of being stigmatized
and excluded. Given such gender stereotypes as
“a man can be only a hero, but never a victim”, it is
difficult if not impossible to break the cycle of silence
and revictimization.
We therefore advocate a holistic approach to caring
for the victims of sexual violence, including children
born as the result of rape. We must ensure that any
response focuses on the rights and needs of all survivors,
including their sexual and reproductive health rights
and that they are treated with dignity and respect. Any
response must encompass medical and psychosocial
services, while at the same time facilitating and
strengthening the reintegration of survivors into their
communities and social structures.
Thirdly, Switzerland is concerned about the
impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators of sexual violence
in national and international conflicts. In particular, we
support the efforts of the International Criminal Court
and its Prosecutor to ensure that the perpetrators of
sexual and gender-related crimes are held accountable
for their actions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Let me express my
appreciation to the German presidency for holding
this open debate. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Pramila Patten and the representatives
of civil society for their moving testimonies.
It is worth mentioning that Ukraine aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union.

19-1175649/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

Unfortunately, almost 20 years after the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), not all the objectives of
the women and peace and security agenda have been
achieved. The tragic reality of sexual violence against
men, women, girls and boys continues to constitute
a part of the fabric of each and every armed conflict
around the globe, regardless of whether it is internal
or external in nature. Since the establishment of the
mandate of the Office of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
10 years ago, the Security Council has adopted
five resolutions focused, first and foremost, on the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence.
Nevertheless, the issue continues to plague
vulnerable communities and, often times, entire
societies, which are exposed to all kinds of violence
and abuse in conflicts. It is therefore imperative that the
international community and the Security Council in
particular continue to look for the most effective ways to
enhance the implementation of the existing resolutions
on the women and peace and security agenda in order
to tackle and prevent atrocities from being committed,
as well as ensure accountability.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/280)
before us today clearly indicates that structural gender
inequalities and discrimination are at the core of
conflict-related sexual violence. In that regard, we
proceed from the conviction that the path towards the
prevention of all forms of violence against women
and girls lies first in the genuine empowerment of
women and their greater engagement at all levels of
decision-making processes. Equally important is the
task of guaranteeing the victims of sexual violence
the right to justice and live in peace and dignity, free
from stigmatization and any form of discrimination.
Impunity for those crimes is rust on the moral image of
any society and should be eradicated.
Ukraine attaches great importance to the equal
and full participation of women in all activities in
the areas of national security, conflict prevention and
resolution, peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Practical
steps are being taken to integrate the women and peace
and security agenda into the ongoing security and
defence reform in my country. The active integration of
gender equality into the activities of the armed forces
of Ukraine, within the framework of the national action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
for the period 2016-2022, has fostered changes to the
50/103

23/04/2019

list of military specializations and positions open to
women candidates.
In 2018, the Government of Ukraine updated the
national action plan and integrated some aspects of the
strategy for the prevention of and response to conflictrelated sexual violence in Ukraine. The action plan,
inter alia, includes education and training programmes
for the security sector on prevention, protection and
response aspects; psychological assistance and a
rehabilitation programme for survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence; and an information campaign
on the prevention of sexual violence.
For the first time, the Government action plan
for 2018 outlined the priority of introducing gender
advisers and gender mainstreaming in higher education
institutions in the security and defence sector. The
Government of Ukraine has enhanced its efforts to
ensure the protection of women’s human rights and
women’s empowerment in all spheres of public life, as
well as the necessary support for, and reintegration of,
women victims who have suffered from sexual violence
as a result of the Russian aggression.
In that light, I must once again reiterate our regret
at the omission of the reference to the UkrainianRussian armed conflict and its victims in the SecretaryGeneral’s latest thematic report (S/2019/280). In that
regard, we would like to recall our request for a United
Nations special mission to investigate sexual crimes
committed in the temporarily occupied territories of
Ukraine in the context of that conflict.
In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Ukraine’s
commitment to ensuring the full implementation of
the women and peace and security agenda, promoting
women’s rights and protecting women from sexual and
gender-based violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I am making this statement on
behalf of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Sweden and my
own country Norway. I thank Germany for organizing
today’s open debate on this critical topic.
With the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019) today,
it is essential to advance the agenda of conflict-related
sexual violence by focusing on the survivors. Let us
emphasize that the survivors of conflict-related sexual
violence deserve basic sexual and reproductive health
and rights. We regret that sexual and reproductive
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

health and rights, as reaffirmed by the Security Council
in several of its resolutions, most recently in resolutions
1889 (2009) and 2106 (2013), were not included.
Nadia Murad and Denis Mukwege bring with them
the voices of the very people we are here to serve and
whose communities the Security Council is meant to
safeguard. As we acknowledge once again that the
devastating harm that those women, girls, men and
boys have been exposed to is a matter of national
and international security, they are here to hold
us accountable.
Girls become mothers and children become
stateless. Women are raped and their husbands are
forced to watch. Reproductive organs are mutilated and
shame and stigma paralyse families and villages. Those
injuries of war call for a comprehensive response.
Sexual violence destroys lives, tears apart the social
fabric of communities, creates rifts between neighbours
and preys on the differences that enrich our societies.
Those who are targeted are often discriminated against
due to their religious, ethnic, sexual, political or other
minority status.
It has been ten years now since the mandate of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
was established. Ms. Wallström, Ms. Bangura and
Ms. Patten have done an excellent job, not least through
United Nations Action and the Team of Experts; yet, in
many conflicts, abuse is still widespread. We welcome
the Secretary-General’s report (S/2019/280), which
indicates possible ways forward.
We must monitor and document violations of
international law and provide training and funding,
where needed. We need to strengthen State institutions
and build our capacity to combat conflict-related
sexual violence. Individual States have the primary
responsibility of preventing and responding to sexual
violence, as well as investigating and prosecuting
persons implicated in such crimes. Perpetrators of
conflict-related sexual violence must be held to account.
We call for the systematic use of gender expertise in
United Nations operations. We welcome the dedicated
specialized teams, the new policy and the soon-tobe-launched all-of-mission handbook on the prevention
of, and response to, conflict-related sexual violence. We
echo the need for resolutions, mandates and sanctions
to address conflict-related sexual violence.

S/PV. 8514

Root causes of gender-based violence, such as
gender-based power inequalities and gender-based
discrimination, must be addressed. Responsive
measures, such as providing adequate services to the
survivors of gender-based violence, are crucial, as
are measures to prevent the violence from happening
in the first place. We support the call to action to end
sexual violence in conflict. We rely on survivors and
witnesses, civil society and human rights defenders
as we strive to build a relevant and effective response
without causing survivors further pain.
Reparation and justice must go hand in hand. A
comprehensive approach is a prerequisite to alleviate
both the immediate and long-term impacts of conflictrelated sexual violence. We must strengthen services
for survivors of sexual violence, including by ensuring
comprehensive sexual and reproductive health rights,
such as access to emergency contraception and the safe
termination of pregnancies. We must fight impunity,
remove stigma, alleviate suffering, rectify injustices
and, ultimately, help people to rebuild their lives and
help communities to build peace. In that context,
we emphasize the significant progress made by the
International Criminal Court and its Trust Fund for
Victims in combating conflict-related sexual violence.
The Nordic countries will do our part through our
embassies, multilateral efforts and many partnerships.
The Nordic Women Mediators network calls for
more gender-transformative peace and reconciliation
processes. The Nordic Centre for Gender in Military
Operations equips peacekeepers. We deploy many
women and men who champion that cause. This
anniversary year demands action.
Norway, together with Somalia, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the United
Nations Population Fund, the International Committee
of the Red Cross and other partners, will host a
conference in Oslo on 23 and 24 May. The objectives
are to mobilize more political awareness and financial
support to address conflict-related sexual violence
in humanitarian crises and highlight best practices
to prevent and respond to sexual and gender-based
violence in humanitarian situations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I thank the Security Council for
this opportunity to address members of the Council.

19-1175651/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

23/04/2019

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening an open
discussion on sexual violence in conflict during your
joint presidency. Fiji congratulates the Security Council
on its adoption of resolution 2467 (2019) against sexual
violence earlier today.

peacekeepers have the soft skills to recognize signs of
sexual violence in conflict early, that they are able to
record evidence and work across the United Nations
system to support victims. The focus must always be
on support for the victims first.

Since 2000, there have been several resolutions
on combating sexual violence in conflict. Those
resolutions highlight that women are subjected to the
most inhumane and systematic torture, rape and abuse
during conflicts, which often continue well after
peace settlements have been secured. Some of those,
as told forcefully this morning by the brave Nobel
Laureate Ms. Nadia Murad, have occurred within the
broader context of genocide as well — they are all war
crimes regardless.

Fiji has learned a lot from our experiences across
peace operations in Timor-Leste, Kosovo, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Iraq, Lebanon, Darfur in the Sudan, South
Sudan and other regions. Those experiences have drawn
our attention to the pressing need for peacekeepers to
prepare far better in order to respond to conflict-related
sexual violence.

The Secretary-General briefed the Security Council
that in spite of a more robust normative framework,
there has been an onset of an epidemic of targeted
sexual violence in conflicts. Rape, sexual violence and
slavery have become systematic weapons of war across
so many of the world’s conflicts. The perpetrators
of these crimes, largely against women, go mostly
unpunished. All of those victims remind us of how far
we need to travel.
I draw the Security Council’s attention to the special
role that peace operations can play in addressing what
the Special Representative this morning called history’s
greatest silence — an epidemic of sexual violence
as a weapon of war. Special skills and resources are
required by peace operations if they are to combat and
prevent sexual violence in conflict. Fiji, a long-serving
contributor to United Nations peacekeeping, is upscaling
its peacekeeping contingents. We are significantly
increasing the number of women peacekeepers
because we know that women peacekeepers bring with
them empathy. Women peacekeepers are far better at
understanding patterns of sexual violence in conflict.
Women peacekeepers are better at identifying signs of
systematic sexual violence early. Women in medical
support units help overcome deep barriers that victims
of sexual violence face in accessing medical help,
trauma counselling and in seeking other support.
Peace operations are an important part of the
international response. Fiji is making progress in
improving its preparedness for peace operations,
with the support of Australia, New Zealand and other
partners. Our approach is not only about getting more
women into peacekeeping; it is about ensuring that all
52/103

During conflict, law and order is the first to
suffer. Women thus have little recourse to governance
institutions; they suffer violence without being able
to access their own national or local institutions.
Major conflicts around the world share an important
character — the growing brutality of systemic sexual
violence. The most recent experience of Yazidi women,
which Ms. Nadia Murad personified this morning, is a
testimony to that.
In recognizing the bravery of Ms. Nadia Murad
and the determination and perseverance of Dr. Denis
Mukwege, the Nobel Committee has helped to draw
international attention to this growing tragedy. The
Security Council needs to do its part. The United
Nations system as a whole needs to play its part. It
was more than 10 years ago that the Council adopted
resolution 1820 (2008), recognizing sexual violence as
a weapon and tactic of war. Rape and other forms of
sexual violence can constitute a war crime and a crime
against humanity. As the Secretary-General informed us
this morning, in spite of a strong normative framework
the facts on the ground have not changed much.
By sharing their experiences with us, Ms. Nadia
Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege inspire us to act. Their
ask is simple. The United Nations needs to respond
to what Ms. Amal Clooney said in her briefing to
the Council this morning. We are facing an epidemic
of sexual violence in conflict. Justice is the antidote.
United Nations peace operations need to have the
strongest possible emphasis on the protection of civilians
in their mandate. The prevention of sexual violence
must be given absolute priority within enhanced peace
operations mandates. That must be explicit. It cannot be
an optional extra.
If peace operations are mandated to explicitly
prevent sexual violence, they should be resourced to
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

be successful. Expecting peace operations to do more
and more with less and less is wrong and morally
indefensible. If peace operations are to be strong enough
to prevent systemic sexual violence, peacekeepers
should possess the skills and the resources. Those
include specialized medical support for victims of
sexual violence in conflict, access to safe areas and
especially support across the United Nations system.
Missions must be able to record and document sexual
violence. Resourcing peace operations sufficiently will
make them fit for purpose in responding to conflicts
where sexual violence is increasingly becoming a
weapon of war.
The Security Council needs to bring systematic
sexual violence into its sanctions regime. Evidence and
documentation are so vital to that. Systematic sexual
violence often continues well into the post-conflict
phase. Nothing makes the case for women to be at the
peace table more powerfully than that. Women need to
in peace processes, at the peace table and in all phases
of peacebuilding.
This morning all the briefers told us about the
urgent need for a resolute international response.
Resolution 2467 (2019), just adopted by the Council,
is a great step forward. The United Nations system as
a whole can and must go much further. We must be on
the right side of history.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on convening
this highly relevant and timely debate, as well as the
Franco-German joint presidencies for bringing to the
fore the women and peace and security agenda.
Greece welcomes the adoption of resolution 2467
(2019) today and aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union. Please allow me
to make the following remarks in my national capacity.
During the past decade, the international community
has witnessed the systematic use of sexual violence
by State and non-State actors as tactics of war and
terrorism — that is to say, as part of a broader strategy
of warfare that poses serious threats to international
peace and security. Conflict-related crimes against
sexual freedom and determination — most often
perpetrated against, but not limited to, women and
girls — are deeply rooted in and exacerbated by gender

S/PV. 8514

stereotypes and discriminatory perceptions of gender
roles that cumulatively result in gender inequalities
that are usually of a structural nature within societies.
In that vein, efforts to prevent and respond to conflictrelated sexual violence should be collective, focusing
on the accountability of the perpetrators, as well as on
the empowerment of the surviving victims. Therefore,
political will to try or extradite alleged perpetrators, as
well as to enhance effective and timely international
judicial cooperation in criminal matters, is of
paramount importance.
Additionally, comprehensive education, capacitybuilding and awareness-raising on the particular
aspects of conflict-related sexual violence and its
frequent use as a tactic of war and terrorism are
deemed to be extremely beneficial in order to end
impunity. Needless to say, such efforts should place
particular focus on the engagement of men and boys as
agents of gender-sensitive, peaceful change. A holistic
perspective of justice and accountability mechanisms
calls for a survivor-centred strategic approach to fight
against conflict-related sexual violence. In doing so the
international community and States should encourage
voices coming from civil society and women’s
organizations, including grass-roots organizations.
A survivor-centred approach should incorporate
a robust gender perspective, coherently mainstreamed
across the whole spectrum of activities at the national,
regional and international levels. To that end, Greece
recently adopted a law on the promotion of substantial
gender equality, and the prevention and combating of
gender-based violence. The law calls for a whole-ofGovernment approach to gender mainstreaming in
order to integrate a gender culture in public governance
and administration, including the justice sector. In that
regard, Greece is currently in the process of drafting
its national action plan on women, peace and security,
which coherently brings together all aspects of its
relevant national policies.
In conclusion, Greece reiterates its readiness to
cooperate constructively with the United Nations
institutions and Member States in fighting conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence and in
working towards the enhancement of substantial gender
equality — that is to say, the equality of all human
beings — so that no one is left behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.

19-1175653/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal): I would like to
thank the German presidency of the Security Council
for convening today’s open debate on this very
important issue.
Portugal aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
with that delivered earlier by the representative of
Canada on behalf of 55 countries.
Portugal greatly values that the Council continues
to pay attention to and acts upon the women and peace
and security agenda, an essential tool for preventing
conflict and ensuring more effective responses to
today’s complex crises. We fully agree that we need to
do more to prevent sexual violence in conflict. In that
sense, we commend today’s adoption of resolution 2467
(2019), with its survivor-centred approach that helps
shift the stigma of sexual violence from the victims to
the perpetrators, as well as the fact that the resolution
addresses the importance of prevention to the great
challenges faced by women and girls, in particular,
sexual violence in conflict. Moreover, we need to ensure
that victims of violence, including sexual violence,
have the right to protection and reparation, and that the
perpetrators are held accountable.
Portugal has been implementing resolution 1325
(2000) since the development of our first national
action plan, in 2009. In this regard, allow me to
highlight that our third national action plan — for the
term 2019-2022 — includes a strategic goal to protect
the human rights of women and girls and punishes
all forms of violence against them, including sexual
violence. Within this goal, our target is to integrate
the women and peace and security agenda and gender
equality, including violence against women and girls,
sexual violence and human trafficking, into our legal
and judicial cooperation in the context of implementing
resolution 2106 (2013). We also seek to promote and
support all activities related to investigation and
punishment of all cases of violations against women
and girls in conflict and post-conflict situations and
humanitarian crises.
Accordingly, we recognize that the promotion of
gender-equality and non-discrimination perspectives
within the various fields of public policy and
development cooperation is imperative if we are to
ensure the full enjoyment of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms for everyone. Furthermore, we
consider it to be of the utmost importance enhancing
54/103

23/04/2019

training to military- and security-forces personnel
on issues related to human rights, international
humanitarian law, gender equality and violence against
women and girls, including on sexual violence and
gender-based violence, not the least of which is the
institutionalization of gender advisers in all branches
of the armed forces.
In conclusion, let me underline that preventing
sexual violence in conflict is possible only if all
stakeholders are involved in finding durable solutions.
In this regard, it is essential to work closely with civil
society, as was underlined by our distinguished briefers
this morning. In fact, civil society organizations
often play an instrumental role in ensuring the full
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda, including by complementing the work done by
military, security and civilian personnel in conflict and
post-conflict settings and in situations of emergency.
They are often essential elements in preventing and
reporting crimes, alerting the international community
to such crimes, restoring the internal stability of the
States, supporting the reconstruction of countries and
helping the population to recover.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): First, I would like to
convey our strong condemnation of the heinous and
reprehensible terrorist attacks against worshippers and
civilians in Sri Lanka and express our solidarity with
the people and the Government of that country.
Next, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today’s important debate and express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his remarks.
We commend the work of Special Representative Patten
and the valuable efforts of the Team of Experts on the
Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict. We also
extend our appreciation to our briefers today.
As we mark the tenth anniversary of the mandate
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, we acknowledge the
progress that has been achieved within the United
Nations system in terms of combating sexual violence.
The Security Council deserves special credit for
connecting the concepts of sexual violence and
impunity to international peace and security, passing
numerous resolutions and addressing the issue in
various meetings. In this respect, we also welcome the
adoption today of resolution 2467 (2019), which Turkey
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

co-sponsored. Nevertheless, the Secretary-General’s
most recent report to the Council (S/2019/280) reveals
the fact that sexual violence continues to be a tactic of
war and is widespread, particularly in armed conflicts,
including their early stages and in their aftermath. The
report also confirms the nexus among sexual violence,
human trafficking, terrorism and forced displacement.
Sexual violence has consequences for all
affected — women and girls, men and boys. In addition
to its devastating impact on survivors, it has a broad
and long-lasting effect on communities and States as
whole entities for generations. Our responsibility must
be to bring justice, recognition and reparations to the
survivors of these horrendous crimes. The SecretaryGeneral rightly identifies accountability for crimes of
conflict-related sexual violence as a key element of his
prevention strategy.
Unfortunately, in conflicts, national judicial and
security systems are often paralysed by incapacity,
resulting in impunity. The absence of efficient criminal
procedures and institutional capacity is common.
Even when legislation and institutions are in place, a
selective application of laws and lack of accountability
often prevails. Accordingly, victims are discouraged
from seeking civil remedies and a culture of impunity
prevails. To address this problem, comprehensive
solutions combining support for the supremacy of
the rule of law and building judicial and security
institutions should be sought. Gaps in both legislation
and implementation must be addressed. Impunity must
come to an end for both perpetrators and those at the
top of the chain of command.
The punishment of a crime often serves as the
most important deterrent. To address sexual violence
during conflicts and ensure that these crimes can
be prosecuted in the post-conflict phase, necessary
documentation and evidence must be gathered while
the conflict is ongoing. The United Nations, other
international organizations, humanitarian agencies and
civil society have an important task in this respect. We
welcome the establishment and the ongoing work of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
for Syria, the Independent Investigative Mechanism for
Myanmar and the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh. International justice mechanisms are essential,
particularly when sexual violence in the form of
systematic rape and forced pregnancies is used as a
tactic of war. Their work complements those of national

S/PV. 8514

systems in the fight against the culture of impunity,
especially in post-conflict settings.
We concur with the Secretary-General that
achieving gender equality, the empowerment of women
and girls and the recognition of their human rights
are the essential steps for prevention and addressing
impunity. This will also help further our agenda on
women and peace and security. Ending violence against
women is a part of this effort. The Council of Europe’s
Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence
Against Women, known as the Istanbul Convention,
stands out as a landmark document in this regard.
Turkey is committed to fostering the objectives of the
Convention and stands ready to share its experiences in
its implementation.
As the conflict in Syria enters its ninth year, millions
of Syrians, particularly women and girls, continue to
live under the threat of sexual violence from various
parties on the ground. The horrific acts of sexual
violence perpetrated by the Syrian regime, especially
during arrest, detention and at checkpoints, have
been documented in various United Nations reports.
As one of Syria’s neighbours, and a country with an
open-door policy towards the Syrians fleeing war and
violence at home, Turkey now hosts over 3.5 million
Syrians, 1.6 million of whom are women. Empowering
Syrian women and youth and fostering self-reliance in
them, with zero tolerance for sexual and gender-based
violence, is one of the tenets of our policy, which is
why we exert every effort to provide security and safety
for them, including through partnerships with United
Nations Fund for Population Activities.
The findings on the situation of the Rohingya in
Myanmar in the Secretary-General’s report are once
again quite disturbing. The international community
expects the Government of Myanmar to create the
necessary conditions for peaceful coexistence in
Rakhine state and the safe return of refugees. That
requires ending all types of violence, including sexual
violence; giving humanitarian agencies immediate
and unhindered access to populations in need; and
implementing international humanitarian and human
rights law in Rakhine state.
We acknowledge the signing of the joint
communiqué between the Government of Myanmar
and the United Nations in December 2018 as a good
step in that direction. We expect its full and swift
implementation, including the commitments regarding

19-1175655/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

23/04/2019

accountability for conflict-related sexual violence
allegedly perpetrated by the Myanmar Armed Forces
and border guards. Bringing the alleged perpetrators of
sexual and other violence to justice will also be of critical
importance to putting an end to that vicious cycle.

that regard, Japan has supported United Nations action
projects, including projects that respond to the needs of
children born as a result of rape and their mothers in
Iraq and that improve access to justice by survivors of
sexual violence in Jordan.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our full
support for international, regional and national efforts
to end conflict-related sexual violence and respond to
its consequences.

Thirdly, in order to prevent and deter sexual
violence by addressing its root causes, including gender
inequality, we need to boost our efforts to promote
gender equality and the economic empowerment of
women. We must also acknowledge that women are
active peacebuilders and safeguards against violent
extremism — they are not just victims of conflict.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to thank the
presidency of Germany for convening this meeting and
welcome the adoption this morning of resolution 2467
(2019), which we co-sponsored.
We cannot tolerate any sexual violence in conflict.
Japan has consistently supported the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. We highly appreciate the
efforts taken by Special Representative Patten to seek
commitments from relevant Governments and parties
through tenacious negotiations to end sexual violence
in conflict, which have led to a number of frameworks
of cooperation and joint communiqués with various
Governments and entities.
In order to prevent and respond to sexual violence
in conflict, the international community should
strengthen its efforts in the following three areas.
First, ensuring accountability for perpetrators
and justice for survivors is key to the prevention and
deterrence of future crimes. If perpetrators are not
prosecuted or if they still hold power, sexual violence
cannot be put to rest, which leads to distrust in the
Government. Japan has, since 2014, financially
supported the work of the Team of Experts on the Rule of
Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic,
Somalia and Iraq. The Team of Experts works closely
with the Governments of those countries, as well as
United Nations missions and country teams, to support
investigation and prosecution, legislative reform and
capacity-building of judicial and security authorities.
Secondly, taking a survivor-centred approach is
important in responding to sexual violence in conflict.
Japan believes that the human security approach, which
is people-centred, comprehensive and context-specific
and focuses on prevention, is valuable in that context. In
56/103

In that connection, Japan has supported UNWomen projects in Kenya, Egypt, Iraq and Jordan to
promote women’s empowerment at the community
level through training against violent radicalization and
cash-for-work programmes. Those projects encourage
women to be confident, active players in protecting
their communities from violent extremist influences.
Under the leadership of Prime Minister Abe,
Japan hosted the fifth World Assembly for Women
last month to create a society in which women shine.
The participants discussed women’s participation in
conflict prevention, peacebuilding and post-conflict
recovery and recognized that all stakeholders, including
Government and civil society, should work together to
promote that agenda. As President of the Group of 20
(G-20) this year, Japan will relay the World Assembly
for Women discussion to G-20 members at the Osaka
summit, at which women’s economic empowerment
will be one of the topics of discussion.
Since the delegation of the Republic of Korea
mentioned the issue of comfort women in his statement
earlier, I am obliged to address the issue at this meeting.
The Government of Japan has been sincerely dealing
with that issue for a long period of time. In addition, as a
result of considerable diplomatic efforts, Japan and the
Republic of Korea reached an agreement in December
2015. With that agreement, both countries confirmed
that the issue of comfort women was resolved finally
and irreversibly. It is of great importance that the
agreement be steadily implemented by both sides.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let
me start by commending Germany, as well as France,
for their excellent stewardship with regard to the
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

women and peace and security agenda during the past
two months.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands fully aligns itself
with the statement to be delivered by the observer of
the European Union and the statement delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of 55 countries.
The pertinent briefings of the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative show that addressing
that topic is as important today as ever. We applaud
their leadership and want to reiterate our full support
for Ms. Patten and her mandate. In addition, we wish
to express our appreciation for Dr. Denis Mukwege,
Ms. Nadia Murad, Ms. Inas Miloud and Ms. Amal
Clooney for sharing their experience and expertise on
that topic.
Today, I will focus on accountability, addressing,
first, the role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC); secondly, sanctions; and thirdly, the survivorcentred approach, including sexual and reproductive
health and rights.
First, enhanced accountability would send a strong
and preventative signal to perpetrators and protect
the safety and lives of millions of women, girls, men
and boys in conflict areas. A coherent accountability
approach to conflict-related sexual violence is important
and the primary responsibility for accountability rests
with the State. When States are unable or unwilling to
prosecute, the ICC can play an important role in holding
perpetrators accountable. We remind the Council of its
power to refer situations, such as the situations in Syria
and Myanmar, to the ICC and we call upon States to
become a party to the Rome Statute of the ICC.
Secondly, sanctions can contribute to the fight
against impunity and be a form of deterrence and
prevention. Last October, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands initiated an Arria formula meeting, at which
the Council discussed ways in which sanctions could
contribute to moving from a culture of impunity to a
culture of deterrence. Allow me to highlight three main
takeaways. They are in line with the recommendations
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/280),
which we strongly support.
To start with, the Council should systematically
and explicitly incorporate and apply sexual violence
as a stand-alone designation criterion in sanctions
regimes. We call upon all Council members to extend
that practice to all remaining relevant sanctions regimes

S/PV. 8514

and to ensure adequate follow-up. Furthermore,
the cooperation and interaction among sanctions
committees, panels and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General should be further strengthened.
It is important for the Council to include sexual
violence in its deliberations on country-specific
situations. In December, we facilitated the briefing by
Special Representative Patten to the Council on sexual
violence in Bentiu, South Sudan (see S/PV.8431). Such
briefings, as well as briefings to Sanctions Committees,
should become the rule rather than the exception. Lastly,
the sanctions architecture should be better linked to the
findings in the Secretary-General’s report, which has
the same list of parties as last year’s. Where no specific
sanctions regimes exist yet, the Council should explore
innovative ways to use sanctions following the listings
in the annex.
My third point is about the survivor-centred
approach. Taking a survivor-centred approach means
listening to survivors and respecting their rights, wishes
and needs while taking into account their privacy and
confidentiality. Sexual violence is aimed at wrecking
communities, and it is essential to address survivors’
needs if communities are to be rebuilt. To enable
survivors to choose freely, we should support them with
comprehensive information and services, including
those related to sexual and reproductive health and
rights, safe abortion and mental health and psychosocial
support, as guaranteed by international humanitarian
and human rights law. In that regard, we fully support
the statement by the representative of France following
the vote on resolution 2467 (2019). We should provide
survivors with both protection and legal action. I am
thinking not only about the survivors of sexual violence
in South Sudan whom I mentioned earlier, but also
about Yezidi women and girls, and about the Rohingya
women and girls I met during the Security Council
visit to Bangladesh and Myanmar almost a year ago
today. The Security Council has raised expectations
and should follow through on them, and justice is
at the top of the list. In that regard, we reiterate our
full support to the United Nations Investigative Team
to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and to the
Myanmar investigative mechanism that will soon start
its important work.
In conclusion, I should like to quote Ms. Nadia
Murad on her acceptance of the Nobel Peace Prize:

19-1175657/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

“Thank you very much for this honour, but the
fact remains that the only prize in the world that can
restore our dignity is justice and the prosecution
of criminals.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I am delivering my
remarks on behalf of Latvia, Lithuania and my
own country, Estonia. We also align ourselves with
the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the
European Union.
First of all, we should mobilize our efforts to
achieve full gender equality in law and in practice. We
should address the gender stereotypes that are deeply
embedded in society and that often have an unconscious
impact on our actions. To counter those stereotypes,
women must be able to fully and effectively participate
in political, economic and social life. In that context, I
would like to commend the initiative of the Framework
of Cooperation signed in 2018 between the Office of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Committee
on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination
Against Women.
Secondly, we must focus on accountability. We
must admit that despite increased attention from
the international community, impunity remains a
widespread and even common practice. Sexual violence
committed in wartime is one of the least reported crimes.
The survivors of violence are often further punished
with rejection and stigma. In ensuring accountability,
we want to stress the role of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The Rome Statute of the ICC provides
the international community with an excellent tool for
putting an end to impunity for sexual and gender-based
crimes, and we want to encourage all States that have
not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute and ensure
that their national laws fully incorporate the Rome
Statute crimes.
Thirdly, we should address the issue of the
implementation of existing commitments. We agree with
the Secretary-General that there are ways to address
the existing gaps in the compliance system and to put
those issues on the Security Council’s agenda. With
regard to our implementation of our own commitments,
all three of our countries have taken steps to prepare
and advance national action plans on women and peace
and security. Latvia is about to start preparing its first
58/103

23/04/2019

national action plan, which will include action based
on domestic policy as well as through multilateral
and bilateral cooperation. Lithuania is finalizing its
second national action plan for the period from 2020
to 2024, and Estonia is currently working on its third
national action plan for the same period, focusing on
the empowerment of women and girls in conflict and
post-conflict situations as well as on raising awareness
on conflict-related sexual violence.
Estonia is also contributing financially to the
activities of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the United Nations Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, and to the work of the ICC Trust Fund
for Victims. Lithuania has been contributing to the
Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund, which focuses
on directly supporting local women’s organizations
engaged in conflict-affected areas, since it was
launched. During its current presidency of the Arms
Trade Treaty (ATT) Latvia has prioritized the issue of
arms-related gender-based violence. The ATT makes a
critical contribution to global efforts to address genderbased violence affected by the illicit proliferation and
misuse of arms, but it is clear that much more work and
political will is needed to address this issue, including
through arms export assessments.
I would also like to stress the crucial role of civil
society, particularly women’s organizations, in fighting
sexual and gender-based crimes through prevention and
evidence-gathering, as well as by providing assistance
to survivors. In this connection, Lithuania organized
a three-day conference for international experts in
November 2018 on the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda, with the aim of building
the capacities and enhancing the abilities of civilsociety organizations. Additionally, at a side event
organized by Estonia in March during the sixty-fourth
session of the Commission on the Status of Women,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Pramila Patten, gave many interesting examples
of the technological opportunities that can be used
to help survivors. As stigmatization is almost always
part and parcel of victimization in sexual violence,
it would be interesting to hear any recommendations
the Special Representative may have for States on
how they can tackle this particular challenge with
technological means.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to thank
Germany for convening today’s debate and all the
briefers for their powerful statements. I particularly
welcome the fact that Pramila Patten, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, whose work
we strongly support, is still with us at this stage in the
day listening to the debate. I thank her for being here.
As war is fundamentally about power and the abuse
of power, so too is sexual violence. Sexual violence
is rooted in women’s political, social and economic
exclusion and insecurity. It is an abuse of power rooted
in historical power imbalances, primarily between men
and women. To eliminate the scourge of sexual and
gender-based violence, our first and most fundamental
task must be achieving gender equality at every level.
Ireland recently concluded two years as Chair of the
Commission on the Status of Women (CSW), working
on precisely that task — progress towards gender
equality and the empowerment of all women and girls.
The debates at the Commission on the Status of Women
are as intense and polarized as any here in the Security
Council. No one should be under any illusion about
the fact that the efforts to balance the power relations
between men and women are deeply, deeply political,
and today’s debate is clearly no less so.
I am proud that the CSW’s recent conclusions
(E/CN.6/2019/L.3) contain vital language on the need
to address the effects of armed conflict and postconflict situations on women and girls, including
victims and survivors of sexual violence. We must keep
working, doggedly and with determination, to build the
structures, in language and in laws, that can bring an
end to sexual violence. Resolution 2467 (2019), adopted
today, is a step on the road, but it is only one step, and
we share the regret expressed by the representatives of
Belgium, France, South Africa, the Netherlands and
other countries that the text did not include references
to sexual and reproductive health-care services for the
victims and survivors of sexual violence in conflict.
As the French Ambassador said, that is not the end of
the road, and we believe that the Security Council must
assume its responsibility and recognize such needs.
We should be mindful too that gender-based
violence affects not just women and girls but also men,
boys and members of sexual and gender minorities.
Poverty, displacement and vulnerability increase the
risk of sexual violence, especially for those in flight.
We see that dynamic of power and vulnerability playing
out again and again.

S/PV. 8514

Gender equality is at the heart of Ireland’s foreign,
development and humanitarian policies. This year
in Ireland we have already increased our funding
to preventing gender-based violence in conflictaffected and fragile States by more than one third.
Our determination in such work comes not only from
conviction but also from lived experience. Northern
Ireland lived that experience intensely. For instance,
we saw there that the decommissioning of weapons,
demobilization of paramilitary groups and growing
confidence in the police service greatly reduced the
threat of firearms in domestic violence situations. One
form of violence stops with the other.
In partnership with the International Rescue
Committee (IRC), in 2016 Ireland established the
world’s first response mechanism dedicated solely to
gender-based violence programming. We have seen
how a survivor-based response saves the lives of women
and girls every day. Our support has helped survivors
such as Nyamal, one of millions displaced in South
Sudan as conflict swept through her village. Nyamal
was separated from her family and in the chaos that
followed she was gang-raped. She was able to access
a safe space for women and girls, where she received
psychosocial support and medical services. But for
Nyamal, like millions of other survivors, the impact and
trauma of sexual violence endured, including through
social stigma. After she discovered she was pregnant,
Nyamal was rejected by her family. When the baby was
born, the IRC worked with local women leaders, who
intervened in Nyamal’s family and she was eventually
reintegrated. The example of Nyamal demonstrates not
just the complexity and deep impact of sexual violence
but also how addressing harmful, embedded cultural
norms play an important role in recovery. Support to
Nyamal would not have been possible without working
with a local partner. We must do everything we can to
increase our support to local organizations and to work
with civil society, in particular human rights defenders.
In our peacekeeping work, Ireland is also proactive.
As seasoned peacekeepers, our defence forces regularly
conduct patrols with mixed gender teams around camps
where young women and girls are collecting firewood
or water. It is a small practical example of the kind of
gender-sensitive approach that should be integrated
at every level of our work. This year, Ireland will
conduct training for peacekeeping contingents in the
investigation of conflict-related sexual and gender-

19-1175659/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

based violence for the African Union, the United
Nations and NATO partners.
We provide support to mechanisms such as the
International Impartial and Independent Mechanism
in Syria and for the work of Justice Rapid Response
in ensuring that gender expertise be made available in
the investigation of serious human rights violations.
We also strongly support efforts by the Security
Council to bolster the use of conflict-related sexual
violence as a criterion for imposing sanctions and for
greater alignment across thematic and country-specific
sanctions regimes.
Put simply, the horrific scale of ongoing conflictrelated sexual violence is a stain on our common
humanity. We have to close the accountability gap with
determination and with unashamed zero tolerance. For
our part, as an aspiring elected member of the Security
Council for the period 2021-2022, Ireland will continue
to work for gender equality and aim to break down the
power imbalances we see as being at the heart of such
violence. We will support bringing that agenda again
to this table.
We are listening carefully to survivors about their
needs, which naturally include sexual and reproductive
health-care services. We want to see women in all
aspects of peacekeeping and peacebuilding. It is there
that we as women belong and where we will make a
difference if we are allowed to get on with the task.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Mr. Mardini: I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate and
all the briefers for their compelling interventions and
courageous dedication.
In the work of the International Committee of
the Red Cross (ICRC) with affected communities in
armed conflict, sexual violence has been highlighted
as a top concern by young women in particular. Other
groups have named it among their major fears alongside
community tensions, loss of means and displacement.
Political attention on sexual violence has been
raised to the highest levels. The burning question now
is how it can compel a collective response, focusing
on the affected population, including those at risk of
sexual violence.
60/103

23/04/2019

On behalf of the ICRC, a neutral, impartial and
independent humanitarian organization, today I wish
to outline three levels where there are challenges
and opportunities to work together among States,
humanitarian actors and other partners.
First, at the level of victims and survivors, there
is a lack of support in addressing medical care, mental
health, shelter, economic insecurity and exclusion.
We ask those present in their respective capacities to
support such needs and the acceptance of survivors.
One concrete request we have is to provide safe and
confidential access to health care to prevent further
risks to survivors who come forward.
For our part, at the level of victims and survivors,
the ICRC supports health centres in the Central African
Republic and Mali through training, financial and
technical assistance.
Secondly, at the community level, we see challenges
stemming from the lack of information on available
services, deterioration of safety leading to an increased
risk of sexual violence, and harmful coping strategies
for protection or income generation. We request
support for risk reduction. We ask for support for social
cohesion among community members or for economic
means as alternatives to harmful coping strategies.
For the ICRC’s part, in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of Congo and
Nigeria the communities themselves identify problems,
causes, consequences and capacities. Guided by the
communities, as experts of their own situation, we work
hand in hand with them on the solutions they propose to
reduce risk exposure.
Thirdly, at the State and institutional level, we see
challenges arising from the inadequate criminalization
of sexual violence and a lack of State and local capacity
to respond. Weak chains of command, poor judicial
systems and ineffective measures to reduce sexual
violence in detention create further obstacles.
Together, we must create and safeguard a
humanitarian environment that prevents sexual violence.
That is possible by establishing adequate normative
frameworks, building the capacity of judicial bodies
and ensuring respect for international humanitarian law
and other bodies of law. The 1949 Geneva Conventions
were the first treaties to prohibit rape and other forms
of sexual violence in armed conflict.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

For our part, the ICRC will continue to engage
with all parties to armed conflict to ensure respect
for international humanitarian law. We will continue
to lend technical expertise to lawmakers and military
officials and to support structures to address sexual
violence, including in detention.
Let us work together to respond on those three
levels — victim/survivor, community and State. As
we mark the seventieth anniversary of the Geneva
Conventions this year, let us also recall its spirit to
uphold human dignity in the midst of armed conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Marinaki.
Ms. Marinaki: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
The candidate countries Turkey, North Macedonia,
Montenegro and Albania; the country of the Stabilization
and Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine and the Republic
of Moldova, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union (EU) welcomes the
Franco-German joint presidency’s determination to
bring the women and peace and security agenda into
the limelight of the Council and the international
community at large. This is in line with the initiatives
implemented by other EU member States during their
recent mandates in the Council. The adoption today
of resolution 2467 (2019), on conflict-related sexual
violence, is a positive step forward and we are fully
committed to playing our part in its full implementation.
Allow me to extend our gratitude to today’s briefers,
whose actions and commitment are an inspiration to
all of us. On this tenth anniversary of the mandate of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict, we also thank Special
Representative Pramila Patten for her dedication and
we reiterate our full support for her mandate.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/280) is
a dispiriting read, and we are sad to have to concur with
his observation that, despite some progress, impunity
for the perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence
continues to be the norm in many parts of the world.
Strengthening proper accountability for that crime is
crucial. We reiterate our call on the Security Council to
systematically and explicitly include and apply sexual
violence as a designation criterion within the relevant
United Nations sanctions regimes, particularly in cases

S/PV. 8514

in which regimes overlap with perpetrators mentioned
in the report of the Secretary-General.
Prevention, protection and prosecution should
be the driving forces of all efforts. With regard to
prevention, we reiterate the importance of promoting
a culture of full gender-equality and women’s
empowerment; supporting women’s and communitybased organizations; boosting women’s participation
in political, economic and social decision-making and
peace processes; properly including men and boys
and training them to become gender champions; and
adopting national action plans for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), as key measures to prevent
conflict-related sexual violence.
Concerning protection, we insist on the urgency
of ensuring full access to comprehensive, coordinated
and quality services, including sexual and reproductive
health care, psychological support and legal
counselling, as well as relief and recovery programmes
for all survivors, without discrimination based on any
grounds, including sex, race, ethnic or social origin,
religion or belief, political or any other opinion,
disability, age, sexual orientation or gender identity.
With regard to prosecution, we recall the need
to ensure adequate investigation and prosecution
through the collection of reliable sex-disaggregated
data, facilitate access to justice for survivors and
ensure specific protection to and psychological
support for witnesses. In that context, we emphasize
the significant progress in international justice made
by the International Criminal Court (ICC), as well as
other non-permanent international criminal tribunals
and similar courts in combating conflict-related sexual
violence. The ICC’s jurisdiction is complementary
to that of States, and the primary responsibility for
bringing perpetrators to justice resides with States.
We also recognize and support the important
contribution of civil society, women’s organizations
and women human rights defenders who challenge
violent gender norms, prevent sexual and genderbased violence and provide medical and psychological
services to communities. We are particularly concerned
about the risks and harm faced by mothers and their
children born as the result of sexual violence, and
would welcome the briefers’ recommendations on how
to better prevent and address such situations. We also
note that, according to the report of the SecretaryGeneral, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex

19-1175661/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

individuals are sometimes specifically targeted with
sexual violence in conflict, and we call on the Council
to give due attention to that issue.
In the spirit of the Secretary-General’s
recommendations, the European Union has taken
concrete actions to prevent and respond to conflictrelated sexual violence based on a holistic approach. I
refer to the written version of my statement circulated
in the Chamber, which details those actions, including
the encouraging examples of such cooperation in
the Western Balkans, the Caucasus, Iraq, Syria and
Afghanistan, as well as the joint United NationsEU Spotlight Initiative, which we invite all United
Nations Member States to join. The United Nations can
continue to rely on the full engagement and support of
the European Union to achieve our shared goals and
help millions of girls and women feel safe and free to
realize their full potential.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Ms. Hutchinson: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to address the Security Council as the
NATO Secretary General’s Special Representative for
Women, Peace and Security. I would also like to thank
this morning’s briefers for their incredibly moving and
powerful statements. I especially thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and her team for all the work that
they do.
This year NATO is celebrating its seventieth
anniversary, which provides an opportunity not only to
reflect on its achievements, but also to look to the future.
NATO’s core mission over the past 70 years has been to
closely safeguard the fundamental rights of democracy,
individual liberty and the rule of law — themes that
resonate so clearly with the women and peace and
security agenda and underscore our work on the
protection of civilians. The adoption of the women
and peace and security resolutions and the work of the
Council have established a new course in understanding
and responding to the grievous, systematic sexual
abuse of women and girls in and around conflict.
Awareness that conflict-related sexual violence affects
not only women and girls, but entire communities, is
now entrenched in our collective thinking.
Last year, NATO Heads of State and Governments
endorsed a new policy and action plan on women, peace
and security, introducing our guiding principles of
62/103

23/04/2019

integration, inclusiveness and integrity. Those collective
principles provide a connective tissue linking security,
stability and protective environments, and frame our
approach to protection through the kaleidoscope of
women and peace and security. For NATO, that means
that there can be no protection without participation
because, at its root, sexual violence is a gendered issue.
Sexual violence arises from fundamental gender
inequalities. Therefore, focusing on solely protective
and preventative solutions is limited and insufficient.
In order to effectively combat sexual violence, we
must address and dismantle all obstacles that impede
women’s full participation in peace and security,
including in peace processes. Eradicating sexual
violence in conflict and focusing on operationally
effective responses to that appalling abuse of women
and girls is critical, but it should not take place at the
expense of the empowerment of women.
The long-term destructive nature of conflictrelated sexual violence, as well as its effect on entire
communities, continues to pose significant threats to
global peace and security. For NATO, that has become
central to its efforts to protect civilians in its missions
and operations.
In Afghanistan, we are working closely with the
Ministries of the Interior and Defence to improve their
efforts to tackle sexual violence. Our work is helping
to increase the awareness of the Afghan authorities and
bolster their efforts to identify and investigate acts of
sexual violence.
In Kosovo, we are focusing on community
outreach and ensuring that the Kosovar population
understands NATO’s role in combating conflict-related
sexual violence.
In Iraq, we are working with the military medical
school to increase awareness of conflict-related sexual
violence, with a particular focus on providing advice
to medical personnel on how to work with victims and
survivors and how to put effective prevention strategies
into action.
Finally, at NATO headquarters, we are developing
a new handbook for commanders and operational
planners as a reference tool for critical thinking and
decision-making in military crisis situations and to
guide them as they put in place the actions required to
prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

But there is so much more we can do, because,
despite our best efforts, the efforts of the international
community, the plethora of attention and the resolutions,
commitments, endorsements and financing, women
constantly remain at risk and subject to heinous
brutality around the world.
While the Alliance has long held the women and
peace and security principles as an innate element of
our core tasks, on this seventieth anniversary year
we pledge to do even more to address conflict-related
sexual violence within our operational mandates and we
will continue, wherever we are deployed, to create the
conditions for security that will allow women and girls
to live free from abuse and violence. Only in that way
will we fulfil our international obligations to prevent
the threat of violence and protect those most in need.
Ultimately, in tackling sexual violence against women
and girls, we do more than help individual victims;
we set a tone for respecting fundamental dignities and
human rights, and by doing that we can lay a foundation
for lasting stability.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan thanks
the German presidency for highlighting our attention
on preventing conflict-related sexual violence. We
commend Secretary-General Guterres for the insights
drawn from his annual report (S/2019/280) and Special
Representative Patten for the overview of her mandate
and work. We also thank the Nobel Peace Prize laureates
and other briefers for their passionate plea to us, as well
as their horrifying analyses of that scourge in different
parts of the world.
Kazakhstan endorses the recommendations
contained in the Secretary-General’s annual report.
Despite the robust normative framework and the
progress achieved, we need to collectively reflect on
how to prevent conflict-related sexual violence from
increasing at the alarmingly high levels as it presently
does. At the same time, we have to take measures
to ensure that sexual violence is not used as a tactic
of war or aggravated by human trafficking, which
can become a source of income for armed groups,
terrorist organizations and transnational organized
crime networks.
That scourge requires concerted and wellcoordinated cross-national interventions with a One
United Nations approach. All efforts of the United

S/PV. 8514

Nations Action Against Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict require improved coordination
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL and regional and subregional organizations.
We also need initiatives and cooperation for prevention,
information-sharing and documentation, assistance for
victims, legal support, the training of security forces,
new orientations for the legal, judiciary and criminal
justice systems and exchanges of best practices in
combating sexual violence.
Our deliberations today make it clear that the
international community should ensure accountability
for sexual violence in conflict and bring a resolute end to
impunity. The Security Council sanctions committees
should therefore include, where appropriate, sexual
violence as a designated criterion for sanctions against
individuals and organized networks, including non-State
parties to conflicts. Regional organizations and
Member States, which have the primary responsibility
for responding to sexual violence and strengthening
the law enforcement system, should harmonize their
national legislations with United Nations standards.
Conflict-related sexual violence affects every
aspect of a survivor’s life and leads to the stigmatization
of victims and the devastation of physical and economic
security, especially of displaced and rural women.
We therefore need a survivor-centred approach,
which should include full, competent and speedy
psychological support, health care, legal assistance
and socioeconomic reintegration. Cooperation with
religious leaders, civil society and local communities
is most important if we want to change extremist
narratives, shift the stigma of sexual violence to the
perpetrators, promote education and create awareness
around the empowerment of women.
Kazakhstan strongly believes that preventing
sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers should
be an absolute priority, along with the United Nations
zero-tolerance policy on such offences. All troops and
police contingents should have full training prior to and
during deployment. We support the greater recruitment
of well-qualified women military and police officers
and the deployment of women protection advisers to
peacekeeping missions.
Our country integrates all elements of the women
and peace and security agenda, including on conflictrelated sexual violence, in our national legislation, with

19-1175663/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

new strong pro-women policies. Training on gender
equality for the armed and security forces and women’s
deployment in United Nations peacekeeping operations
are priorities for Kazakhstan’s national peacekeeping
training centre.
At the regional level, we are supporting
Afghanistan with a multidimensional approach of
conflict prevention, accompanied by humanitarian and
development assistance, by strengthening the security
and development nexus. At the international level, we
are contributing to the United Nations Trust Fund to
End Violence against Women, which funds projects in
post-conflict settings.
To conclude, we welcome today’s adoption of the
milestone resolution 2467 (2019) and are pleased to
inform the Council that Kazakhstan will today present
our concrete pledges to accelerate our implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda by the
anniversary in 2020 at the high-level companion event,
hosted by Germany and the United Kingdom. We
will be fully engaged, together with the international
community, in promoting the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the new agenda for peace
to protect women’s dignity and gender empowerment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Chidiac (Lebanon) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate of
the Security Council on a theme that deeply affects
all of humankind, our collective conscience and
human values.
We also thank all the briefers for their remarks and
their commitment.
On this occasion, we welcome the presence among
us of the man who repairs women, Dr. Mukwege, and
the women who speak on behalf of all of us, Ms. Nadia
Murad and Ms. Inas Miloud.
Often, war is not simply a sordid machine gun, a
crude grenade or a criminal tank. Terrorism cannot be
reduced to a deceitful and deadly ideology. Conflicts,
wars and terrorism are also synonymous with women
who suffer unthinkable violence and indelible trauma
to their flesh and bodies. When their own bodies are
turned into assault weapons against themselves, we all
face the moral and ethical imperative to act.
64/103

23/04/2019

We must act as a moral obligation and collective
responsibility. We must act to defend and protect,
prevent and deter, investigate and hold accountable,
denounce and judge and never again allow State and
non-State actors alike to brandish women’s bodies as
weapons against themselves or use rape as a weapon of
terrorism and sexual violence of any kind as a tactic of
war. But we must also act to guarantee the rights of all
survivors of sexual violence, including their sexual and
reproductive health rights.
To that end, we call for full respect for the norms of
international law and international humanitarian law in
times of war and the implementation of all the Security
Council’s resolutions on the women and peace and
security agenda, the cornerstone of which is resolution
1325 (2000). In that context, it should be recalled that
this resolution and all those that have followed highlight
the evidence that women are a vital partner for peace
and security in the world and that their involvement in
negotiations and peace efforts would pave a clear path
towards lasting peace.
In the national context, we emphasize the
importance of establishing inclusive and gendersensitive inquiry and communication mechanisms
and the introduction of relevant legislation that seeks
to bring to trial the forces behind and any individual
responsible for acts of sexual violence not only against
women, but also against men and children. To that end,
specialized funds should be mobilized to promote and
strengthen the institutions responsible for monitoring,
investigating and prosecuting these wrongdoings.
In addition, improved conditions of access to justice
remain a basic component of the process.
Lastly, let us not forget the need to ensure the
participation of civil society and of male and female
human rights defenders in the women and peace and
security agenda and to recognize the fundamental role
they play, often at the risk of their lives.
In brief, what we will now have to consider is how
to move from denial to confession; from bullying and
stigma to empowerment; from the silence of humiliation
to the courage of the truth; from indifference to
compassion; from impunity to justice; from injustice
to atonement; and from words to actions, because this
world is not for those men who wage war but for all of
the women who want peace!
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to join others in expressing my
sincere appreciation to the German presidency of the
Security Council for April and to thank it for attaching
such importance to the women and peace and security
agenda, especially the issue of sexual violence in
conflict that we are discussing today.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict for their efforts. I also thank all of today’s
women briefers, who shared their valuable ideas and
experiences during this important debate.
Sexual violence in conflict and post-conflict
situations is a phenomenon that exposes a number of
imbalances that need to be addressed in a comprehensive
manner. The nexus between this phenomenon and the
general status of women and girls, as well as certain
negative social behavioural patterns, is indeed a basic
one. The issue is also mainly connected to accountability
and fighting impunity, as indicated in the concept note
(see S/2019/313, annex).
Over the past 11 years, the Security Council has
adopted five very important resolutions addressing
several aspects of sexual violence in conflict situations,
including the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war, the
link between organized crime and terrorism, trafficking
in persons, reporting and monitoring mechanisms, as
well as the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Despite all that, the phenomenon
of sexual violence against women and girls persists.
Those violations are primarily perpetrated by non-State
entities and terrorist groups. This proves that we still
have a long way to go.
The holistic approach to dealing with sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations starts
before the occurrence of sexual violence. It includes
raising awareness of the rights of women and girls,
changing certain negative social behavioural patterns
and, of course, preventing conflicts in the first place.
In conflict situations, we must provide the necessary
protection for women and girls specifically and make
sure that they are not subjected to sexual violence
by the warring parties. This approach extends to
post-conflict situations, and in that regard Egypt
supports the survivor-centred approach to providing
the necessary care and protection to survivors in a
comprehensive manner.

S/PV. 8514

Egypt believes that women play a vital role in
society. Women are not merely victims; they perform an
essential role in fighting sexual exploitation and abuse
as part of their general role in the women and peace
and security agenda. We must enhance that important
role. Experience has shown that women are capable
of overcoming a number of obstacles in dealing with
the victims of sexual violence, exposing perpetrators,
fighting impunity and providing the necessary help to
the victims. In that context, we recall the open debate
held in the Security Council on 11 April on women in
peacekeeping (see S/PV.8508).
The Egyptian presidency of the African Union for
2019 focuses mainly on reconstruction and development
in post-conflict situations, based on a comprehensive
approach that includes building the capacities of national
armies and law-enforcement authorities to combat
terrorism and crime and providing the necessary care
for communities in post-conflict situations, including
children, women and girl victims of those conflicts.
Egypt has already developed a number of
programmes and mechanisms specifically for the Sahel
region of Africa, which has been suffering under the
yoke of armed conflicts, the activities of terrorist groups
and organized crime. We are fully prepared to cooperate
with all partners in developing and implementing
projects and specialized programmes that provide
the necessary care and protection to women and girl
survivors of sexual violence, in cooperation with the
Egyptian Agency of Partnership for Development.
Egypt strongly supports the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
In that context, the Cairo International Centre for
Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding
is holding training courses for Egyptian, Arab and
African military and police personnel, in cooperation
with United Nations specialized agencies. The aim is
to train these personnel before deployment in how to
deal with situations of sexual exploitation and abuse in
conflict areas.
In conclusion, I reiterate that Egypt fully supports
the Council’s efforts to promote fighting sexual violence
in conflict areas and is fully prepared to cooperate with
all relevant parties in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovenia.

19-1175665/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

Mrs. Blokar Drobič (Slovenia): I thank German
presidency for organizing this debate and the invited
speakers for their briefings and testimonies.
Slovenia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier on behalf of the European Union and would like
to make some additional remarks in its national capacity.
We once again welcome the report of the
Secretary-General on conflict-related sexual violence
(S/2019/280). We are outraged by the persistent and
widespread occurrence of sexual violence in armed
conflict and join others in condemning these violations.
Regarding resolution 2467 (2019), adopted this
morning, we regret the fact that agreement could
not be reached on issues of crucial importance,
including providing sexual and reproductive health
services to all survivors of sexual violence in conflict.
Ensuring comprehensive assistance to all survivors
of these heinous crimes is at the heart of a survivorcentred approach.
We must seriously increase our efforts to do
three important things: prevent such heinous crimes
from ever happening again, bring those responsible
to justice and provide victims with all the assistance
and help they need and deserve. We must do all of that
regardless of whether a situation is on the agenda of the
Security Council.
In the past decade, an important paradigm shift
has been made: conflict-related sexual violence is
itself understood as a threat to international peace and
security. It especially impedes women’s participation in
peace and political processes, including post-conflict
reconstruction and reconciliation. In most cases, sexual
violence in conflict occurs where there is systemic
discrimination against women and girls. We must
therefore promote efforts to eliminate discrimination
against women and girls in law and practice.
Again, sexual violence in contemporary conflicts is
not a side effect. Rather, it is a front-line consideration,
a horrifying tactic of war, a means of repression, terror
and control used to humiliate and injure victims, their
families and their entire communities. All survivors,
regardless of their gender or age, are traumatized and
stigmatized for life. Entire generations and communities
are affected for decades to come.
Ensuring accountability and ending impunity is
of paramount importance. The primary responsibility
to protect civilians and bring perpetrators to justice
66/103

23/04/2019

always resides with States. Ensuring accountability
remains a major challenge. In this regard, the role of
international criminal justice has been recognized, in
particular the International Criminal Court. Slovenia
supports the different international mechanisms for
investigation and prosecution of such crimes.
We also express our support for the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his report (S/2019/280)
to fully integrate the issue of conflict-related sexual
violence into the work of its sanctions committees
and include sexual violence as an explicit designation
criterion for sanctions as well as to include measures
to prevent conflict-related sexual violence in securitysector- and justice-reform initiatives.
The approach to sexual and gender-based
violence must be survivor-centred, and awarenessrising activities must be added in parallel to victim
assistance so as to fight stigmatization of the survivors
and children born as a result of sexual violence and to
challenge negative perceptions and misunderstandings
that prevent survivors from rebuilding their lives.
Slovenia is addressing the correlation of conflictrelated sexual and gender-based violence in its second
national action plan on women, peace and security for
the period 2018-2020, adopted in November 2018. The
plan contains, inter alia, several activities relating to
prevention and accountability. In June 2018, Slovenia
also joined the Call to Action on Protection from
Gender-based Violence in Emergencies and committed
to stepping up its engagement in prevention and response
to gender-based violence. Last year, we allocated
an additional financial contribution for prevention
of sexual exploitation and abuse in the Democratic
Republic of Congo. The education and training on
women, peace and security, which were systematically
introduced throughout the Slovenian Armed Forces, are
also an important domestic achievement.
Let me conclude by once again confirming our
strong support for United Nations action against
conflict-related sexual violence. We call on all parts
of the United Nations to continue prioritizing this
important issue and further call on the Security Council
to strongly, systematically, consistently and promptly
respond to all violations in situations of armed conflict.
Neither silence nor tolerance nor impunity is an option.
This is a message that should clearly emanate from the
Security Council.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramirez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank the German presidency for convening
this debate and extend my gratitude to those who have
enriched the discussion today.
Sexual violence is always an aberrant crime and a
flagrant and unacceptable violation of human rights.
When it occurs in the context of a conflict situation,
it becomes a war crime as well, one that contravenes
international humanitarian law and, as a result,
sanctioning it and providing redress become a matter
of interest to the international community.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of
the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Armed
Conflict. Since then, remarkable progress has been
made, particularly with regard to the international
community’s recognition that sexual and genderbased violence in armed conflict constitute a threat to
international peace and security. However, important
challenges remain, not only in terms of accountability
and the fight against impunity, but also in terms of the
definition of the phenomenon itself.
Member States must strengthen their national
capacities in order to have the legal and institutional
frameworks in place to ensure the investigation and
prosecution of those who are guilty of these crimes.
To that end, our national laws must be based on the
application of fundamental principles, such as equality
before the law, respect for human rights, and fair,
effective and non-discriminatory access to justice
systems that incorporate gender and intercultural
perspectives in a cross-cutting manner.
For the timely prevention and effective combat
of conflict-related sexual violence, it is necessary to
recognize and address at least three inescapable factors:
first, structural gender inequalities; secondly, historical
discrimination against women and girls; and, thirdly,
marginalization, especially of vulnerable groups. All
these factors are a fundamental part of the origin of
these crimes. If we also add to all of the foregoing
weak institutions of justice, fear of denunciation, fear
of reprisals, the rejection of families and the prejudices
of the communities themselves, we can surely better
understand what are some of the main obstacles that
victims face in accessing justice.

S/PV. 8514

That is why it is urgent to change the social norms
that continue to perpetuate as equal the impunity of
the aggressors, on the one hand, and the suffering of
the victims, on the other. It must also be recognized,
however regrettable it may be, that victims often do not
find satisfactory answers to their most pressing needs,
hence the importance of redoubling efforts. Achieving
effective gender equality is unavoidable if the goal is
the sustainable development of our societies. Women
must participate fully and effectively in political,
economic and social life. That is the only way to build
just, inclusive and peaceful societies that lead justly to
sustainable peace.
There is concern that the term “sexual violence”
may not be properly codified in international law. It
should be recalled that this term was not explicitly
included in the Declaration on the Protection of Women
and Children in Emergency and Armed Conflict,
adopted in 1974 by the General Assembly in resolution
3318 (XXIX). It is worth asking whether the definition
agreed upon so far is really sufficient for the required
approach to all manifestations or acts of violence of a
sexual nature perpetrated, especially against women
and children, in the context of armed conflicts. We
therefore take this opportunity to endorse the relevance
of the Geneva Conventions, in particular common
article 3 and article 27 of the Fourth Convention, which
incorporate an express reference to the protection of
women against rape, forced prostitution or any form of
indecent assault.
We very much appreciate that the Secretary-General
places the rights of victims and survivors at the centre
of his strategy as a response to this serious problem. We
hope that all necessary measures will be implemented
in order to prevent survivors from facing situations of
revictimization and to provide them with the necessary
comprehensive support to ensure their rehabilitation
and strengthen their resilience. We therefore call on the
Council to support the recommendations put forth by
the Secretary-General in his latest report (S/2019/280),
in particular the following recommendations.
First, it must include in a timely manner sexual
violence as a specific criterion for imposing sanctions.
Secondly, it should systematically include the prevention
of conflict-related sexual violence in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations and include early warning
indicators on sexual violence as part of their civilian
protection structures. Thirdly, it should promote the
participation of victims and civil society, in particular

19-1175667/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

women’s organizations, in all activities to prevent
and counter that scourge. Fourthly, it should promote
greater participation by women in peace and ceasefire
negotiations and ensure the inclusion of provisions on
sexual violence in such agreements. Fifthly, it should
further strengthen prevention by supporting efforts to
ensure that perpetrators included in the annex to the
report of the Secretary-General are held accountable
for their crimes. On that last point, we must underscore
the fundamental role that the International Criminal
Court can play in combating impunity for such atrocity
crimes when they constitute war crimes and crimes
against humanity.
The protection of and respect for the human rights
of women and their participation in the prevention and
peaceful settlement of conflicts are crucial to ensuring
more peaceful and secure societies. Communities
cannot be healthy, fair or inclusive when the needs of
large sectors of their populations are ignored. The issue
that we are dealing with today must therefore remain a
priority on national agendas and, of course, on that of
the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Jordan.
Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
high-level open debate on sexual violence in conflict.
I appreciate your efforts as President of the Security
Council for this month and wish you every success. I
also want to thank the Secretary-General, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict and the briefers for their statements.
I congratulate the Security Council on its adoption
of resolution 2467 (2019), on sexual violence in conflict.
Our world is experiencing an unprecedented wave
of violence and conflict, which various extremist
groups, such as Da’esh, Boko Haram and others, have
used as a tool to sow terrorism and terrorize societies,
in particular the most vulnerable and marginalized
groups, especially women and girls. We have seen
in Iraq, Syria, Myanmar and other countries serious
violations and heinous sexual violence being committed,
which have led to social and psychological trauma that
threatens the fabric of our societies and international
peace and security.
The coordinated and prompt response of the
international community and the United Nations
68/103

23/04/2019

system is very essential to address the needs of women
survivors of violence and to rehabilitate them in their
societies and in areas of conflict. The role of civil
society organizations and local communities to that
end is also pivotal, without forgetting the importance
of collective international efforts in strengthening
accountability and laying the groundwork for justice.
Those are all extremely important factors in combatting
sexual violence in areas of conflict.
Jordan has always sought to be a major driving
force for peace and security. In spite of the challenges,
the lack of resources, the flow of refugees and our
geographical position in an area that has suffered from
conflicts, we have managed to transform many of
those challenges into opportunities to offer health care,
education and jobs, as well as to involve our men and
women in building, development and relief efforts.
The Syrian refugee crisis, as a result of which
we have hosted 1.3 million refugees, the majority of
whom are women and girls, demands joint efforts with
security and humanitarian organizations at all levels
in order to provide the refugees with services. This
flow of refugees has put various pressures on the host
communities and led to changes in attitude and social
behaviour that threaten peace and security in the host
communities and the refugee camps. Those changes
have had an impact on the situation of women and girls,
such as early and forced marriages, sexual and physical
violence and a loss of civil and legal rights.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan has tackled those
challenges, in coordination with its various institutions,
in line with its national assistance plan for the Syrian
refugee crisis. To that end, we have established and
implemented mechanisms and measures such as
awareness-raising campaigns in local host communities
and refugee communities. Furthermore, we have
provided a wide range of education, health care and
legal services for the protection and empowerment of
women and girls, as well as to strengthen their resilience
and their ability to adapt. In addition, we have launched
job and rehabilitation programmes to allow male and
female refugees to earn a livelihood, be rehabilitated
and work so that they will be able to return voluntarily
and safely to their country and communities.
Based on my country’s conviction that women play
an important role in establishing and building national,
regional and international peace and security in line
with resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

and security, the Jordanian National Commission for
Women, with the broad participation of civil society
actors, launched a 2018-2021 national plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). The plan is based on four
main pillars: participation, protection, assistance and
recovery. The plan also meets the strategic goals for
armed conflict set out in the 1995 Beijing Declaration,
including strengthening the participation of women in
operations to prevent conflicts, building and enhancing
peace, security and stability, resolving conflicts,
decision-making and participating in peacekeeping
operations. The national plan also takes into account
our Kingdom’s commitment to the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals and focuses on the role of youth and
men as partners in supporting women’s participation
and strengthening efforts to prevent and resolve armed
conflicts. The plan also reflects Jordan’s commitment
to respecting human rights and promoting the principles
of justice, equality and participation.
As a pioneer among countries that combat terrorism
and violent extremism, Jordan seeks to address
terrorism and fight violent extremism. It is also keen
to protect women and girls from the danger of violent
extremism. We stress the key and pivotal role of women
in guarding societies against extremism and promoting
a culture of peace. We underscore our collective
responsibility to establish peace as a priority and to
combat all attempts to sow sedition, hatred and sexual
violence. In that regard, we underline the importance of
ensuring the necessary funding for the implementation
of our national, regional and international plans.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Djibouti.
Mr. Doualeh (Djibouti) (spoke in French): At the
outset, Djibouti, vehemently condemns the coordinated
terrorist attacks that targeted places of worship and
hotels in Sri Lanka, leading the bloody massacre of
countless innocent victims. We reiterate our solidarity
with the people and Government of Sri Lanka.
(spoke in English)
Djibouti expresses its appreciation to the delegation
of Germany for convening this important discussion
on the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence, its
impact on international peace and security, and ways
to strengthen accountability. We are grateful for the
continued efforts and commitment of the SecretaryGeneral, as reflected in his annual report (S/2019/280)
on the implementation of resolutions 1820 (2008),

S/PV. 8514

1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). We value the work
undertaken by the Office of the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Armed Conflict and the team
of experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence/
women protection advisers in their efforts to prevent
and address all forms of sexual violence in conflict and
post-conflict situations.
A few days ago, we commemorated the twentyfifth anniversary of the Rwandan genocide with our
brothers and sisters in Rwanda. The prohibition of
rape is one of the oldest rules of war, having been
prohibited in the first modern code of war, the Lieber
Code of 1863 and the 1949 Geneva Conventions. It
was only in September 1998, in the case of Jean-Paul
Akayesu before the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda, that a tribunal handed down a conviction for
rape as a crime against humanity. The Tribunal stated
unequivocally that rape and sexual violence constituted
one of the worst ways of harming the victim as he or she
suffered both bodily and mental harm.
Building on that jurisprudence, the development of
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
was seen by many as a significant milestone in the
prosecution of conflict-related sexual and gender-based
violence. Article 8 of the Rome Statute includes rape,
sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy,
enforced sterilization or any other form of sexual
violence as war crimes in cases of both international
and non-international armed conflict.
Many other speakers, including the remarkably
brave 2018 Nobel Peace Prize laureates Ms. Nadia
Murad and Dr. Denis Mukwege Mukengere, continue
to bring conflict-related sexual violence and genderbased violence to the world’s attention. Djibouti thanks
them for their presence here with us today and for
their contributions.
Despite the progress made, sexual and genderbased violence continue in conflicts today. It remains
uniquely concealed and distinctively difficult to
prosecute. I would like to focus on the importance
of addressing the silence around such crimes. As Dr.
Mukwege has explained, staying silent about sexual
violence has granted impunity to the perpetrators and
increased its proliferation. “What is keeping rape in our
society is silence. The silence is really a strong tool of
rapists, so they can go on destroying girls and women,”
he said. “If she stays in silence, she can be raped again
and again and she cannot protect others.”

19-1175669/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

The United Nations and its Members must
endeavour to help survivors report their experiences
concerning their conflict-related sexual and genderbased violence and thereby increase accountability.
We should all seek to reduce the stigma around sexual
and gender-based violence. We should find creative
ways to raise awareness, including through the use of
community radio, theatre and community and religious
leaders. We need long-term communal strategies to
change underlying behavioural norms that somehow do
not condemn sexual and gender-based violence as the
atrocious crimes they are.
The United Nations should help community-based
first responders to better document sexual and genderbased violence. Health-care providers play a critical role
in providing urgent care and immediate clinical care
to survivors. In addition to that moral imperative, they
could help hold perpetrators accountable. It has been
convincingly demonstrated that victims who report
rape and the medical providers who document their
accounts support the justice process through forensic
medical examinations and by recording findings in
any final medical report, collecting evidence from
a survivor’s body and testifying in court. Providing
adequate training in those areas is therefore critical.
In conclusion, Djibouti supports the establishment
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
to address rape and other sexual crimes in their
investigations of human rights violations in war zones.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): let me begin by joining
others in expressing Australia’s deep shock and sadness
at the horrific terrorist attacks in Sri Lanka. we extend
our deepest condolences and stand with Sri Lanka as
it continues to come to terms with that senseless and
barbaric attack.
Turing to today’s agenda, in order to eradicate
sexual violence in conflict, we need to address all four
pillars of the women and peace and security agenda, not
just protection. It is not simply an issue of protection
but of prevention and accountability.
Protection starts with prevention. Sexual violence
in conflict is part of a continuum of violence,
primarily against women and girls, which is rooted
in gender inequality. Research clearly shows that
gender inequality, including violence against women
70/103

23/04/2019

in peacetime, is a direct cause of sexual violence in
conflict. Indeed, gender inequality is the strongest
indicator of a country’s risk of conflict.
While this debate naturally focuses on violence
during conflict, we must not forget that the fundamental
route to prevention relies in addressing the fundamental
cause: gender inequality in all its forms. Sexual violence
is not an inevitable occurrence in the ordinary course
of conflict. It is not something we should ever accept.
Australia is outraged by the persistent and widespread
occurrence of sexual violence in armed conflict. A
climate of impunity discourages reporting, undermines
assistance and abets further violations.
We acknowledge the central importance of sexual
and reproductive health and rights for all people in
conflict situations, but particularly survivors of rape
and sexual violence. Access to the full range of quality
reproductive and sexual health care, services and
information is critical to the recovery of survivors and
the restoration of their dignity and bodily autonomy.
Sexual and reproductive health and rights are vital
human rights. Respecting and upholding those rights,
particularly the right to services and information, can
be the difference between life and death.
In addressing sexual violence in conflict, we need
to identify solutions and approaches that are contextspecific, inclusive and informed by experience,
especially that of survivors. Our actions must be
survivor-centred and recognize diversity of experience
and need. For example, children born of rape and their
mothers have particular needs and we must not forget
that male survivors, including boys, have their own
barriers to accessing services.
We emphasize the importance of ensuring that our
military, police and service providers develop positive
internal cultures that are gender-sensitive and do not
tolerate violence. Further, we encourage the use of
gender advisers in peacekeeping, the military and the
police and note that the representation of women is not
the same as gender expertise.
Finally, diverse women must be involved in all
aspects of our efforts to end sexual violence and in the
design and implementation of services to survivors of
sexual violence in conflict. Australia commends the
extraordinary work of survivor-advocates, civil society
organizations and human rights defenders. We call on
Member States to listen to their voices and to support
their work.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Afghanistan.
Mrs. Raz (Afghanistan): I would like to thank
the German presidency for holding today’s meeting
on conflict-related sexual violence. It reflects the
Council’s focus, and we hope that today’s discussions
will reinforce the efforts of all States to enhance
progress on the protection of women.
The Government of Afghanistan is strongly
committed to protecting women’s rights and to
preventing violence against women in armed conflict.
We call on all parties in conflict in Afghanistan to
prevent violence against women. That commitment
is a reflection of our international and national
responsibilities, which are enshrined in our Constitution
and national laws and are implemented through the
policies and programmes adopted by the Government.
Our national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) is a strong example of the
Government’s commitment, through which we are
combating conflict-related sexual violence and working
to protect and empower women in all aspects. As part
of the protection pillar of our plan, we have improved
our legal structure through the enforcement and
amendment of legislation to safeguard women from all
types of violence and discrimination. Our revised penal
code, which entered into force in February 2018, has
been expanded by criminalizing all forms of conflictrelated sexual violence as a war crime, a crime against
humanity and an act of genocide.
Under our law on the elimination of violence
against women, various awareness-raising activities
are being carried out at all levels nationwide, including
in provincial communities and committees.
More broadly, our protection measures are based
on a zero-tolerance approach to all forms of violence
against women and children. All cases of crimes
against women are investigated and referred to judicial
institutions, based on various national laws and the
law on the elimination of violence against women.
Our security and judicial institutions have taken new
measures to ensure accountability for crimes committed
against women, including sexual violence, which have
had a notable impact on deterrence and have led to a
drop in crimes committed against women. We have also
established a mechanism for registering all alleged and
reported crimes nationwide to ensure that all cases are
identified and fully addressed.

S/PV. 8514

In focusing on this type of protection we collaborate
closely with various actors on the ground, including the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission,
local and religious figures and civil society. We have
also increased our numbers of female prosecutors and
judges to enable women to speak openly about any
alleged crime. That has been an effective reform in
the judicial sector, where women are now more willing
to speak up about acts of violence committed against
them. Furthermore, in order to assist the survivors of
gender-based violence, we are making sure that family
guidance centres are providing legal advice and health
and psychosocial services in all parts of the country.
All those measures demonstrate a comprehensive
approach to ensuring women’s protection using various
means, both within and outside the framework of
Government. We are pleased to report that publicawareness initiatives have been making increasing
progress, broadening wide networks of actors and
advocates. In that regard, public lectures, workshops
and conversations on the law on the elimination of
violence against women are being held in collaboration
with Islamic figures, religious schools, teachers and
others. Our independent administrative reform and
civil service commission has developed policies to
increase the ratio of women’s recruitment to public
institutions and their protection in the office. Beyond
the civil service, active steps have also been taken
in the security sector to recruit more women into the
national police and military forces.
Ensuring the physical protection of women is only
one aspect of our focus on upholding women’s rights
and empowerment. For us, protection and empowerment
have a broad meaning. They also include enhancing
the role of women in the civil service, the security
sector, elections and the peace efforts that are under
way to end the conflict. As part of the Government’s
commitment, we assure the Council that any potential
peace agreement would in no way compromise
women’s rights or their proactive role in rebuilding a
new Afghanistan. However, we would like to ask the
Council and the participants in today’s open debate to
support our efforts to protect and preserve the rights of
Afghan women in the gains that we have made over the
past 17 years during the peace talks with the Taliban.
We welcomed the Council’s adoption today of
resolution 2467 (2019), and we hope and expect that it
will improve the coordination of all international actors
in their efforts to end sexual violence in conflict and,

19-1175671/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

more broadly, to ensure continued progress on women’s
safety and empowerment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Luxembourg.
Mr. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank the Secretary-General and
this morning’s briefers for contributing to today’s
open debate with their testimonies and call for action.
Our thanks also go to you, Sir, and to Germany for
convening this debate under your country’s presidency
of the Security Council.
Luxembourg associates itself with the statement
delivered this morning by the observer of the
European Union.
Last month, at the initiative of Her Royal Highness
Grand Duchess Maria Teresa of Luxembourg, my
country hosted the international conference Stand
Speak Rise Up!, which is aimed at ending sexual
violence in sensitive regions. Ms. Pramila Patten,
Dr. Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad enriched
the conference with their participation just as they
have contributed to today’s debate. It was the first
international event of its kind to focus primarily on
survivors and thereby helping to humanize the subject
that brings us together today.
The tenth anniversary of the establishment of the
mandate of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict should be
duly marked. Resolution 1888 (2009) established key
monitoring mechanisms, including the Team of Experts
on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict,
which carries out vital work on the ground to combat
impunity and support women, men, girls and boys
who have survived sexual violence. Luxembourg has
supported and will continue to support the important
work of Ms. Patten and her team.
How can we strengthen accountability for those
who commit acts of sexual violence? We are following
the efforts to find innovative solutions with interest.
Technological and financial innovation can be a
powerful ally of women’s equality and rights on one
condition, which is that we must never assume that
technical solutions can solve political problems. The
challenges that persist are those facing us on the ground.
They are social, security-related, infrastructural
and institutional in nature. Any effective solution
will require the initiatives of national authorities in
72/103

23/04/2019

cooperation with community organizations in the
countries concerned. We must redouble our efforts to
support them. In that regard, we believe that we must
continue to consider new ways to support survivors.
The adoption of the Rome Statute marked an
important step in the fight against impunity in general,
but more specifically in the fight against sexual and
gender-based crimes. The International Criminal Court
nevertheless represents a legal channel of last resort,
while the responsibility for investigating such crimes
belongs first and foremost to national legal systems. With
the implementation of its national action plan on women
and peace and security, adopted in 2018, Luxembourg
will continue to support the development of capacities
to strengthen the fight against impunity. We are a longstanding partner of Justice Rapid Response and UNWomen, which work together to provide specialized
expertise that can be rapidly deployed to carry out
investigations and assist victims of sexual and genderbased violence in conflict situations. Male and female
survivors deserve both reparations and justice, as well
as the assurance that crimes will not be repeated. The
responsibility to protect requires that we support them.
That responsibility falls to all of us, and Luxembourg
will continue to play its part in that effort.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mr. Buttigieg (Malta): I would like to thank the
German presidency for holding this annual open
debate on sexual violence in conflict. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his annual report (S/2019/280).
Malta fully supports the statement delivered by the
observer of the European Union.
I would also like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge the contribution of civil society in
this area.
The annual open debate on sexual violence in
conflict provides a critical opportunity for taking stock
of this important aspect of the women and peace and
security agenda. Although the political momentum for
the fight against sexual violence has resulted in some
progress, we are still a long way from eliminating
that crime, partly because of the peace and security
challenges that the international community continues
to face, including mass migration and displacement and
rising levels of violent extremism and terrorism, conflict
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

and the proliferation of weapons. We must redouble our
efforts to sustain the momentum for change.
It is the responsibility of all States to support and
assist survivors and hold perpetrators to account. It
is unacceptable that perpetrators of conflict-related
sexual violence, both from States and from non-State
armed groups, should be allowed to continue to live
with impunity. The fight against impunity for conflictrelated sexual violence and the role of accountability as
an effective prevention tool are crucial to the women
and peace and security agenda. When sexual violence
is not addressed, reconciliation efforts and transitions
to more stable, secure and peaceful societies are
undermined, often resulting in long-lasting effects
on survivors and their families and communities. In
that regard, the importance of the role of civil society,
including women’s rights groups, in peacebuilding and
post-conflict reconciliation efforts at the grass-roots
level cannot be stressed enough. We must continue to
support them.
The continued effective collaboration and
coordination between all Security Council instruments
for women and peace and security and conflict-related
sexual violence is very much welcome. Malta fully
supports the mandate of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
We agree that a holistic, survivor-centred approach
is needed when dealing with the fight against sexual
violence in conflict — one that is based on gender
equality, inclusive of all stakeholders, and can be
integrated in United Nations programmes and actions
across the board. By pursuing such an approach, which
is essential for the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, and by continuing our work
on gender equality and ensuring the full and effective
participation of women and girls in all spheres, we will
be able to make a real difference.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar): I have the honour of
delivering this statement on behalf of 51 members of
the Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect,
co-chaired this year by Denmark and the State of Qatar.
The Group would like to thank Germany for
organizing today’s important open debate. I would
also like to extend our gratitude to Nobel Peace Prize
laureates Dr. Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad

S/PV. 8514

for their informative briefings and persistent efforts to
end the use of sexual violence as a tactic of war and
armed conflict.
As the Secretary-General noted, sexual violence in
conflict is a historically hidden crime that requires early
warning and swift responses. Sexual violence, including
rape, is not just a by-product of war but is increasingly
employed as a deliberate strategy by State and non-State
actors to retaliate against, terrorize, intimidate, control
and displace civilians. Such acts may amount to crimes
against humanity, war crimes or genocide. Further,
sexual violence in conflict significantly exacerbates
and prolongs situations of armed conflict, destroys the
social fabric of communities and impedes peacebuilding
and reconciliation efforts.
Sexual violence is a pervasive facet of many
conflicts today that claims thousands of victims
every year. In South Sudan, sexual violence in
conflict remains rampant and is often used as a form
of collective retribution against ethnic rivals. The
United Nations Mission in South Sudan reported 1,157
cases of sexual violence during 2018 — and those are
only the reported cases in a context of notoriously
underreported incidents.
Similarly, as Ms. Murad has attested, the so-called
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has systematically
committed rape and sexual violence against Yazidi
women and girls, practices which the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian
Arab Republic has characterized as war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide.
As it is the primary responsibility of Member States
to protect their populations against genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and ethnic cleansing,
including those involving rape and sexual violence, the
Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect would
like to stress the following points.
First, strengthening the capacity of national
institutions is critical to ensure accountability for
such crimes perpetrated in the past and to prevent and
deter the perpetration of such crimes in the future. It
is of utmost importance that States put in place and
enforce legislative and institutional procedures to
comprehensively address sexual violence in conflict
and prevent its occurrence.
Despite the increased awareness of the issue, most
incidents of mass rape continue to be met with impunity.

19-1175673/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

States have the primary responsibility for investigating
and prosecuting crimes committed within their
jurisdiction and national accountability efforts should
be encouraged and supported, including through the
strengthening of judicial cooperation between States.
Fact-finding missions, investigative mechanisms,
commissions of inquiry and hybrid and international
courts and tribunals provide complementary avenues
for accountability when and where options under
domestic law prove insufficient.
Secondly, there is an urgent need for a survivorcentred approach to support the needs of victims
of sexual and gender-based violence before, during
and after situations of conflict. The international
community should support the provision of appropriate
medical, psychosocial and socioeconomic reintegration
assistance and services to survivors in order to prevent
their revictimization and restore the social fabric of
societies after conflict.
Thirdly, at the heart of sexual violence lies a
disregard for human rights, as well as the perpetuation
of gender inequality and systematic discrimination.
Sexual violence in conflict must be addressed with the
active and equal participation of women in identifying
prevention mechanisms and holistic, rights-based
solutions that address their needs. It is equally important
to continue to engage men and community leaders to
play a positive role in addressing gender stereotypes
and societal exclusion mechanisms.
Fourthly, the Security Council could and should
make better use of targeted sanctions to prevent and
halt sexual violence, including through basing listing
criteria on the involvement in the perpetration of sexual
violence. In that context, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
and the Panels of Experts should consistently brief and
give information on individuals or entities responsible
for perpetrating sexual violence to sanctions
committees, encourage Member States to list them and
recommend targeted sanctions.
Lastly, training on gender issues, preventing
sexual exploitation and abuse and addressing sexual
violence in conflict should be a mandatory component
of national military and police training, as well as
predeployment and in-mission training of all United
Nations peacekeeping and civilian personnel. In that
regard, we support the United Nations zero-tolerance
policy on sexual exploitation and abuse and welcome
74/103

23/04/2019

the Secretary-General’s initiative on the voluntary
compact between the United Nations and Member
States to prevent and eliminate sexual exploitation
and abuse.
Sexual violence in conflict need not be an inevitable
side effect of armed conflict — it can be prevented and
stopped. While significant normative progress has been
achieved in recent years, it is also clear that words on
paper are not yet matched by facts on the ground. In
that regard, it is imperative that the members of the
Security Council take timely and decisive action to end
and prevent sexual violence in conflict, if and when
they may amount to atrocity crimes.
In closing, the Group of Friends of the Responsibility
to Protect would like to recognize and pay tribute again
to the important work accomplished by Dr. Mukwege
and Ms. Murad, including providing critical medical,
psychosocial and socioeconomic reintegration support
to the survivors of sexual violence in conflict and
addressing impunity for those heinous crimes. We
would like to ask — how can we, as members of the
responsibility to protect community, more efficiently
integrate gender considerations and the prevention of
sexual violence into our work?
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed: I wish to start by thanking
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s important
debate on the theme “Women and peace and security:
sexual violence in conflict”. I would also like to thank
Special Representative Pramila Patten, Dr. Denis
Mukwege, Ms. Nadia Murad, Ms. Amal Clooney and
Ms. Inas Miloud for their insightful and passionate albeit
troubling briefings. I also commend the SecretaryGeneral for his report (S/2019/280), which strongly
underlines sexual violence as a tactic of war — one
that must be addressed through a stronger survivorcentred approach.
The year 2019 is an important year for the women
and peace and security agenda. Ten years ago, the
Security Council adopted the landmark resolution 1888
(2009), which established the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, of which I wish to acknowledge
and commend the tireless work and impact it is making
on thousands of lives. We are also stepping up our efforts
for the celebration of the twentieth anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), both at the policy
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

level and on the ground, to ensure that women are core
partners in the maintenance of international peace and
security, through participation in prevention, mediation
and post-conflict peacebuilding and reconstruction.
The African Union reiterates its profound
conviction that the women and peace and security
framework, based on Council resolutions 1325 (2000)
and 1888 (2009) and subsequent Council resolutions,
remains a strong framework that guides our global
efforts to build more peaceful and sustainable societies.
In view of that, permit me to focus my statement on
three main points.
First, the AU recognizes that structural gender
inequalities and discrimination against women, girls
and vulnerable communities represent some of the
most profound root causes of conflict-related sexual
violence. The disturbing reality is that sexual violence
continues to be a major tactic in the broader strategy of
parties to war and conflict. In that vein, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2467 (2019), despite its
weaknesses, and we hope that it will send a strong
signal to perpetrators as we continue to defend the
victims of such heinous crimes.
The African Union, through and the Peace and
Security Department and the Office of the AU Special
Envoy on Women, Peace and Security, have worked
very closely with the United Nations, through the
Office of the Deputy Secretary-General, the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict and UNWomen, to address that scourge. Together we have led
fact-finding solidarity missions to operationalize the
women and peace and security agenda in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Nigeria, South Sudan, Chad and
Niger, respectively, over the past two years.
The findings brought some of the following
significant insights. Women, girls and vulnerable
communities remain the primary targets of organized
abductions, rape, forced marriages and sexual slavery
in times of conflict. Women and girls face considerable
levels of sexual exploitation in camps for internally
displaced persons or during migration, including in the
alarming form of sex for food. Women, girls, young men
and boys are targeted as suicide bombers by extremist
and terrorist groups. Finally, young men and boys also
suffer from conflict-related sexual violence, notably
from gang rape and forced nudity.
The African Union recognizes that those challenges
are made worse by the fact that, while policies have

S/PV. 8514

by and large been put in place, their implementation
remains weak. It is in that perspective that the AU Peace
and Security Council adopted the Continental Results
Framework for Monitoring and Reporting on the
Implementation of the Women and Peace and Security
Agenda in Africa with a view to supporting member
States and other stakeholders in the acceleration of
delivery on commitments.
It is regrettably accurate that women remain the
principal victims of sexual and other forms of violence
and discrimination in times of conflict. Nonetheless,
they are also key partners as leaders at the community,
national and regional levels. And indeed, in addition
to the protection pillar, the AU is championing the
implementation of the women, peace and security
commitments, specifically the participation pillar,
with particular emphasis on the role and leadership of
women, peace processes and governance.
It is in that context that the AU has launched an
action-oriented network of women in mediation known
as FemWise-Africa, and has partnered with the United
Nations under the joint framework on peace and security
to enhance women’s leadership in peace, security
and development with the African Women Leaders
Network, as recognized in resolution 2457 (2019).
Secondly, the African Union reaffirms its zerotolerance position when it comes to the issue of sexual
violence in conflict. One of the most outrageous
challenges we face remains the lack of criminal
accountability. Survivors have little chance of seeing
their offenders face justice.
At the continental level, in its 2018 Policy on
Prevention and Response to Sexual Exploitation and
Abuse for Peace Support Operations, the African Union
reaffirmed its full commitment to eradicating sexual and
gender-based violence in Africa. The AU has focused
on operationalizing its various instruments on sexual
and gender-based violence and sexual exploitation and
abuse through the work of the Office of the AU Special
Envoy, the Peace and Security Department and the
Women, Gender and Development Directorate.
At the level of AU member States, acts of violence
against women, such as rape, domestic violence and
other acts, have been criminalized in several countries.
In addition to the legal and policy approach to prevention,
African member States have also undertaken to build a
culture of peace and non-violence. I wish to recall that
African Heads of State and Government have declared

19-1175675/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

the period from 2010 to 2020 as the African Decade
for Women. In that context, training centres and
programmes have been developed to raise awareness of
the need to combat sexual and gender-based violence, to
provide the necessary knowledge and to prevent those
deployed in peace-support missions from committing
sexual exploitation and abuse.
Thirdly, we must adopt an approach that is survivorcentred and community-led when developing and
implementing programmes and policies that address
the needs of survivors. Their strength as survivors, as
shared by some of the briefers today, is inspiring, and we
must learn from them. The African Union offers robust
support to survivors, in partnership with African civil
society organizations and women-led organizations,
to provide health services, physical and psychological
support and legal and economic aid.
Article 14 of the Maputo Protocol guarantees the
respect and promotion of women’s right to health,
including sexual and reproductive health. We do
recognize, however, that we need to continue to
enhance support for survivors, including medical and
psychosocial support and support for rehabilitation.
Finally, the AU fully recognizes that gendersensitive transitional justice should be an integral
part of peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction
processes. Transitional justice should take into account
women’s and vulnerable communities’ experiences
of violence; fully address the role and responsibility
of perpetrators of conflict-related sexual violence;
and address how to overcome stigmatization, while
focusing on reintegration. It is our responsibility to
make that happen.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): Viet Nam would like to thank
the German presidency for convening this open debate.
We would also like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his valuable report (S/2019/280)
and to the other briefers for their in-depth remarks.
Although we have come a long way in combating
sexual violence in conflict, the use of sexual violence
as a tactic of war and terrorism continues on a large
scale. Victims suffer severe pain and social exclusion
deepens their scars. Children born of wartime rape
never understand why they are discriminated against
even before they have come into the world. At the same
76/103

23/04/2019

time, most perpetrators have not been held accountable
for the crimes they have committed. The vicious cycle
of violence, exclusion and revictimization is therefore
unbreakable, undermining our peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts.
While conflict prevention is an ideal and longterm way to address the root causes of such suffering,
immediate actions are urgently needed. In that regard, we
strongly support the recommendation of the SecretaryGeneral that all parties to conflict make commitments
to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence
and we welcome the progress highlighted in the report.
To develop a more holistic approach, we would like
to emphasize the following points. First, there can be no
place for stigmatization in any society. More awareness
campaigns are needed to awaken the conscience of all
members of society so that they embrace victims with
the love and kindness that they desperately need. We
must eradicate stigmatization in order to save the lives
of thousands of survivors, open the door to the future
that survivors deserve and build a bridge of connection
between survivors and societies.
Secondly, life-saving services for victims,
including medical care, psychological support and legal
aid, should be made more available and accessible.
To that end, the primary role of States should be
strengthened and complemented by assistance from
relevant United Nations entities, specialized agencies
and peacekeeping missions. This may include technical
assistance, capacity-building, sharing of expertise in
law enforcement, gender-mainstreaming, women’s
empowerment and development.
Last but not least, the women and peace and
security agenda — and the issue of sexual violence,
in particular — should be looked at from both the
protection and the participation angles. We fully
support initiatives to further promote the participation
and leadership of women in peace processes, including
in peacekeeping missions. We also champion the greater
participation of women in developing and advancing a
culture of peace, as women are the ones who instil the
values of love, harmony, compassion and resilience in
societies and across generations.
In conclusion, the fight against conflict-related
sexual violence is no doubt a long one but, regardless of
how challenging it is, we need to sustain our momentum
and devote our energies to ending this brutality. For our
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

part, Viet Nam reaffirms its commitment to working
with the international community in this endeavour.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Botswana.
Mr. Kelapile (Botswana): Mr. President, we
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April, and we
thank you for convening today’s important thematic
debate. We also appreciate the briefings provided by
the Secretary-General, the Special Representative
on Sexual Violence in Conflict and the Nobel Peace
Laureates, and the statements of the other speakers who
took the floor this morning.
Botswana supports the statement delivered by the
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the United
Nations, Ms. Fatima Mohammed, but we wish to add a
few points in our national capacity.
Conflict-related sexual violence undoubtedly
represents one of the most serious forms of violation of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.
Ending such violations is a moral imperative and one
which we must collectively address. This is all the more
crucial in conflict situations.
Our delegation welcomes the Secretary-General’s
report contained in document S/2019/280, which offers
useful analysis and recommendations for dealing with
conflict-related sexual violence. The report once again
highlights, inter alia, the fact that sexual violence is
applied as a tactic of war and terror. It is observable
that such methods are often used by both State and
non-State actors.
As rightly noted in the Safe Schools Declaration,
conflict situations do not only destroy infrastructure
in educational institutions. Forced occupation of
educational facilities by parties to conflict exposes
children and youth to vulnerabilities stemming from
sexual violence, abuse and exploitation. That is why
Botswana co-sponsored the Safe Schools Declaration.
Considering the dire dimensions of the problem and
its implications for international peace and security,
we agree that conflict-related sexual violence can be
comprehensively tackled through a multidimensional
and coordinated approach to conflict prevention
and sustaining peace. Beyond their being subjects of
violence in conflict situations, women must be enabled
to play a meaningful role in conflict resolution,
preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding. They must

S/PV. 8514

be empowered to act as active agents of peace and
transformation by creating an enabling environment
where they can freely participate on an equal footing
without any fear of violent acts or intimidation.
The international community has indeed come
a long way in designing policies and strategies on
women, peace and security. We therefore believe that,
through the combination of the commitments and
measures adopted globally, we are much better situated
than before to achieve the purposes of resolution 1325
(2000) and other relevant resolutions addressing sexual
exploitation and abuse. Clearly, there is no lack of good
intentions and efforts on this issue.
Urgently needed are implementation of the common
tools and frameworks and better utilization of the data
and information already collected on women, peace and
security. These would greatly enhance evidence-based
policy decisions and identification of obstacles in our
way. Importantly, this year we mark two very important
occasions: the lead-up to the commemoration of the
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) on
women and peace and security and the tenth anniversary
of the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
At the continental level, our delegation notes
that Africa, as a region that is affected by conflicts,
is playing a key role in this important agenda. We are
well advised that a total of some 42 instruments on this
issue have been adopted by the African Union (AU)
and its regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms. At the national level, we also note that
close to half of the member States of the AU have put in
place national action plans in this area.
Our delegation welcomes these and other ongoing
efforts to respond to sexual violence, exploitation
and abuse. We particularly note the determination
to strengthen the system-wide approach through
enforcement of the existing United Nations zerotolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse,
as well as such other accompanying initiatives as
the United Nations Action against Sexual Violence
in Conflict.
We also believe that enhanced coordination and
collaboration among all relevant stakeholders would
strengthen global efforts aimed at addressing sexual
violence. In this regard, we support, inter alia, the
work of UN-Women and the strengthened respective
mandates of the Special Representative of the

19-1175677/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. We therefore encourage
closer partnership with other relevant institutions
working in this area, such as the AU’s Women, Gender
and Development Directorate and the Special Envoy on
Women, Peace and Security.
The Member States have the responsibility to
strengthen the capacities of their national institutions as
a critical means for ensuring accountability, prevention
and deterrence, including compliance with relevant
obligations to prosecute all perpetrators of all forms
of sexual violence, exploitation and abuse. Targeted
training programmes aimed at raising awareness
against gender-based violence and sexual exploitation
and abuse for personnel deployed in conflict situations
should remain central to these efforts.
Equally important is provision of adequate
protection for the rights and needs of victims of sexual
violence in conflict environments. We believe that
victims deserve platforms where they can be involved
in processes of healing, rehabilitation, reconciliation
and reintegration into their societies. We therefore
support the continued emphasis on survivor-centred
responses. In this regard, we note the work of the Team
of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence
in Conflict, mandated under resolution 1888 (2009),
to assist Governments with criminal investigation
and prosecution, protection of victims and witnesses,
and reparations.
In conclusion, Botswana pledges its commitment to
working with the international community on effective
strategies to prevent violence against women and
children in conflict situations. We remain optimistic
that, with our collective will, we can bring an end to
these shameful crimes against humanity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): My
country’s delegation would like to thank Mr. Heiko
Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany
and President of the Security Council for this month.
We wish him every success in steering this constructive
and important dialogue. We also thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres and Ms. Pramila Patten, his
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
for their valuable briefings.
78/103

23/04/2019

I would also like to thank the Iraqi Nadia Murad
and her colleague Dr. Denis Mukwege, who were jointly
awarded the 2018 Nobel Peace Prize as a result of their
outstanding role in upholding the noble objectives of
humankind and in defending the oppressed throughout
the world. Iraq is proud of Ms. Murad, who as a young
woman suffered, alongside her fellow Yazidis, terribly
at the hands Da’esh. We would also like to thank
Barrister Amal Clooney for the important role she has
played in providing support to Yazidi women survivors.
My delegation would like to convey its sincere
condolences to the people and Government of Sri Lanka
and to the families of the victims of the terrorist attacks
that killed many innocent victims. We categorically
reject all terrorist acts that target civilians, regardless
of their religious, sectarian or ethnic identity.
Iraq has turned the page on a sombre part of its
history after defeating the Da’esh terrorist group, which
targeted the land and people of Iraq. That group carried
out the most heinous crimes, which have no precedent
in human history. After the enormous sacrifices made
by our people from all religious and ethnic backgrounds
in order to recover their land, which was occupied by
Da’esh on 10 June 2014, Iraq decided to take practical
measures to return all displaced persons to their areas
of origin and to provide them with redress following
the suffering endured — especially by Yazidi women
and girls, who are a basic component of the Iraqi
society — as a result of the Da’esh terrorist group.
Allow me to explain some of the measures that
my country has taken in this regard. Together with
the Yazidi victims, including Nadia Murad, President
Barham Salih of Iraq put forward a draft bill for
Yazidi female survivors. That draft bill was submitted
this month to the Iraqi Parliament, to be debated and
adopted. It seeks to help Yazidi female survivors
who had been kidnapped by Da’esh on 10 June 2014
and subsequently liberated. The bill aims to provide
them with financial and moral compensation and to
rehabilitate them in order to ensure that they have a life
of dignity and to undertake all the necessary measures
to reintegrate them into society and rehabilitate the
infrastructure in their regions.
The bill would designate 3 August every year as
a national day of awareness of the heinous crimes
committed by terrorist groups, such as the torture,
kidnapping, massacres and displacement of Yazidi
women and girls. The law would prohibit forever
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

amnesty for those who are found responsible for crimes
against Yazidi women. There will be no statute of
limitations for those crimes. This is intended to deal,
within the framework of the law, with the perpetrators
of these crimes and with those who are complicit in
committing them.
In the context of our work with the United Nations to
prosecute the perpetrators of such crimes in the context
of fighting impunity, on 25 March Iraq submitted to the
Office of the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict a list of persons
accused of human trafficking who have been arrested by
Iraqi security forces and surrendered to the Prosecutor’s
Office so that they can face just punishment. Iraq
aims to ensure the collection of evidence for crimes
perpetrated by Da’esh by working with the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, created under resolution 2379 (2017),
so as to bring justice for the victims and to ensure that
perpetrators are brought before Iraqi justice. Indeed,
the Iraqi judicial authorities are entirely independent
in their rulings and judgments according to the law.
They allow for justice to be carried out for all kinds
of crimes.
On 9 December 2018, Iraq launched its national
strategy to combat violence against women. That
is an important step to ensure the implementation
of women’s and girls’ rights and to take measures to
prevent violence against them. It was supported by the
Kingdoms of Sweden and Norway and in cooperation
with the United Nations Population Fund, along with
international civil society organizations.
In order to ensure that women’s capabilities and
participation can also be strengthened in the drafting of
national policies and in decision-making at all levels,
Iraq is working with its international partners, the
United Nations and civil society organizations to draft
our second national plan to implement resolution 1325
(2000). We presented our first such plan in April 2014.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): Allow me to
congratulate the German presidency on convening this
meeting. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
valuable insights.

S/PV. 8514

Resolution 1325 (2000) was a milestone in the
debate of women and peace and security. On the one
hand, it aims at empowering women and amplifying
their presence both in decision-making processes and in
the field. On the other hand, it seeks to prevent and fight
sexual violence in conflict situations. Brazil therefore
commends the latest report of the Secretary-General
on conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280) for
its sober assessment of the latest developments and
measured recommendations. We reiterate our position
that the use of sexual violence as an instrument of
power in the context of an armed conflict is a scourge
that must be completely banned.
It is imperative that the causes and effects of such
violence be dealt with accordingly by the Security
Council. The Security Council should do everything in
its power in every particular situation it is called upon
to examine. In that sense, fighting impunity is almost as
important as preventing direct acts of sexual violence.
Setting an example by investigating, prosecuting and
eventually carrying out the appropriate sentences for
those who are accused of having committed such crimes
in the context of armed conflicts is a powerful deterrent
in preventing another case against another victim from
arising. It also helps to empower women, men, girls and
boys who are affected by sexual violence in conflict
to have confidence that all possible measures will be
taken to repair the situation.
The establishment of the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict 10 years ago provided the
Organization with an important tool kit to promote
advocacy and raise public awareness of the grave
question of sexual violence in conflict. Brazil commends
Ambassador Pramila Patten on her efforts to keep the
issue high on the international agenda and reiterates its
support for the United Nations Action against Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
Peacekeepers have an important role to play in
the prevention of and focusing attention on situations
of conflict-related sexual violence, as they are in
direct contact with local populations and constitute
perhaps the most visible face of the Organization.
The presence of women peacekeepers on the ground,
including women protection advisors, has proven to be
an effective instrument to combat and prevent conflictoriented sexual violence and to encourage survivors to
report allegations of crimes committed.

19-1175679/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

In that context, the importance of increasing the
presence of women in peace negotiations and on the
ground becomes strikingly clear. As several studies
have shown, the presence of women not only increases
the likelihood of peace agreements being enforced for a
longer period of time but also facilitates the treatment
of issues such as conflict-related sexual violence. We
therefore support initiatives that promote a greater
presence of experts on conflict-related sexual violence
in mediation efforts, as well as in the formulation and
implementation of peacekeeping mandates.
We are proud to be able to recall an example of
excellence in the field from our own armed forces.
We would once again like to congratulate Brazilian
Commander Marcia Andrade Braga on receiving,
from the hands of the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Military Gender Advocate of the Year Award
for her work as a gender adviser in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic. In the Commander’s
own words, the Award acknowledges how the presence
of women peacekeepers in United Nations missions
allows local women to discuss the issues that affect
their own lives. Commander Braga’s actions show us
that preventing conflict-related sexual violence can
benefit from simple actions such as ensuring that the
voices of local women be heard.
There are many reasons to celebrate the work done
over the past two decades, but we must also recognize
the challenges to completely eliminate conflict-related
sexual violence. In that regard, we acknowledge
Germany’s new resolution 2467 (2019) on sexual
violence in conflict and welcome the effort to update
and strengthen the international norms on this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank the leadership
of Germany for convening today’s debate. Let me
also commend the briefers for their informative and
important contributions. I would also like to take this
opportunity to condemn the recent terrorist attack in
Sri Lanka, in which one of our young citizens lost his
precious life along with approximately 300 other people.
We stand in unity with the Government and the people
of Sri Lanka and express our deepest condolences to the
families of those who lost their lives. We demand that
the perpetrators of that heinous act be swiftly brought
to justice.
80/103

23/04/2019

We welcome today’s adoption of resolution 2467
(2019), which we co-sponsored. Ten years ago, through
resolutions 1820 (2008) and 1888 (2009), respectively,
the Security Council designated sexual violence in
conflict as a tool of war and called on the SecretaryGeneral to work with United Nations personnel on the
ground and national Governments in strengthening
the rule of law in terms of preventing sexual violence.
However, the findings in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2019/280) that was presented today confirm
the trends that sexual violence continues as a part of
the broader strategy of conflict and accountability
remains elusive. We found the recommendations in
the Secretary-General’s report quite objective and
pragmatic and they clearly require the urgent attention
of the Security Council.
Our role in spearheading the women and peace
and security agenda and the landmark resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security underlines our
commitment to create consensus across the extreme
vulnerability of women during conflict and to address
those vulnerabilities.
Our women experienced widespread and systematic
sexual violence and abuse as a tactic of war during our
war of liberation in 1971. That horrific experience has
come back to haunt us with the Rohingya humanitarian
crisis. The majority of the 730,000 Rohingyas who have
fled atrocities in Myanmar’s Rakhine state since August
2017 are women and children. Those Rohingya women
and girls in the camps in Cox’s Bazar were victims of
horrific sexual abuse by the Myanmar forces, which is
attested to by United Nations agencies and international
humanitarian activists. In that connection, we deeply
appreciate the good work that Special Representative
Ms. Pramila Patten and her Office to bring before the
world what the Rohingya women suffered before they
fled and while fleeing Rakhine state.
According to Save the Children, in 2018 alone an
estimated 40,000 Rohingya babies were born in the
camps. Many of them are unwanted, even by their
mothers, and we all can imagine why. Their recognition
and compensation and ensuring a better future for them
in their country of origin are issues that the international
community should carefully consider.
As part of the solution to the problem of sexual
violence in conflict and post-conflict situations, we
should deliver on our promises and commitments.
At the national level, to increase support to national
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

authorities, we can strengthen national laws and
investigation mechanisms and provide protection to
victims. In addition, we should ensure victims’ rights
to sexual and reproductive health care and reparations.
In Bangladesh, as a top troop-contributing country,
we have ensured raising awareness about sexual
exploitation and abuse and predeployment training for
all our peacekeepers. The Prime Minister has time and
again pronounced her zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. We have also implemented the
guidelines of the Supreme Court by establishing womenonly committees in workplaces to hear complaints
against discrimination and sexual violence against
women and girls. The authorities are moving ahead
with the national plan of action on women and peace
and security with the help of UN-Women. Capacitybuilding at the local and national levels is an essential
part in that regard. In that context, the signing of the
framework of cooperation between the Government
and the Office of the Special Representative offers a
conduit for dedicated support measures.
The culture of impunity, as experienced in the
case of conflict-related sexual violence, perpetuates
the vicious cycle. Without bringing an end to it,
justice cannot be fully achieved. In cases when
the State is unwilling to ensure accountability and
justice for such crimes, the international community,
particularly the Security Council, cannot avoid its
responsibility. The case of Rohingya women is a
glaring case in point. While the whole world is asking
for a resolution of the crisis through the voluntary, safe
and dignified return of the Rohingyas to their place
of origin, bringing the perpetrators to justice will be
a critical confidence-building measure to incentivize
repatriation, which we do not see happening. Can we
expect the Rohingyas, particularly the women and girls
who have been subject to unspeakable sexual violence,
to be willing to return without any guarantee that the
same fate would not befall them?
We appreciate the idea of a survivor-centred
approach in dealing with victims of sexual violence.
We are well aware of the difficulties that Rohingya
women and children face in the camps. From our modest
resource bases, we provide the Rohingya women and
girls with as much specialized care as possible. We
ensure the availability of sexual and reproductive
health services, including obstetric, prenatal and postnatal care to the Rohingya women. We are working to
identify and address policy and systemic barriers to

S/PV. 8514

support services and ensure that refugee camps are
safe for women and girls. We have mobilized adequate
law enforcement personnel and humanitarian actors on
the ground. Yet one must understand the realities of
managing the largest camps in the world. The hope of
return and a better future tends to become uncertain,
the challenges become manifold and more complicated
and desperation creeps in, particularly when the stay
becomes prolonged. Certainly, the most effective
way to keep all that at bay is a safe, voluntary and
dignified return.
It is hypocritical to condemn the human rights
violations and express horror at the new violence, while
not taking strong measures to ensure the accountability
of the State and individuals who are responsible for
such crimes. Member States committed to conflict
prevention and sustaining peace cannot turn a blind eye
to State-sanctioned persecution of and discrimination
against ethnic minorities or other human rights
violations, including sexual violence. We also urge
civil society organizations, human rights groups and
other rights groups to come forward in that regard.
While we reaffirm our commitment to preventing
sexual violence in conflict and in peaceful situation,
we should not rest until we have done our part to ensure
the punishment of those who commit and execute such
heinous and inhuman acts against women and girls.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kenya.
Mr. Amayo (Kenya): Kenya joins other Member
States in thanking Germany for convening this
important and timely debate under the women and
peace and security agenda.
Indeed, 2019 is a seminal year. It leads to the
twentieth anniversary of the landmark resolution 1325
(2000) on women and peace and security, championed
by Namibia in 2000, and marks the tenth anniversary
of the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Addressing sexual violence in conflict is a
collective endeavour, not just a Government, Security
Council or women’s affair. Creating awareness and
ownership of the objective and process must involve the
whole of society in order to achieve sustainable results.
Kenya recognizes the importance of military
training and accountability at all levels of engagement,
including for peacekeeping missions. Rape is violence

19-1175681/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

23/04/2019

and a basic violation of an individual human right. We
have also noted that at times men and boys have been
neglected as the ignored victims of sexual and genderbased violence during conflict, and in order to curb
that, our interventions should be more inclusive. The
mainstreaming of the role of gender advisers within
peacekeeping missions is a welcome development,
although more can still be done.

military purposes by the rank and file and should rather
focus more on assigning collective responsibility to the
entire command for such crimes. As we approach the
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in 2020,
we urge Member States to continue working to create
an environment that enables women and young people
to actively engage in peace and security processes at
all levels.

In 2016, Kenya inaugurated a national action
plan with strategies for strengthening its judicial
mechanisms and ensuring justice in a survivor-centred
approach, as well as developing appropriate policy and
legislation. That has ensured a conflict- and gendersensitive approach to addressing matters pertaining
to gender-based violence. The Government has gone
further, partnering with civil-society organizations
in order to translate the plan into various local
languages as an outreach initiative. The plan’s goals
include, first, the active and increased participation of
women at all decision-making levels in all institutions
and mechanisms for the prevention, management
and resolution of conflict in key positions in the
peace-conflict continuum, including senior posts in
the military, the political arena and public service. We
have also established a task force on women and peace
and security within a gender-sector working group,
as a platform that brings together State and non-State
actors to advance our national priorities on gender in
addition to integrating women and peace and security
into the country’s development plans. We have provided
guidelines for training military and police personnel
on issues of sexual and gender-based violence, with
essential procedures focused on the diverse needs of
survivors at the grass-roots level. Those efforts have
resulted in increased dignity for survivors, more
reporting of sexual and gender-based violence and a
reduction in the stigma that survivors face.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.

My delegation recognizes and supports the African
Union’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual violence
in times of conflict or peace through its initiatives,
including the African Union Solemn Declaration
on Gender Equality in Africa. We strongly believe
that accountability for sexual violence should be
enhanced everywhere. Strengthening national criminal
jurisdictions and ensuring strict compliance with the
applicable standards under international humanitarian
law are important. International action to end sexual
violence as a tool of war should go beyond individual
criminal responsibility for crimes committed for
82/103

Mrs. Ahmed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, my country’s delegation would like to express
its appreciation to you, Mr. President, and your
friendly country for organizing this open debate to
discuss such a vital and important matter. We also
thank Secretary-General António Guterres and his
Special Representative, Ms. Pramila Patten. We
appreciate her presence in the Chamber to listen to our
statement. We are also grateful to the briefers for their
valuable contributions.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
earlier by Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
My country’s delegation expresses its heartfelt
condolences to the Government and the people of Sri
Lanka in the aftermath of the recent horrific attacks on
civilians in their country.
I am honoured to be delivering this statement before
the Security Council as my country is undergoing
positive historic changes. In the wake of the glorious
revolution of December 2018, those developments are
consolidating the rights of our people while ushering
in a new era leading to a better future. I would like to
focus on two core issues.
The first is the positive developments in the Sudan
that are taking place as we approach the twentieth
anniversary of the Security Council’s adoption of
the women and peace and security agenda through
resolution 1325 (2000), and as we mark the tenth
anniversary of the establishment of the mandate of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict. The second is the emphasis
of my country’s Transitional Military Council on its
commitment to all regional and international treaties
and agreements. The Council is also committed to
cooperating with the international community to ensure
the protection of human rights for all in the Sudan,
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

especially women’s rights, and the soon-to-be-formed
civilian Government will demonstrate that. We expect
that the current transitional phase will enable us to
make progress in the efforts to achieve peace in Darfur,
and in the two regions most affected in particular,
which will ultimately help us to eliminate all forms of
conflict-related sexual violence.
Sudanese women have played a vital role in this
great movement. The Sudanese people took to the
streets to call for freedom, peace and justice, and
Sudanese women participated in those protests on
an equal footing while demanding their rights and
anticipating a better future. There can be no question
that during the upcoming period, Sudanese women will
be able to actively participate in the political sphere and
in leadership roles in the Sudan, thereby following in
the footsteps of the great Nubian queens, or candaces,
of the Kingdoms of Meroe and Kush.
The recent improved security situation in Darfur has
had a positive impact on the status of women and girls.
Major efforts have been made to achieve sustainable
peace, including by establishing specialized courts,
appointing public prosecutors and additional judges
and setting up legal aid offices in all of Darfur’s states
to facilitate access to justice in cities and rural areas.
That is in addition to launching weapon collection
campaigns and repatriating displaced persons and
ensuring their return to their villages and reintegration
within their local communities. We have also provided
land for refugees, ensured safe travel paths for herders
and established water-distribution centres for them.
The Sudan will continue to protect and advance
women by combating discrimination and gender
inequality, implementing disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programmes, ensuring redress for
victims and implementing economic-empowerment
programmes for women, as well as supporting witnessprotection programmes to shield the survivors of human
rights violations, including survivors of conflictrelated sexual violence. We are also implementing
training programmes for police and military personnel
to improve the investigation of cases of sexual violence.
Furthermore, we are working on implementing training
courses for doctors and health workers to serve rape
victims, and establishing psychological support centres
and raising awareness about such matters. We are also
working to ensure society’s participation in the fight
against this scourge. We hope that the international

S/PV. 8514

community and our regional and international partners
will support our efforts.
In conclusion, we stress that the Sudan will
continue to cooperate and coordinate with the United
Nations and its agencies to further the women and
peace and security agenda. We reiterate that the Sudan
is fully committed to a zero-tolerance policy for crimes
of sexual violence and to the fight against impunity.
We also underscore the importance of cooperating
closely with the office of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in order to establish a joint
cooperation framework aimed at enhancing national
efforts in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): I would also like to join my
colleagues in thanking Germany for convening today’s
important open debate.
We will soon be approaching the twentieth
anniversary of the Council’s adoption of its landmark
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security,
which mobilized global efforts to eliminate the scourge
of conflict-related sexual violence. Since then, we have
collectively made significant progress in establishing
and strengthening the legal and normative framework
for addressing that challenge. The international will to
investigate conflict-based sexual violence is also much
stronger today than ever before. Yet in many conflict
situations around the world women, especially young
girls, continue to bear the brunt of both physical and
psychological abuse and trauma. From Myanmar to my
country’s region, the world continues to watch in horror
as rape and sexual abuse are employed with impunity
as a deliberate means to oppress entire populations and
humiliate and terrorize them. As the Secretary-General
noted in his recent report (S/2019/280), sexual violence
continues to be employed as a broader strategy for
repression, domination and subjugation to deliberately
harm and scar defenceless and vulnerable communities.
Our fight against impunity for conflict-related
sexual violence must continue, with a greater
commitment to holding aggressors to account and never
allowing political or geopolitical interests to constrain
or compromise our efforts. By focusing on creating
an enabling environment for the more meaningful
participation of women, and by securing their seats at
the table as true partners and stakeholders in all matters
related to peace, mediation and reconciliation, we can

19-1175683/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

certainly give peace efforts a much better chance to
succeed. I would like to make six brief, specific points.
First, while the Security Council has led the way in
drawing international attention to such horrific crimes,
it should also focus on addressing the root causes of
conflicts, notably the protracted disputes of Jammu
and Kashmir and Palestine. After all, one of the most
effective ways to prevent conflict-based sexual violence
is to eliminate the breeding grounds that are created by
unresolved, protracted disputes. By leaving disputes
unaddressed, the Council runs the risk of acting
selectively and displaying a blind spot for some of the
most vulnerable women who suffer disproportionately
from violence perpetrated by foreign occupation.
Secondly, national Governments have a critical role
to play in securing accountability for sexual violence
and abuse. Only by strengthening national criminal
justice systems and enacting strict victim- and witnessprotection laws can impunity be effectively denied to
the perpetrators of such heinous crimes.
Thirdly, real justice for the survivors of sexual abuse
in conflict situations does not end with the prosecution
of the perpetrators. It also requires concerted efforts
to restore victims’ dignity and ensure their honourable
reintegration into the community by shielding them
from any consequent stigma or victimization.
Fourthly, by enlisting faith leaders and respected
figures from within communities, we can further
promote efforts to mitigate the stigma suffered by
survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.
Fifthly, we also need to enlist more women in
peacebuilding and mediation processes in order to take
advantage of their unique skill sets. We are encouraged
by the fact that women’s protection advisers have
been deployed in seven United Nations peacekeeping
operations to convene the monitoring, analysis and
reporting arrangements on conflict-related sexual
violence in the field. At the same time, more women
should be appointed to leadership roles, particularly as
special envoys and special representatives.
Finally, gender perspectives should be fully
integrated into the peacebuilding paradigm, which
would greatly enhance women’s role in peace accords,
as well as in the post-conflict stabilization and
reconstruction phases. Pakistan, as one of the leading
troop contributors to the United Nations, is deploying
a female infantry engagement team in the Democratic
84/103

23/04/2019

Republic of the Congo next month. We have also recently
achieved the goal of deploying 15 per cent female staff
officers among all those deployed in our peacekeeping
missions, thereby fulfilling our responsibilities in
accordance with the uniformed gender-parity strategy
and Security Council resolutions.
In conclusion, Pakistan has always remained
a resolute supporter of global efforts to protect the
vulnerable, including women and children. Our
professional peacekeepers to the United Nations,
including our female peacekeepers, continue to set the
highest standards in fulfilling peacekeeping mandates
and protecting all vulnerable sectors of the population,
including women, from violence in some of the most
dangerous and complex conflict situations around
the world.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset, my delegation would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on the
important issue of the elimination of sexual violence in
times of conflict. I would also like to thank the briefers
in this debate for the important information they have
given us.
Today’s debate is highly symbolic, as it paves
the way for the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and marks
the tenth anniversary of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. Despite the progress that has been
made in this area, our debate is an ideal opportunity for
the international community to renew its commitments
and bring greater pressure to bear so as to not lose the
ground it has gained and respond to the challenges posed
by new and emerging threats, including terrorism.
I would like to express Morocco’s sincere
condolences to the Government and the people of Sri
Lanka in the wake of the terrorist attacks in the country
last Sunday.
Over the past decade, there has been a significant
paradigm shift. Today sexual violence in armed
conflict and post-conflict situations is considered a
threat to international peace and security. At the same
time, several tools have been developed to prevent and
respond to such horrific crimes through the resolutions
that followed resolution 1325 (2000). However, given
the fact that these heinous acts persist, indignation is
no longer enough. Our joint action should be further
strengthened to provide real, pragmatic and sustainable
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

solutions for preventing and responding more effectively
to acts of sexual violence and helping survivors rebuild
their sense of self. I would therefore like to highlight a
few points.
First, we need a more comprehensive and holistic
approach that addresses the root causes of conflict and
strengthens the inclusion of women in decision-making
processes,
promotes
human
and
sustainable
development and encourages national initiatives to end
gender discrimination. Conflict prevention is a central
pillar of the women and peace and security agenda,
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
Sustainable Development Goals, in particular Goals
5 and 16, which give priority to conflict prevention
and demonstrate that women and peace and security
issues and development are linked, interconnected
and inseparable.
Secondly, it is important to support women’s
participation in debates on conflict prevention and
resolution, the maintenance of peace and security and
post-conflict peacebuilding.
Thirdly, we must combat impunity and strengthen
access to justice for victims of sexual violence. A
policy of zero tolerance should be embraced wherever
violence occurs.
Fourthly, the stigma surrounding victims of
sexual violence and children born as a result of sexual
violence must be eradicated, as it constitutes a new
kind of victimization. They must receive support on the
medical, social and economic fronts.
Fifthly, religious leaders have an influential role
to play in combating the misleading exploitation of
religion as a justification for violence. They should
be encouraged to speak out strongly against violence.
Cooperation with local stakeholders and community
leaders is also crucial, as they can identify advance
signs of sexual violence, provide early-warning systems
and suggest appropriate prevention strategies.
Morocco firmly condemns all forms of sexual
violence, including during conflict, and considers them
barbaric, brutal and inhumane methods and practices
that have serious consequences for the process of
establishing lasting peace and reconciliation. In our
belief in the importance of the contribution of women
as a key element in early-warning mechanisms, their
awareness of threats to local security and their role
in mediation, we are actively involved in a number

S/PV. 8514

of initiatives, including the Initiative on Mediation in
the Mediterranean launched by Morocco and Spain
in 2012, the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points
Network, started by Spain, and the Mediterranean
Women Mediators Network, launched by Italy.
We recently organized an international conference
in Rabat on the topic of women and peace and security
that examined the role of women in mediation, conflict
prevention and the issue of deradicalization. Morocco
is actively involved in the training of imams, men and
women preachers from several African, European and
Arab countries in providing guidelines on the true
peaceful principles of religion, based on tolerance and
acceptance of others, and distanced from erroneous
interpretations or radical orientations.
We have also been actively involved in integrating
women into Morocco’s contingents deployed to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Moroccan women
personnel are regularly deployed in the Royal Moroccan
Armed Forces contingents serving in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In addition, the
fifth rapid deployment battalion has a specific unit with
a core female staff. Morocco has achieved the target of
15 per cent of mission experts and military observers in
that category.
Finally, I would like to emphasize that Morocco,
as a major contributor of troops to United Nations
peacekeeping operations since the 1960s, attaches
particular importance to the fight against sexual
exploitation and abuse and to the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy in that regard. To that end, we
associate ourselves fully with all actions in that regard,
including the voluntary compact on preventing and
addressing sexual exploitation and abuse and the Circle
of Leadership, which His Majesty King Mohammed
VI has joined at the invitation of the SecretaryGeneral. At the national level, the Moroccan judicial
system is among the strictest in this area, and many
actions have been taken, including the systematic
integration of national investigators into all deployed
contingents — which incidentally has been recognized
as an exemplary practice — the creation of a system
for rotating troops every six months, and strengthened
predeployment and awareness training.

19-1175685/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Georgia.
Ms. Agladze (Georgia): I would like to express
our appreciation to the Franco-German presidencies of
the Council for their leadership in advancing the issue
of sexual violence in conflict. I also want to thank the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/280), as well as
this morning’s briefers, who gave us moving accounts
of their experiences and their perspectives on tackling
impunity and increasing accountability in the area of
sexual violence in conflict. We welcome the adoption
today of resolution 2467 (2019) and are committed to
its implementation.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of
the establishment of the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict. During that time we have seen
groundbreaking changes in terms of understanding and
addressing the root causes and the devastating impact
of conflict-related sexual violence. However, sexual
violence continues to be used as a strategy of warfare
and a tactic of terror to this day. It continues to function
as both a driver and a result of forced displacement. It
is thus our primary responsibility to address conflictrelated sexual violence at all stages of the prevention,
protection and prosecution nexus.
The Government of Georgia has been carrying out
its national action plans for implementing the Security
Council’s resolutions on women and peace and security
since 2012. Our most recent plan covers the inclusion of
the needs, priorities and recommendations of internally
displaced women and women affected by conflict in
peace and security efforts, as well as women’s increased
participation of women in the Geneva international
discussions and in the mechanisms for preventing and
responding to incidents of sexual violence. To that end,
the participants in the Geneva international discussions
and the prevention and response mechanisms
meet and consult regularly with representatives of
non-governmental organizations, including those
specializing in the protection of women’s rights.
To further support women affected by conflict, the
Government of Georgia has launched a project aimed
at empowering them economically by expanding their
knowledge and enhancing the practical skills they need
to start their own businesses.
Gender equality is an essential pillar of military
and civilian personnel management in Georgia.
86/103

23/04/2019

Our Ministry of Defence’s gender-equality strategy
establishes the conditions required to guarantee equal
rights, freedoms and opportunities for men and women,
prevent and eradicate all forms of discrimination,
counter any kind of gender violence and eliminate
misconduct, sexual harassment and physical and
psychological mistreatment. Today approximately
8 per cent of our armed forces and 49 per cent of
Ministry of Defence personnel are women. The genderequality monitoring team at the Ministry of Defence
coordinates gender mainstreaming, the implementation
of a gender perspective and the institutionalization and
fulfilment of national and international obligations.
The team is also engaged in implementing measures
designed to prevent domestic violence perpetrated
by representatives of the Ministry of Defence. The
Ministry has further improved its legislative base
to ensure accountability for sexual harassment by
military servicemen, and has introduced a mandatory
training course for all employees on the elimination of
sexual harassment in the workplace. Training on gender
perspectives and resolution 1325 (2000) has been part
of predeployment training for peacekeepers since
2014, and more than 5,000 military servicemen and
-women have been trained so far. Gender and domestic
violence issues are also included in sessions on posttraumatic stress disorder held by Ministry of Defence
psychologists following deployment.
Despite the Government’s efforts to promote the
full inclusion in the peace process of women affected
by conflict, the ongoing occupation of Georgia’s
Abkhazia and Tskhinvali regions by the Russian
Federation hinders the peace process and imposes
severe conditions on women living in Georgia’s
occupied regions, as well as in areas adjacent to the
occupation line. Those areas are systematically subject
to human rights violations, including the denial of the
right to freedom of movement, illegal detentions by
Russian FSB officers and threats to physical security
for so-called illegal border crossings. International
engagement and monitoring of the situation inside the
conflict-affected regions, and the occupied regions
of Georgia in particular, are thus crucial to ensuring
substantive gender equality and preventing sexual
violence against women.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Guillermet-Fernandez (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): Costa Rica thanks the German presidency for
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

convening this open debate. We also thank the briefers
for their valuable contributions to this debate.
My delegation endorses the statement made earlier
by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group of
Friends on the Responsibility to Protect.
We also join others in condemning the horrendous
attacks committed in Sri Lanka this past Sunday. We
stand in solidarity with the Government and the people
of Sri Lanka.
Sexual violence is unacceptable at any time and
place, and its widespread use as a tactic of terror and a
weapon of war and terrorism is especially deplorable.
It is therefore essential to address its causes, as well
as the structural gaps in our systems, to ensure that
it is eradicated in a systematic and robust way. The
primary responsibility for protecting populations
rests with States, which must establish robust legal
and institutional frameworks in order to lay firm
foundations to prevent and address the existing gaps
in victim protection. While women and girls deserve
special attention, we must also expand the scope of
protection measures to include the most vulnerable
populations, including ethnic and religious minorities,
women in rural areas, women and girls associated with
armed groups, the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
and intersex population and men and boys, who are
equally vulnerable to sexual violence. Sexual violence
as a cause of forced displacement is equally worrying,
as are the growing risks of violence in situations of mass
movements, where migrants, refugees and displaced
persons are subject to sexual extortion, human
trafficking, assault and rape, among other abuses. It is
important to consider conflict-related sexual violence
when awarding refugee status or asylum, with policies
on victim assistance and the provision of adequate
protection for such populations.
Any act of sexual violence must be punished with
the utmost firmness through the rigorous application
of existing international legal mechanisms including, if
applicable, referral to the International Criminal Court,
with a view to completely eradicating impunity in
these cases. These acts of violence are war crimes, which
is why a rigorous zero-tolerance policy is required for
those who commit, order or condone sexual violence in
conflict situations.
Similarly, amnesties and immunities for this type
of crime should be prohibited, as should procedural
and evidentiary impediments to justice for victims,

S/PV. 8514

especially the restrictive statute of limitations for filing
complaints, as well as the intimidation or discrediting
of victims. Similarly, transitional justice arrangements
should be included in peace and ceasefire agreements.
The use of sanctions in cases of sexual violence in
the context of armed conflict and terrorism should be
consistent. For this to be effective, relevant sanctions
committees should deploy sexual and gender-based
violence specialists as part of their investigative work,
recommending measures applied under international
law to target all those involved in financing, planning
or supporting groups with connections to acts of sexual
violence, be they civilian or military.
Prevention is key. The systematic inclusion of
women’s protection advisers in the strategic planning
processes of political missions, peace operations and
mediation is essential. We highlight the work done by
Justice Rapid Response in partnership with UN-Women
and its roster of judicial experts on gender-based
sexual violence in processes to ensure criminal justice
and accountability in conflict situations. In addition,
more women should be incorporated into national
police forces and political and peacekeeping missions,
with adequate training in prevention and response to
cases of sexual violence, in recognition of the positive
correlation between reporting rates of sexual violence
and the number of women in such contingents.
It is essential that all the foregoing efforts be
focused on the victims. There must therefore be a
guarantee of multisectoral assistance for survivors of
sexual violence, including medical services, including
access to comprehensive sexual and reproductive health
care, as well as psychosocial and legal services. In this
regard, we regret that resolution 2467 (2019), adopted
today in the Council, excluded this provision on health,
since access to services and sexual and reproductive
health is essential to guarantee the dignity of the victim
of sexual violence.
Legal frameworks must be established at the national
level to protect victims and combat the stigma associated
with sexual violence and abuse, where reparations and
compensation are provided, taking into consideration
that different forms of sexual violence require different
solutions and responses. The meaningful participation
of survivors and civil society, including women’s and
women-led organizations, should also be encouraged as
a central element of prevention.

19-1175687/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

Finally, it is essential to involve women and girls
in decision-making processes and leadership positions.
The lack of opportunities, the dearth of national policies
for their protection and inclusion, and structural
barriers in all areas that promote discrimination against
women perpetuate circles of poverty, exclusion and
cycles of violence, inhibiting the enjoyment of their
rights. We welcome the framework for cooperation
between the Office of the Special Representative and
the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Discrimination Against Women in recognition that
conflict-related sexual violence is intrinsically linked
to structural gender inequalities and discrimination. It
is therefore necessary to guarantee equal opportunities,
access to education and the economic, political and
social empowerment of women and girls so that they
can assume a transcendental and transforming role in
their communities during and after conflicts, enabling
them to regain their dignity and the full enjoyment of
their rights.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Let me commend
you, Mr. President, for the hard work of your delegation
in bringing the negotiations on resolution 2467 (2019)
to a successful conclusion. Allow me to offer a few
short remarks at the end of a long day.
In the first instance, we want to refer to some of
the situations that are particularly relevant for our
discussions today. In Myanmar, there have been
patterns of widespread atrocities, including sexual
violence, against Rohingya women and girls. There
is strong evidence that the threat and use of sexual
violence have been a push factor for forced displacement
on a massive scale. We would like to hear from the
Special Representative how we can best address the
increasing prevalence of children born of wartime
rape and provide necessary services to mothers and
children without contributing to their stigmatization. In
Libya, migrant women and girls are very vulnerable to
conflict-related sexual violence. Many are exposed to
forced prostitution and sexual exploitation, amounting
to conditions of sexual slavery. In Syria, displacement
camps pose a high risk of sexual violence and abduction
for women and girls. Such violence during arrest
predominantly affects women and girls residing in the
home of a targeted male, while both males and females
are among the victims in detention settings.
88/103

23/04/2019

Secondly, women and girls are particularly
vulnerable to conflict-related sexual violence, but
research, including by the All Survivors Project,
documents that men and boys are also specifically
targeted, for example, in Burundi, the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
South Sudan. And yet sexual violence against men and
boys remains seriously underreported, due to a culture
of taboo and the stigmatization of the victims, which
also restrains them in their already limited access to
services. We welcome the progress made today in the
adoption of resolution 2467 (2019) to ensure timely
and safe survivor-centred assistance for all survivors,
including psychosocial and health-care services.
Thirdly, we reiterate our strong commitment to the
fight against human trafficking and modern slavery,
for which conflict situations pose a special risk. We
support in the particular the call in resolution 2331
(2016) to engage all relevant stakeholders in the fight
against illicit financial flows stemming from human
trafficking, including sexual slavery. This call has
paved the way for the Liechtenstein Initiative for a
Financial Sector Commission on Modern Slavery
and Human Trafficking, a public-private partnership,
carried out in cooperation with the Governments of
Australia and the Netherlands and with support from
the United Nations University. This work will result in
a set of measures for the global financial sector that
will be presented publicly in September in New York.
My final point relates to the importance of
accountability as an essential part of the fight against
conflict-related sexual violence. States have the
primary responsibility in this respect, but international
criminal justice mechanisms, in particular the
International Criminal Court, can significantly
contribute to strengthening national capacities, as
called for in Sustainable Development Goal 16, on the
basis of the principle of complementarity. The Court
has made sexual and gender-based crimes one of its
strategic priorities, which is a reflection of the very
progressive stance of the Court’s founding Statute
on this issue. There is a particular responsibility for
the Security Council to ensure accountability for
these crimes, in accordance with the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct
against mass atrocity crimes, supported by two thirds
of the Council’s membership.
We also commend the work of the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria,
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

whose annual report was discussed in the General
Assembly today (see A/73/PV.76). It has already made
significant progress in operationalizing its mandate to
effectively address sexual and gender-based crimes. We
expect the accountability mechanism established by the
Human Rights Council for Myanmar to build on this
good practice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): First of all, let me express our
heartfelt condolences to the people and the Government
of Sri Lanka on the heinous terrorist attack perpetrated
on innocent civilians by cowardly groups. We condemn
it in the strongest terms, and we stand in solidarity with
the people and Government of Sri Lanka.
We are greatly indebted to Germany for organizing
this important debate on the women and peace and
security agenda and the prevention of conflict-related
sexual violence. We must also thank the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive tenth annual report on
conflict-related sexual violence (S/2019/280), as well
as all those who have provided briefings for us this
morning. The report of the Secretary-General clearly
highlights the current trends and our concerns about
sexual violence in conflict. We sincerely hope that it will
allow us to draw up a clear framework of commitment
and seriously address the challenges involved in the
prevention of conflict-related sexual violence.
Sexual exploitation, abuse and violence in conflict
situations demands the strongest possible actions
and responses. One of those responses must be the
mobilization of international efforts to galvanize
effective and organized prevention measures to deal
with those challenges. We all know that sexual violence
is a common part of the tactics of terrorist organizations
in conflict and post-conflict situations everywhere. The
need to intensify efforts to prevent such violence and
hold accountable those who are responsible requires
global attention. At the same time, as reports from
the United Nations peacekeeping missions in Africa
currently make clear, it is Africans who are most
affected by this problem today. It is obvious that we
need to apply much greater efforts to stop the activities
of armed groups and other parties to conflict. We must
take action — urgent action — to deal with those areas.
In the context of Africa, we strongly welcome
the Secretary-General’s recommendation of engaging
religious and traditional leaders to help mitigate the

S/PV. 8514

suffering of survivors. Equally, we believe that a central
part of any recovery plan must be to strengthen the
capacity of the national institutions of conflict-affected
countries by providing finance and technical expertise
for their prevention efforts.
The Security Council should continue to encourage
prevention and capacity-building to address the root
causes of conflict. Those, of course, include persistent
problems of gender inequality and even backward
discriminatory practices. There is also a very real need
to encourage and promote the meaningful participation
of civil society organizations. They are absolutely
necessary to bring about changes in structural gender
inequality practices. The Council should employ all and
every means at its disposal and make every effort to
enhance and sustain a global response against conflictrelated sexual violence.
In that connection, the African Union (AU) has
demonstrated its commitment to fighting impunity
and holding accountable those responsible for conflictrelated sexual violence. One aspect of that should be
the continuous training of all peacekeeping personnel,
whether on United Nations or AU missions, on issues
related to gender and conflict-related sexual violence. I
am glad to be able to say that that has been prioritized
in Ethiopia’s deployment of peacekeepers.
Finally, let me once again affirm the commitment of
Ethiopia to criminalizing sexual violence and working
with the Office of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
and others, to prevent conflict-related sexual violence.
We welcome the Secretary-General’s commitment to
increasing women’s representation in United Nations
activities, whether as special representatives and
envoys, in field operations or among military observers,
police and human rights and humanitarian personnel.
We also appreciate and support his suggested measures
to prevent conflict-related sexual violence and his call
for a policy of zero tolerance. At the same time, we
reiterate the necessity that we should agree to a strong
and clear framework of action to respond effectively to
these challenges.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): Allow me to express my
condolences and sympathy for those who lost beloved
family members in the recent terrorist attacks in Sri
Lanka. Cambodia strongly condemns the attacks and

19-1175689/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

remains united with the Government and people of Sri
Lanka during this difficult period.
At the outset, I would like to thank Germany for
having convened today’s highly important debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
informative report (S/2019/280) on conflict-related
sexual violence, as well as to express my delegation’s
appreciation to the briefers for their insightful
presentations on the subject this morning.
The use of sexual violence as a tactic of war and a
means of repression, terror and control is reprehensible.
My delegation strongly condemns all forms of sexual
violence and exploitation, especially against women
and children. In order to prevent the victimization of
women and girls, we must address the deep-rooted
causes of conflict. Conflict prevention is a prerequisite
for sustainable peace and respect for human rights.
Poverty, discrimination, a lack of education, social
exclusion and inequality perpetuate the cycle
of violence.
In that light, the international community must
come together in addressing these issues in a purposeful
and comprehensive manner. The timely implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development can
provide real, long-lasting means of protection for
women and girls in times of conflict and in times of
peace. Women are the bedrock of global socioeconomic
development, yet despite the many advances, inequality
still persists. The successful implementation of the
Sustainable Development Goals, particularly those
addressing gender equality, the promotion of quality
education and inclusive economic growth, can empower
women and aid in achieving their full potential.
Cambodia is fully committed to advancing the
goals of gender equality, prosperity and peace. For our
part, we have spared no effort in addressing human
security threats, as we have contributed to global
peace and stability through our active participation in
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Cambodian
peacekeepers do their utmost to safeguard and protect
local populations from sexual violence and abuse by
upholding peace, preserving the rule of law and helping
to build safe and secure communities. Cambodia
supports the Secretary-General’s zero-tolerance policy
for crimes committed by United Nations personnel
on missions.
In that context, Cambodia supports the SecretaryGeneral’s recommendation contained in his report
90/103

23/04/2019

that the continued training of all peacekeeping
personnel on issues relating to gender and conflictrelated sexual violence is of paramount importance.
In order to ensure the effectiveness of operations and
make peacekeeping missions a success, peacekeepers
should be professionally trained, be provided with
reliable field support and have access to necessary
modern technology.
Cambodia stands with the Secretary-General in
his efforts to strengthen prevention by ensuring the
criminal accountability of perpetrators. On the eve of
the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), it
is necessary to strengthen accountability mechanisms,
noting the resolution’s call on all parties to armed
conflict to fully respect international law applicable to
the rights and protection of women and girls.
In our efforts to stamp out sexual violence and
abuse, the United Nations and its Member States must
work together in an open and cooperative manner. We
should strengthen the existing legal instruments for the
protection of women and girls in armed conflicts by
mainstreaming a gender perspective while promoting
survivor-focused care. Moreover, given that the
Secretary-General acknowledges that it is difficult to
ascertain the exact prevalence of conflict-related sexual
violence owing to a range of challenges, it is paramount
that reporting and recommendation documents be based
on accurate, verifiable data. Clarity in reporting will
aid in our understanding and help inform our action,
thereby strengthening the rule of law at the national and
international levels.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Cambodia’s
unwavering resolve to protect vulnerable populations
in situations of armed conflict. Ending sexual violence
against women and girls requires joint global action,
and Cambodia is fully committed to working with all
our partners to ensure that future generations live free
and in peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Itegboje (Nigeria): I thank the delegation
of Germany for organizing today’s open debate. Our
special appreciation goes to Secretary-General António
Guterres for his remarks. We thank Ms. Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, and the other briefers for
sharing their perspectives on this very important subject.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

Nigeria condemns in the strongest terms the
abduction, trafficking and maltreatment of women
and girls by extremist groups, including the heinous
activities of Boko Haram in the Lake Chad region,
particularly in north-eastern Nigeria. The use of women
and girls as sex slaves must also be equally condemned.
In that regard, it is our expectation that this debate will
offer suggestions to address the prevailing challenges
and gaps in acquiring the resources needed to advance
the role of women within the context of the global peace
and security architecture.
It is worthy of note that next year we will mark the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), which was initiated during Namibia’s presidency
of the Security Council in 2000. We acknowledge
that by adopting resolution 1325 (2000), the Security
Council provided the leadership necessary to give
impetus to involving women in the peace and security
agenda and laid the foundation for subsequent Security
Council resolutions on this very important issue.
In Africa, the African Union (AU) has been a
useful platform for the advancement of the women and
peace and security agenda by placing emphasis on the
engagement of women and youth in the continent’s
development. That is clearly reflected in Agenda 2063 of
the African Union. We are proud to note that 25 African
States have a national action plan on women and peace
and security, which constitutes 31 per cent of countries
with a national action plan globally. In addition, there
are numerous AU and African subregional instruments
that advance the women and peace and security agenda.
At the subregional level, in West Africa, the
Economic Community of West African States, in
collaboration with the United Nations Office for West
Africa, developed an integrated plan of action in
September 2010 for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000). The plan of action emphasizes the
importance of the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution, mediation and peacebuilding efforts, as
well as the rebuilding of post-conflict societies.
Building on those subregional efforts, in August
2013 Nigeria launched a national action plan to fully
implement the relevant provisions of resolution
1325 (2000). The plan reflects the Government’s
commitment to ensuring the security of women and
girls during armed conflicts and to enhancing their
active and direct participation in conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. We are also collaborating with our

S/PV. 8514

neighbours Chad, Cameroon, the Niger and Benin,
within the framework of the Multinational Joint Task
Force (MNJTF), to defeat the Boko Haram insurgency,
which is targeting women and girls. Our experience
in the Lake Chad region today is evidence that, with
determined international collaboration, terrorism can
be defeated. We therefore call on the international
community to continue to support the MNJTF.
In addition, the Government of Nigeria has
taken steps to cater to victims of Boko Haram
terrorism — in the form of rape and other sexual
violence against children, the abduction of children and
other grave violations — by putting in motion several
remedies. Some legal and social remedies undertaken
by the Government include the diligent prosecution of
detained Boko Haram terrorists in competent courts
of law, as well as reintegration, reorientation and
rehabilitation programmes designed to meet the needs
of each victim of sexual violence.
The sustained efforts of Nigeria and its international
partners have culminated in the liberation of territories
previously occupied by Boko Haram. We have taken
concrete steps to meet the humanitarian needs of
internally displaced persons and to ensure that the
necessary conditions are established to enable their
voluntary return to their places of origin in safety and
dignity. As a sequel to the aforementioned efforts, we
recall the release of the abducted Chibok and Dapchi
girls. Our efforts will continue until the remaining ones
are released.
I would like to conclude by acknowledging the
contributions of civil society organizations as partners
in the prevention, management and resolution of
disputes. The Nigerian Government will continue to
engage them as key stakeholders and partners in the
women and peace and security agenda. Nigeria remains
firmly committed to the promotion and protection of the
rights of women and girls in conflict and post-conflict
situations. In that regard, we will work assiduously
to enhance the participation of women in peace and
security initiatives.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): Allow us to join other
Member States in congratulating you, Mr. President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for this
month, as well as for convening this important debate.
I also thank all the briefers for their useful briefings.

19-1175691/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

From a Rwandan perspective, this open debate
comes at an important time in Rwandan history. This
month of April marks 25 years since the genocide
against the Tutsi, where rape was widely used in
carrying out the genocide. I will make my statement
today with that context in mind.
It was in 1998, at the trial of a genocide convict,
Jean-Paul Akayesu — a former commune mayor in
Rwanda — that the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda concluded and ruled, for the first time,
that rape was used as a means of perpetrating genocide
aimed at exterminating a targeted group and therefore
constituted an act of genocide, of which Akayesu
was convicted. Therefore, if we are going to address
the widespread use of sexual violence in conflict as a
weapon of war, terrorism, ethnic cleansing and even
for the extermination of targeted groups, then we need
to address the central issue of the culture of impunity,
which has become the default response to sexual
violence in conflict. Fighting impunity contributes to
the prevention of future crimes and the healing and
reintegration of survivors in their communities.
My second point concerns prevention, and I would
like to make the following recommendations. First,
the prevention of sexual violence begins with strong
institutions and comprehensive legal frameworks during
times of peace. National judicial institutions and legal
instruments should be robust enough to address cases of
sexual violence on an equal footing with other criminal
offences. Secondly, the Security Council should consider
expanding the designation criteria for individuals who
perpetrate sexual violence in the context of conflicts.
Relevant sanctions committees should work closely
with the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict in order to regularly appraise
cases of sexual violence. Thirdly, we should invest in
survivor-centred approaches that prioritize the rights
and special needs of victims of sexual and gender-based
violence. That entails the provision of appropriate
medical, social and economic reintegration support
in order to reinstate the social fabric of the societies
in which we live. Fourthly, it is equally important to
involve women in conflict resolution, peace agreement
negotiations, peacekeeping operations, peacebuilding
and reconciliation at all levels.
My third point is on the survivor-centred approach,
which has already been mentioned. Survivors of sexual
violence face an uphill task in recovering and rebuilding
their lives. Their experience of sexual violence leaves
92/103

23/04/2019

lasting marks of psychological and social trauma. They
have to deal with sexually transmitted diseases, which
create extensive health problems that are difficult to
address in post-conflict societies. We need a more
holistic and effective support system for survivors
that will enable them to move from being victims to
being resilient survivors and empowered members of
our communities.
The pain and trauma are also inherited by the
children who are conceived and born out of rape. As
they grow through adulthood, they try to come to
terms with an identity that no parent would wish for
their child. Those children also require extensive
psychosocial services to help guide them through their
unique experiences.
In closing, allow us to make the following suggestions.
First, we need to improve our understanding of
the ideology behind sexual violence in conflicts. The
bodies of women, girls and children from targeted
groups have become the new battlefields where wars
are fought, with the intention of destroying the social
fabric of targeted communities. Secondly, we need to
scale up the accountability of leaders of armed groups
or politicians promoting or enabling the use of sexual
violence in armed conflict. Even if justice cannot
undo the atrocious crimes of sexual violence, without
justice there cannot be an end to the culture of impunity
and the cycle of violence may continue. Lastly, in
the provision of justice and support for victims and
survivors, we need survivor-centred support in order
to shift the shame and stigma onto the perpetrators of
sexual violence in conflict.
The President: Before I give the floor to
the representative of Sri Lanka, please allow
me — and I think I can speak on behalf of everyone in
the Chamber — to convey our sympathy and heartfelt
condolences for the victims of the heinous attacks
committed in that country. Our thoughts are with the
victims and their families.
I now give the floor on the representative of
Sri Lanka.
Mrs. Samarasinghe (Sri Lanka): On behalf
of my delegation, let me first express our heartfelt
gratitude to all those delegations that have extended
their condolences and support to the Government and
people of Sri Lanka at this difficult time, as we face an
unprecedented challenge.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

We congratulate Germany, as President of the
Council for the month of April, on having organized
this debate, especially as we approach the twentieth
anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000). We also thank the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2019/280) and the briefers for their
valuable comments.
As a troop-contributing country, Sri Lanka has
taken many steps with regard to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations, including by
joining the Secretary-General’s Circle of Leadership,
signing the Secretary-General’s voluntary compact on
preventing and addressing sexual exploitation and abuse
and contributing to the United Nations Voluntary Trust
Fund for Victims of Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children.
The long, drawn-out conflict that Sri Lanka
experienced has left deep-seated scars on our society.
Women were major victims. Orphans, war widows,
single mothers and women-headed households were
the legacy of that conflict. Heightened vulnerabilities,
especially during conflict, render women and girls
far more susceptible to violence, and my delegation
strongly condemns violence, intimidation, harassment
and abuse directed towards women in all its forms and
manifestations, whenever they occur.
As Sri Lanka engages in rebuilding our society and
healing our communities through reconciliation and
justice mechanisms, we are committed to addressing
the immediate concerns of women and girls by
empowering them, providing them a safe space in which
to speak out and making them equal participants in all
areas of peacebuilding and peacekeeping. Sri Lanka’s
Administration has approved a set of recommendations
presented by the Prime Minister on preventing sexual
and gender-based violence. Those recommendations
include the formulation and enforcement of laws to
combat violence against women and girls and the
introduction of social protection measures.
With regard to allegations of sexual violence
during the period of the conflict, the Government
has established mechanisms to ensure the right to
justice. In 2016, Sri Lanka endorsed the Declaration
of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Noting the concerns raised regarding alleged sexual
violence, a series of directives have been issued by
the President of Sri Lanka with regard to alleged
human rights violations. Action has also been taken

S/PV. 8514

to prosecute the perpetrators of reported incidences of
rape by individual members of the security forces.
There are several action plans that focus on sexual
and gender-based violence in the country. In line with
the underlying principle of zero tolerance for sexual
and gender-based violence in Sri Lanka, the policy
framework and national plan of action to address sexual
and gender-based violence, launched in November
2016, provide a holistic policy guideline to address the
issue of violence against women.
Awareness-raising programmes have also been
conducted by the Government, as well as civil
society organizations, on zero tolerance for genderbased violence, legal protections and institutional
mechanisms for women at the grass-roots level. The
Ministry of Women and Child Affairs has its own
units in former conflict areas. Women development
officers and counsellors have taken a keen interest in
providing victim-centred rehabilitation for victims of
violence. Psychosocial counselling as a healing process
is available and given to women victims of violence by
the Office of National Unity and Reconciliation.
One recent phenomenon that has emerged regarding
sexual and gender-based violence is the request made
by civil society organizations to take measures to
address the biases that operate against victim survivors
as a result of the stigma associated with the incident.
They have also requested that the Government develop
guidelines to encourage stakeholders to take the
initiative to act with responsibility in order to enable
victim survivors and their families to participate in
society as equals.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Myanmar.
Mr. Suan (Myanmar): The Government of
Myanmar, in building a people-centred democratic
nation, places the promotion and protection of human
rights as a high priority on its political agenda. The
Government upholds its policy of zero tolerance for any
form of sexual violence, including conflict-related ones.
The root causes of conflict-related sexual violence lie in
the lack of peace and stability. We are therefore putting
our utmost efforts into the cessation of conflicts and
building sustainable peace and national reconciliation.
Allow me to briefly share the efforts made in recent
months by the Myanmar Government in the prevention
of conflict-related sexual violence.

19-1175693/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

Based on the Government’s firm commitment to
addressing this issue and in the spirit of cooperation with
the United Nations, in December last year we signed a
joint communiqué with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict
to prevent and address conflict-related sexual violence.
Soon after signing the joint communiqué, the
Government of Myanmar facilitated the visit of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Patten,
and her team to Myanmar in February. In March, a
ministerial-level national committee on the prevention
of and response to conflict-related sexual violence was
formed to implement the joint communiqué, and the
first national committee meeting was held subsequently.
The national action plan will be drafted with technical
assistance from the United Nations.
To transform the zero-tolerance policy against
sexual violence into action, domestic legal reform
is essential for the effective implementation of the
protection of the rights of women and girls. In this
regard, a law on the prevention of violence against
and the protection of women has been drafted and will
soon be enacted by Parliament. The new law stipulates
the need to protect women from all forms of violence,
including domestic abuse, marital rape, sexual violence,
harassment by stalking, harassment in the workplace
and public places, and violence through traditional and
customary practices.
The Government has regularly submitted reports
relating to actions taken on the protection of the rights
of women and the prevention of sexual violence against
women and girls to the United Nations Committee on
the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and
has also them included in the universal periodic review
process of the Human Rights Committee. We are
also working closely with UN-Women in formulating
and implementing our national strategic plan on the
advancement of women for the period 2013-2022 for
gender equality and women’s empowerment.
With regard to the alleged sexual violence
committed against women, an independent commission
of enquiry was established to investigate all allegations
of human rights violations following the Arakan
Rohingya Salvation Army terrorist attacks in August
2017 in northern Rakhine. The mandate of the
commission is to seek accountability and reconciliation.
The commission is carrying out its mandate with
independence, impartiality and objectivity.
94/103

23/04/2019

The commission has publicly invited submissions
on the allegation of human rights. The commission
will soon be visiting Cox’s Bazar, in Bangladesh,
to meet with alleged victims of sexual abuse. The
commission’s work will be evidence-based. Therefore,
the international community should support the work
of the commission, which will submit its final report to
the Office of the President towards the end of the year.
The Government of Myanmar is capable and willing
to address accountability in cases of sexual violence.
Action will be taken in accordance with the law where
there is sufficient evidence.
Much as we all condemn conflict-related sexual
violence, we must respond in accordance with the
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly with regard to the peaceful resolution of
conflicts through dialogue and negotiation, respect for
the sovereignty of countries and recognition of their
primary responsibility to maintain peace and security
and uphold the rule of law.
In tackling the issue of sexual violence in conflict,
the international community should be guided by
the universally accepted norms of impartiality,
non-selectivity and non-politicization of the issue. A
constructive approach through dialogue and providing
assistance to the country concerned would bring about
positive results in efforts to resolve the problem.
Exerting unfair pressure upon a country, solely based
on unrealistic lofty human rights standards without
giving any due regard to the condition of the country
concerned, would surely fail and be met with total
rejection from the people of that country.
The first obligation of international actors, whether
they are a United Nations agency, an international
non-governmental organization, a civil society
organization or a media outlet, is to do no harm. Often
and regrettably, so much damage has been done due to
the predetermined political agendas of some countries
and organizations that apply double standards by
abusing United Nations systems with a biased attitude.
Let me just give one example of how much damage
can be done to a country by the international community
and the international media in a crisis situation. I am
quoting from an article by Jacob Goldberg entitled
“When the story comes before the survivor”, which
appeared in the 21 February issue of the Columbia
Journalism Review. It says:
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

“In October 2017, a refugee woman named
Rajuma Begum, 20, told The New York Times’s
Jeffrey Gettleman that Myanmar soldiers beat and
gang-raped her and shot her mother and brother.”
She told him: “They threw my baby into a fire”. These
words have been passionately and repeatedly quoted
by the media, human rights activists, many diplomats
and even some United Nations officials in an attempt to
justify the accusation of alleged atrocities committed
by the Myanmar security forces.
But, before Rajuma told Gettleman that her baby
was thrown into a fire, she had already told a different
version of her story. She told Al Jazeera in September
2017: “They ripped my son from my arms and threw
him [on the ground] and cut his throat”. Later, she told
others that her baby had been killed with a machete,
making no mention of the fire. In any case, the damage
had been done. This is just one example among endless
fake and manufactured accounts with the malicious
intent to tarnish the image of the Government and the
people of Myanmar. If we are to succeed in our effort to
end sexual violence in conflict, we must rise above the
politicization and dramatization of the violence.
As for Myanmar, we shall continue to engage and
work constructively with the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to achieve our
objective of ending sexual violence.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Seifi Pargou (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
the German presidency of the Council for convening
this open debate. I also thank the Secretary-General
and the briefers for their valuable input.
Sexual violence in armed conflict — a method
often used as a tactic of war and terrorism — is a
brutal crime. Unfortunately, women and girls are its
main victims. The prevention of this inhumane practice
requires a collective effort. That, however, cannot be
successful without addressing its root causes, meaning
the occurrence of armed conflict itself. Accordingly, the
ultimate solution to prevent such crimes is to suppress
armed conflicts altogether. As long as terrorism, violent
extremism, foreign occupation and foreign intervention
exist, such a solution remains, regrettably, out of reach.
The current global environment is increasingly
becoming fertile ground for raising conflict over peace.
Destructive advocates of hatred, racism, discrimination

S/PV. 8514

and unilateralism are uniting against the proponents of
win-win multilateral solutions. This is most certainly
not a promising development for women and girls, most
of whom may continue to find themselves, here or there,
sooner or later, in the midst of another horrific armed
conflict and inevitably face the cruel cycle of violence,
including sexual violence.
The question must be raised, then, as to who
is responsible for the current situation. Indeed, it
is the politicians who are putting their delusionary
geopolitical interests ahead of the lives of innocent
women and girls in other countries, thereby shaping the
landscape that makes this current situation possible. It is
therefore essential that these aforementioned politicians
change their disastrous foreign policy options and stop
manufacturing armed conflicts. Shedding crocodile
tears for women and children who have fallen victim to
the conflicts created by them or by their allies cannot
veil their direct responsibilities.
In our volatile region, the Middle East, for
instance, foreign occupation, foreign invasion and
terrorism — which have no respect for women’s rights
and lives — are the core threat to their security. While
every effort should be made to prevent conflicts, which
are the main root cause of sexual violence in armed
conflicts, we also need to take other measures to
prevent and respond to such crimes. In this context, it
is essential that our efforts be focused on ensuring the
criminal accountability of such perpetrators. Likewise,
the access of survivors to justice must be ensured.
We should fight against impunity for conflict-related
sexual violence. In this regard, we support proposals
to exclude crimes of sexual violence from amnesty
provisions in the context of conflict resolution.
In conclusion, we underline the need to empower
women and promote their role in conflict prevention
and resolution. The realization of this noble objective
is a collective responsibility and we stand ready
to contribute to any genuine international effort to
that end.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mrs. Tripathi (India): My delegation would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this open
debate. We thank all the briefers for sharing their
experiences and insights.

19-1175695/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

Let me begin by condemning the serial blasts in Sri
Lanka and extending our deepest condolences to the
families of the victims, the Government and the people
of Sri Lanka.
Despite commendable advances both in policy and
practice in combating sexual violence, a gap between
what is recommended and the reality in the field
remains. We need to better understand the dynamic
complexities that manifest as sexual violence in armed
conflict in order to prevent the atrocities, end the culture
of impunity and rehabilitate and reintegrate survivors.
Our experience of appalling atrocities perpetrated
with impunity against women by the armed forces of a
State in our immediate neighbourhood in 1971 remains
vivid. The scars from these wounds are yet to heal.
The call for justice has reverberated at the high-level
general debate annually by a strong woman leader
who remains steadfast in reminding the international
community of the sexual violence committed against
women of her country. The perpetrators of these crimes
are now masquerading as champions of justice in order
to cover their mistakes.
We would like to make the following five points on
today’s theme of discussion.
First, a robust framework for accountability
against sexual violence in armed conflicts must seek to
include all actors, irrespective of their affiliations and
motivations. The conceptualization of sexual violence
primarily as a tactic of war has become pervasive. It is
based on historical evidence and we not are disputing
the assertion, yet restricting our understanding to the
notion of instrumentality of sexual violence in armed
conflicts runs the risk of rendering the other victims of
such atrocities invisible. These invisible victims could
include boys and men or those violated by civilians
and humanitarian actors with other motivations. The
framework for accountability and reparation must
address their suffering.
Secondly, a fragmented conceptualization of
sexual violence in armed conflicts often leads to the
decoupling of the issue from its sociocultural, economic
and political contexts. Interventions based on limited
considerations typically attempt to treat the symptoms,
rather than the underlying ailment. Our understanding
of the nexus between terrorism, trafficking and
sexual violence must inform action in this regard.
The Council must push for greater cooperation on
96/103

23/04/2019

countering terrorism and the effective implementation
of sanctions regimes.
Thirdly, the United Nations must prioritize support
to national Governments to adopt stronger legal,
administrative and justice systems for protecting
the rights of victims, prosecuting perpetrators and
addressing the long-term consequences of abuses
towards the individual, the family and the community.
Fourthly, the greater participation of women in
conflict resolution and post-conflict reconciliation
processes needs to be promoted to address deeprooted inequality and subordination in society.
Treating victims, their families and communities
as mere beneficiaries of humanitarian assistance
disempowers them. Strengthening the role of locally
led civil society organizations is therefore pivotal to
sustainable solutions.
Fifthly, mainstreaming the gender perspective in
peace operations and increasing women’s representation
in peacekeeping are prerequisites for prevention and
response. In this regard, India welcomes the uniformed
gender-parity strategy to increase the number of
women peacekeepers and is ready to deploy a female
engagement team to the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and a women formed police unit to the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan this year.
To conclude, improving the Security Council’s
response to sexual violence in armed conflicts cannot
be pursued in isolation. The normative work done
outside the Council regarding equal rights and the
empowerment of women must continue to inform
our discussions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): I would
like to thank Foreign Minister Maas and Germany
for convening today’s open debate. The high-level
participation in this discussion on sexual violence in
conflict, as well as the late hour due to the very long
list of speakers today, is a testament to the global
importance of this issue to many Member States.
We all agree that sexual violence in conflict is a
particularly heinous and vicious crime, as well as a
threat to international peace and security. We have
heard, however, how some armed groups continue
to use sexual-based violence as a tactic of war, with
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

no fear of consequence, in order to subjugate and
humiliate their opponents or to retain recruits. As the
Council has heard, Da’esh in our region is particularly
notorious for these actions and, despite its recent loss
of territories and defeats, not a single member of that
terrorist group has been held accountable for the sexual
violence it has inflicted, as poignantly described in
Nadia Murad’s brave testimony this morning. Similarly,
it is unconscionable that no one has been punished for
the sexual violence directed against the Rohingya. As
the Secretary-General mentioned earlier, women and
girls were gang-raped in their homes before they were
forced to flee Myanmar. Ending impunity is indeed an
essential deterrent against future crimes.
Beyond the trauma that conflict-related sexual
violence causes, it contributes to the dangerous cycle of
insecurity and inequality that impedes the participation
of survivors — predominantly women — in peace
processes. Via resolution 1325 (2000), United Nations
Member States have committed to increasing the
participation of women across the peace-development
continuum, recognizing the crucial role of women in
preventing conflict and sustaining peace. I would like
to share what my country, the United Arab Emirates, is
doing to try and help in its small way.
Earlier this year, the United Arab Emirates and UNWomen launched a military and peacekeeping training
programme for Arab women at the women’s military
academy in the United Arab Emirates. The programme
aims to build the capacity of women in our region and
will strengthen the pipeline of women for deployment
to peacekeeping operations in the future. The first
cohort of women, 134 in total, recently completed the
training, and we will expand the programme to include
women trainees from countries beyond the Arab region
as part of our global commitment.
Meaningful participation in peace processes
requires an enabling and encouraging environment for
survivors to tell their stories, as we have heard today. The
majority of those survivors are women and girls. Few
of them come forward because of the perceived shame,
fear of rejection and lack of resources, among a number
of other factors. To address these challenges, we need a
survivor-centred approach, as recognized by resolution
2467 (2019), adopted today. We need to raise awareness
of the stigma surrounding rape and offer resources and
support in a way that empowers survivors. The United
Arab Emirates has financially supported the excellent
work of the Special Representative’s Team of Experts

S/PV. 8514

on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict
and we encourage other Member States to do the same.
In our efforts to further the women and peace and
security agenda in the next phase of implementation
beyond 2020, I am pleased to announce that the United
Arab Emirates will shortly launch a panel series,
with the Georgetown Institute for Women, Peace and
Security, to examine the important role of women
across the social, political, and economic components
of post-conflict reconstruction and to elevate research
and better inform data-driven policy and practice. It is a
critically underresearched area of the women and peace
and security agenda and we look forward to sharing the
outcomes of the project with Member States.
Ending conflict-related sexual violence, as
envisioned by resolution 1820 (2008), is a daunting task
but a moral imperative for us all. Member States should
implement the Secretary-General’s recommendations
on conflict-related sexual violence, and we believe
they should prioritize the following three actions.
First, we should focus on documenting and tracking
cases of conflict-related sexual violence. Without
evidence and data, it is impossible to measure the
effectiveness of our efforts to eradicate sexual violence
and hold individuals accountable. Secondly, we should
support national efforts to address impunity in States
currently in conflict or in a reconstruction phase, as
Amal Clooney called for this morning. That includes
strengthening the capacity of national investigative and
judicial bodies, as well as supporting and increasing
the number of women protection advisers in United
Nations missions. Thirdly, we should mainstream
gender equality and women’s empowerment in our
foreign policy and development programming. The
United Arab Emirates has set a goal of ensuring that
all of its foreign assistance programming includes a
gender component by 2021, and we encourage others to
establish similarly ambitious targets.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liberia.
Mr. Kemayah (Liberia): My delegation brings
warm greetings from His Excellency Mr. George
Manneh Weah, President of the Republic of Liberia,
and congratulates you, Sir, on your assumption of the
Security Council presidency for the month of April.
We commend the Security Council for its adoption
earlier today of resolution 2467 (2019), on sexual

19-1175697/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

violence in conflict. Liberia is proud to have been one
of its sponsors.
We also want to reiterate our empathy and
sympathy for the Government and the people of Sri
Lanka and the families of the victims of the recent
tragic terrorist attacks.
We would like to thank the Security Council, under
Germany’s presidency, for hosting this stimulating
debate and we thank the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative and the briefers for their inspiring
contributions, which truly reflect their unrelenting
efforts to end the use of sexual violence as a tactic of
warfare. On this tenth anniversary of the mandate of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
the Government of Liberia would like to express its
appreciation for the constructive efforts that have been
undertaken under that mandate, including its assistance
to Liberia in our efforts to strengthen our national
legislation and our justice system’s capacity.
The Government of Liberia remains resolute in its
ownership and leadership of the security and welfare
of its State and people. One of the peacebuilding
objectives of our new development framework, the ProPoor Agenda for Prosperity and Development, aims
to sustain peace and promote social cohesion through
the increased participation of women in every area.
Regrettably, however, in an alarming phenomenon that
the Government of Liberia is very concerned about,
sexual violence is a persistent remnant of our period of
conflict. For many years women were excluded from
political and development processes, and a climate
of impunity for acts of sexual violence made matters
worse. Today we realize the importance of addressing
issues of impunity and accountability that impede
deterrence and prevention, as well as addressing the
root causes that fuel the recurrence of sexual violence.
The Government of Liberia is poised to embark on the
following objectives.
First, we will adopt our second national action plan
on women and peace and security and ensure budgetary
support for its implementation. Secondly, we will
reconstitute the national and county steering committees
to promote the localization of resolution 1325 (2000),
with a view to effectively raising awareness and
improving our national implementation of it. Thirdly,
we will establish gender units in nine ministries and
agencies to ensure the effective mainstreaming of
gender into their institutional frameworks. We will also
98/103

23/04/2019

lobby and enhance our collaboration with the national
legislature to ratify the Optional Protocol to the United
Nations Convention on the Elimination of all Forms
of Discrimination Against Women, ensure the entry
into force of our domestic violence bill and increase
women’s access to landownership. With the effective
achievement of those objectives in view, the Government
of Liberia is collaborating with UN-Women, the United
Nations Development Programme, the International
Organization for Migration and non-governmental
organizations to implement a number of initiatives
on women’s empowerment, the political engagement
of young people, justice and human rights and the
peaceful management of concession-related conflicts,
with support from the Peacebuilding Fund.
Today Liberia’s iconic Peace Huts continue to be
a potent traditional mechanism for conflict mediation
and resolution and early-warning systems. We have
also received financing from the Peacebuilding Fund to
support the strengthening of participants’ negotiation
and mediation skills. Dialogues in community Peace
Huts have focused on issues related to sexual and
gender-based violence, drug abuse, education, land
disputes, health services and illegal movements at
the borders.
Combating sexual violence requires a collaborative,
multi-stakeholder and multisectoral approach. The
Government of Liberia is committed to leveraging that
approach and remains grateful to the United Nations and
our development partners for their continued support
and assistance as we earnestly endeavour to ensure
that Liberia remains a secure country of inclusion and
equality for all.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Ms. Yánez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Ecuador thanks the German presidency
for the timely convening of this open debate on the
devastating problem of sexual violence in armed
conflict. We are grateful to the Secretary-General
and the briefers for their statements this morning.
We would particularly like to recognize the work of
Dr. Denis Mukwege and Ms. Nadia Murad, who were
rightly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize last year for
their selflessness in supporting and caring for victims
of sexual violence and for bringing the world’s attention
to the fact that such crimes must not go unpunished.
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

As the Secretary-General’s annual report
(S/2019/280) outlines, sexual violence against women,
girls and young boys is an alarming trend that continues
to affect millions. It is used as a tactic of war and
terrorism and as an instrument of political repression.
We agree with the Secretary-General’s statement in
paragraph 3 of the report that
“[p]reventing sexual violence requires the
advancement of substantive gender equality before,
during and after conflict, including by ensuring
women’s full and effective participation in political,
economic and social life and ensuring accessible
and responsive justice and security institutions.”
We also believe that in order to address sexual
violence in armed conflict, a comprehensive and
preventive vision is necessary. Member States need
to make a collective effort, including legislative and
judicial reform, so that those responsible for acts of
sexual violence are brought to justice and so that
survivors have access to justice, are treated with dignity,
benefit from protection and are duly compensated.
Of all those elements, the fight against impunity is
fundamental, as is the presence of women in mediation
processes and decision-making in conflict resolution
and peacebuilding.
To guarantee the effectiveness, practice and
enforceability of women’s fundamental rights,
Ecuador’s legal framework is based on two fundamental
pillars — the Constitution, which explicitly
acknowledges that Ecuador must consider the measures
necessary to prevent, eliminate and sanction all forms
of violence, including sexual violence; and the binding
international instruments ratified by the State.
The national plan for eliminating gender violence
became public policy in 2007 and constitutes one of the
pillars of the “Toda una vida” national development plan.
In 2018, Ecuador issued a comprehensive constitutional
law to prevent and eradicate violence against women,
which establishes a comprehensive national system that
is structured around and articulated through prevention,
care, protection and comprehensive reparation of the
rights of victims.
As was voiced by my delegation during the
interactive dialogue on commitments under resolution
1325 (2000), my country has continuously promoted
initiatives to mainstream gender, particularly through
the National Council for Gender Equality, based on its
specialized competencies, and through the Ministry

S/PV. 8514

of Defence with regard to managing the School of
Peacekeeping Operations, which trains and educates
military personnel — men and women alike — for
deployment in United Nations peace missions.
Ecuador wishes to express its appreciation for
the Secretary-General’s various initiatives in this
area — the strategy for improving the approach to
preventing sexual exploitation and abuse across the
system and his zero-tolerance policy in that regard;
the voluntary global compact on the commitment to
eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse, signed by my
country in February 2018; the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative; and the Circle of Leadership on the prevention
of and response to sexual exploitation and abuse. All of
those initiatives complement and reinforce resolution
1325 (2000).
To conclude, I wish to convey to the Office of the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
my country’s appreciation for its work in recent years
and for Ms. Patten’s selflessness in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to the
United Nations.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): My delegation would
like to thank the German presidency for convening
today’s open debate to consider sexual violence
in conflict.
This topic is sadly all too familiar to the members
of the Security Council. Reports of the SecretaryGeneral on crisis situations refer regularly to crimes of
sexual violence. Used as a weapon of war to subjugate
and humiliate victims and cause them physical,
emotional and psychological harm, sexual violence also
has profoundly negative impacts on the communities to
which victims belong and from which they sometimes
find themselves ostracized.
Far too often, rape, gang rape and other forms
of sexual violence, including unspeakable crimes
committed against children and infants, are perpetrated
when the rule of law is weak or non-existent and when
there is no respect for principles of humanitarian
law. What is more, impunity is often the norm and
consequently victims are often afraid to speak out. The
silence must be broken. We cannot remain indifferent
when such widespread cruelty is inflicted on the
innocent. Impunity must give way to accountability so
that there can be justice and reparation.

19-1175699/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

The landmark resolution 1325 (2000) demands
that parties in armed conflict take special measures
to protect women and girls from violence, particularly
from rape and other forms of sexual abuse. It also calls
for the participation and full involvement of women in
all efforts to maintain and promote peace and security.
Indeed, one way that women and girls can help to lay
the foundations for durable peace and justice is when
their own voices are heard. In particular, survivors of
conflict-related sexual violence should be considered
experts — their pain should be acknowledged, their
strength recognized and their wisdom harnessed.
Terrorist organizations and other non-State actors,
including criminal gangs, have committed crimes of
sexual violence on a massive scale. We know, however,
that they are regrettably not the only perpetrators of
such crimes. Members of armed forces and even some
who serve under the United Nations flag have, in
some instances, added to the misery. My delegation
notes with appreciation the initiatives to prevent and
combat sexual abuse in United Nations peacekeeping
operations, including through specialized training of
personnel, with the specific aim of reducing risks in host
countries through campaigns to enhance sensitivity,
promote respect for the dignity of others and encourage
populations to speak up.
Those who have suffered conflict-related violence
are victims at multiple levels. They are burdened by war
and then condemned to carry the marks of that trauma in
their own person. Their educational, development and
other basic needs are often not met. Among the victims
are also men and boys — a reality so taboo in some
cultures and contexts that it is hidden and shrouded in
even greater silence. To add insult to injury, victims
are afraid to speak out in many cases for fear of being
shunned by their own communities, indeed by their
own families, making their plight even more desperate.
Discussion of this delicate topic inevitably raises
the equally sensitive question of children conceived
and born as a result of sexual violence in conflict. The
human rights of those children need to be respected
and guaranteed as they would be for any child. Those
young, innocent lives should be welcomed, cherished
and given the means necessary to flourish and reach
their full human potential. Those children need to be
supported and loved, not shamed, stigmatized, banished
or, worse still, denied the most basic right to exist and
be born.
100/103

23/04/2019

Our hope is that today’s open debate and the
attention that it brings to the subject will give more
space to survivors and victims to come forward to
find healing and hope through the recognition of their
personal dignity, and that more robust mechanisms
will be established to bring to justice those who have
committed violations against them.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mr. Ruidíaz Pérez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I wish to express in this Chamber the
Chilean Government’s condolences to the people and
the Government of Sri Lanka for the cruel terrorist
attacks carried out in the country in recent days, as well
as our strong condemnation of those crimes.
We appreciate Germany’s initiative to convene this
open debate and the leadership of Minister Heiko Maas.
My delegation would also like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for presenting his report (S/2019/280), the
speakers whom we heard this morning and Ms. Pramila
Patten for her work as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.
Chile reiterates its commitment to implementing
resolutions on sexual and gender-based violence in
conflict and against the impunity of those crimes, as
well as the Secretary-General’s initiatives in favour of
gender equality and his zero-tolerance policy regarding
sexual abuse.
Women and peace and security constitutes one
of the priority pillars of Chile’s foreign policy. We
have therefore promoted stronger regional and global
cooperation in establishing public policies that
guarantee women the full exercise of their rights,
which triggers cultural and structural changes that lead
to inclusive societies in which the empowerment of
women and the prevention of sexual violence should be
at the centre of the international response.
A wider dissemination of measures for prevention,
protection, rehabilitation and reintegration is needed to
ensure a full understanding of the seriousness of sexual
and gender-based violence. Reporting such crimes
must also be promoted and protected to effectively
combat their impunity. We value the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as the deployment of women’s protection advisers
in United Nations missions, which has contributed,
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

among others, to improving the access and quality of
available information.
Achieving justice is essential for victims to achieve
some degree of spiritual and material reparation. In
that regard, we emphasize the work of the International
Criminal Court — an instrument that complements
the work of national courts and mixed courts in
transforming the culture of impunity into one of
deterrence. The imprescriptibility of such crimes is
also fundamental to fighting against their impunity and
for achieving just reparation.
Education programmes at all levels are also
necessary for prevention, especially in the armed
forces. In that regard, Chile’s second national plan
has heightened training and education on gender
perspectives, sexual violence and human rights of
women in peacekeeping operations, both for police and
military institutions and for civilian personnel who
participate either in those institutions or in conflict and
post-conflict resolution processes.
Chile is currently committed to developing its third
national action plan for the period 2020-2022 with a
view to strengthening the role of women in negotiation,
mediation, construction and peacebuilding. Monitoring,
evaluation and accountability will also be incorporated
with respect to its objectives, as well as the budgetary
allocations necessary for its adequate implementation.
Its sphere of competence will cover natural catastrophes,
humanitarian aid and the displacement of people. We
are actively collaborating with civil society and other
institutions in its development.
In line with the vision that we have set out, the
challenges of the third-generation national plan
include increasing the participation of women in peace
operations and in leadership and decision-making
positions, as well as ensuring the presence of gender
advisers in those operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Paraguay.
Mr. Carrillo Gómez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): On behalf of the delegation of the Republic
of Paraguay, I welcome the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2019/280) on conflict-related sexual violence and
the initiative of the German presidency of the Council
to convene this debate and to begin commemorating
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) — a framework resolution aimed at

S/PV. 8514

encouraging the representation of women at all levels
of decision-making for the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts.
Like the Secretary-General in his report, we
acknowledge that, in order to prevent sexual violence,
it is necessary to promote substantive gender equality
before, during and after conflicts. In our experience,
including women at different levels of decision-making
has been a challenging process but one that continues to
progress steadily. For example, since 2006, Paraguayan
female career officers have been able to graduate from
military academy, serving in almost all specialist areas
of the army, the air force and the navy. Many of those
women have been deployed as part of the Paraguayan
contingents in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Women will organically reach the highest ranks of
the military, occupy the corresponding positions at
different levels of command and be deployed in the
country’s various military secondments.
Incorporating women into traditionally male roles
has been accompanied by active State measures, such
as the creation of public policies that are supported
by relevant legislation and the provision of the
infrastructure necessary for the smooth running of
military activity, while making arrangements for the
unique needs of women. Through the national education
system, the Paraguayan Government has also promoted
the population’s awareness of the importance of the
participation of women in areas traditionally reserved
for men.
Finally, we welcome the call made to Member States
to assume new commitments for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000) on the twentieth anniversary
of its adoption. In that context, the Republic of
Paraguay, through the Ministry of Women, will
convene an inter-institutional working group to update
Paraguay’s national action plan 2013-2017 with a view
to implementing resolution 1325 (2000) on women
and peace and security and re-evaluating it for the
upcoming period.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the Economic Community of Central African States.
Mrs. Byaje (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), I would like to start by thanking the delegation
of Germany for the excellent work carried out during its
presidency of the Council during this month of April,

19-11756101/103

S/PV.8514

Women and peace and security

and by wishing you, Mr. President, every success in the
work that remains to be done.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, as well as all the other speakers who have
preceded me, for their constructive contributions to this
open debate.
The choice of today’s topic reflects your
commitment, Sir, to the protection and advancement
of women and girls against sexual violence in conflict
situations, within the United Nations humanitarian
framework. It is a pledge of your firm commitment to
address that worrying question with renewed vigour in
order to finally move from words to deeds.
The Economic Community of Central African
States congratulates you, Mr. President, on this
undertaking and takes the opportunity to commend
the concrete initiatives taken by its member States, as
well as their sustained political will, as evidenced by
the implementation of laws, policies and mechanisms
to address abuses of women in conflict-affected areas.
ECCAS continues to assure its member States of its
full collaboration in the process of aligning national
legislation with regional and international instruments.
Despite the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) and
subsequent resolutions, which have been crucial in
raising awareness regarding violence against women
and girls during times of conflict and in humanitarian
environments in which they are regularly raped and
abused with full impunity, nonetheless women and girls
continue to be subjected to all kinds of sexual abuse in
the midst of conflict, where the use of that inhumane
and degrading practice has become the norm and rape
is a weapon of war.
It is urgent that we put an end to that trend in the
name of the young girls, women and children who are
seeing the world crumble around them without any
hope of resuming a normal life or having their attackers
brought to justice. To that end, a change in our practices
and actions in peacekeeping and peacebuilding
missions, as well as in the protection of civilians, is
essential if we are to eradicate the scourge.
It is in that context that ECCAS is striving to
consolidate early warning mechanisms to strengthen
its capacities in preventing and managing armed
conflict by advocating for the participation of women
in peace and security processes. It is also for the
102/103

23/04/2019

sake of contributing to that effort that seven of its 11
member States have adopted national action plans on
innovative resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace
and security. A regional action plan for the resolution’s
implementation has also been approved and adopted by
member States.
It should also be emphasized that the economic
and social empowerment of women is at the heart of
all the actions undertaken in the context of national
plans, because it is indeed a cross-cutting issue in all
sectors. It is therefore imperative, including in the
areas of peace, security and inclusive governance,
that a favourable climate be established to ensure that
women participate actively in mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, as well as in post-conflict building
efforts, while benefiting from laws that protect them in
armed conflict.
Allow me to recall an example that was highlighted
so eloquently by the representative of Rwanda, namely,
the 250,000 rape victims of Rwanda — one of our
member States — during the genocide perpetrated
against the Tutsi in 1994, who saw their hopes and
dreams forever shattered, especially since the majority
of them contracted HIV/AIDS. I am also compelled
to mention the daily abuses suffered by women in the
areas where armed groups thrive in our subregion. Such
heinous and humiliating crimes, such as rape, sexual
abuse and violence against women in times of conflict,
rob victims of all dignity and lead to discrimination
against them and stigmatization, while leaving them
with moral, physical and psychological wounds.
In order to address the root causes of all forms of
violence against women and girls, the following essential
steps have been proposed in some of our member States’
national plans for the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000), which should be encouraged and supported:
first, allocating resources to prevent sexual abuse and
mitigate its consequences, while raising awareness
of violence against women in conflict settings;
secondly, strengthening social justice mechanisms
and creating institutional and legal frameworks to
facilitate access to justice, while developing policies
to fight impunity; thirdly, monitoring and evaluating
progress; fourthly, prosecuting the perpetrators of
such crimes and providing support and reparations to
survivors of sexual violence; and lastly, ensuring that
women are represented in the contingents deployed in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations, as well as
19-11756

23/04/2019

Women and peace and security

S/PV. 8514

in post-conflict building, and sharing good practices
with local authorities.

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of the Republic of Korea to make a further statement.

To conclude, the ultimate goal of today’s debate can
be attained by adhering to the different preconditions
that we have just cited. If we establish all the necessary
circumstances, we will be able to arrive at practical
solutions for transforming the negative experiences
of victims of rape and sexual violence into positive
developments so as to restore human dignity and
eliminate once and for all violence against women and
the structural obstacles to their economic, social and
political empowerment and gender equality.

Mr. Lee Jooil (Republic of Korea): I would
like to reply to the statement made by the Japanese
representative regarding the issue of comfort women.

ECCAS will continue its reach out to member States
to encourage them to accelerate the implementation
of their national plans on resolution 1325 (2000), as
well as the legal decisions and instruments adopted
to enable women to participate in all spheres of life.
To that end, ECCAS welcomes the collaboration with
its strategic partners, particularly the United Nations,
the African Union and the other regional economic
communities, as well as civil society and the private
sector, in exchanging experiences and good practices.
Finally, we welcome the support of those partners
in pooling human and material resources at the regional,
national and continental levels with a view to charting
the way forward and identifying the collective actions
to be taken to win the fight against sexual violence.

The issue of comfort women has dimensions that go
beyond the bilateral relationship between the Republic
of Korea and Japan. It is indeed a matter of universal
human rights and, in particular, is related to sexual
violence in conflict, the resolution of which requires a
victim-centred approach. The Korean Government will
continue to cooperate with the international community
on this issue.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Japan to make a further statement.
Mr. Furumoto (Japan): The Government of Japan
has long been sincerely dealing with the issue of
comfort women. In addition, as a result of considerable
diplomatic efforts, Japan and the Republic of Korea
reached an agreement in December 2015. With that
agreement, both countries confirmed that the issue
of comfort women had been finally and irreversibly
resolved. It is of great importance that the agreement
be strictly implemented.
The meeting rose at 8.15 p.m.

19-11756103/103
