S/PV.7164

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7164th meeting

Tuesday, 29 April 2014, 10.20 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Ogwu/Mr. Sarki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Nigeria)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rwanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein
Mrs. Kazragienė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Manzi
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

14-31416 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

*1431416*

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Algeria, Bangladesh, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Brazil, Cuba, Egypt, Guatemala,
Guinea, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic
of Iran, Israel, Japan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malaysia,
Morocco, Namibia, Oman, Pakistan, Peru, Qatar,
Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mr. Robert
Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Abdou
Salam Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People; and His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla,
Permanent Observer of the League of Arab States to
the United Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now give the floor to Mr. Serry.
Mr. Serry: I intend to dedicate today’s briefing to
the Middle East peace process as the Security Council
will be briefed on Syria tomorrow and on Lebanon next
week.
We meet today, nine months to date since the
launch of United States-brokered negotiations between
2/68

29/04/2014

Israelis and Palestinians with the previously agreed
objective of achieving a comprehensive settlement on
all core issues by this time. In those nine months, we
have seen an unprecedented effort by Secretary of State
Kerry, assisted by Mr. Martin Indyk as his envoy, to see
the process through at long last. Quartet, regional and
international stakeholders, recognizing it as perhaps
one of the last chances to achieve a two-State solution,
have also been actively engaged in support of the effort.
Yet efforts have faltered, given the inability of the
parties to bridge the gaps on their substantive positions
or even accept with reservations a United States
framework that would attempt to do just that. As of
today, we know talks have been suspended. It behooves
the parties and all stakeholders to recognize that this
is another moment of truth. Inaction could see the
situation turn into a crisis. That is why joint reflection
is in order on how the current impasse came about and
ways to overcome it.
On 28 March, the Israeli Cabinet postponed its
decision to follow through with the release of the fourth
and last tranche of 30 pre-Oslo prisoners. On 1 April,
interpreting that as a breach of the quiet understanding
of a diplomatic truce in return for the release of 104
pre-Oslo prisoners, the Palestinians, by a unanimous
vote of the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO),
proceeded with submitting accession instruments
to 15 international treaties and conventions. The
announcements of 708 reissued tenders for settlement
units in Gilo on the same day added to the Palestinian
conviction that they had no other choice. Nevertheless,
President Abbas reiterated his commitment to
negotiations.
The Palestinian decision was met with surprise by the
Israeli side, which has since indicated its understanding
that they were nearing a deal to extend negotiations that
comprised more than the aforementioned prisoners. In
their interpretation, the original understanding was
valid as long as there was progress within the talks.
Despite those events, the negotiators continued
to meet in an effort to find a way out of the impasse.
We understand that among the issues discussed as part
of Palestinian demands have been the release of the
fourth tranche of prisoners and a freeze of settlement
construction, combined with an offer of continued talks
if the issue of borders is front-loaded. The international
community also remained active, urging both parties to
remain constructively engaged in talks and not miss the
opening presented by the United States. The Secretary14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

General was in contact with both leaders on 13 and
14 April, and High Representative Ashton issued a
statement to that effect on 18 April. In an emergency
meeting on 9 April, Arab Foreign Ministers remained
appreciative of United States efforts and declared their
support for President Abbas, including by renewed
pledges of a safety net in the event of a loss of revenue
as a result of Israeli potential reprisals. Such support
is timely and welcome, while we urge Israel to adhere
to the punctual and transparent transfer of revenues it
collects on behalf of the Palestinian Authority, which is
essential for the stability of the Authority.
In subsequent developments, Palestinians reached
a unity agreement on 23 April, stipulating, inter alia,
that a national consensus Government would be formed
within five weeks and elections held no later than
six months after the formation of that Government.
Following the announcement of that accord, Israel
cancelled a meeting scheduled between the Israeli and
Palestinian negotiators and, after an emergency Cabinet
meeting on 24 April, took the decision to suspend the
talks. Quartet envoys remained in frequent contact
throughout, holding several telephone calls to discuss
the developments.
The political stalemate that I have been describing
poses great risks to the prospect of a two-State solution,
which I will elaborate on later. It will also not be without
impact on the situation on the ground, which I will
briefly address, as it is already volatile, with negative
trends in the West Bank and a fragile calm in Gaza.
The year 2013 saw the highest number of Palestinian
fatalities in the West Bank since 2009. I was appalled
by incidents of violence in the reporting period, against
both Palestinians and Israelis, which we condemn. Two
particularly disturbing instances were the killing of
an Israeli man and the injury of two others, including
a child, in an attack near Hebron on 14 April, during
Passover, and the shooting by the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) of a 14-year-old Palestinian boy crossing the
Barrier on 19 March, which resulted in his death.
The rise in violence in the West Bank was reflected
by the following trends, inter alia: increased clashes
between Israeli security forces and Palestinians,
particularly in and around refugee camps; Palestinian
stone- and Molotov cocktail-throwing, resulting in
some injuries and material damage; and settler attacks
against Palestinians and their property, in spite of
some Israeli efforts to crack down on so-called price
tag attacks, which have also targeted Israeli security

S/PV.7164

forces. We should be under no illusion that the level of
violence would be higher still were it not for the work
of the Palestinian security forces to maintain law and
order, and continued security coordination.
Settlement activity continued. In two worrisome
developments on 13 April, the Government of Israel
retroactively approved legalizing a West Bank outpost
at Gush Etzion, appropriating private Palestinian
land, and granted settler access to a disputed Hebron
building that Palestinians have over the years argued
in court was purchased illegally. The United Nations
position on the illegality of settlements is well known.
The reporting period saw 88 demolitions of Palestinian
structures, including five residences and a mosque
today, and the dismantling of five settlement outposts
by the IDF.
The situation in East Jerusalem remains worrisome.
Tensions and clashes in the Old City have continued,
including during the holiday period. The SecretaryGeneral has reiterated the importance of respect for the
religious freedom of all, for worshippers of all faiths to
have access to their holy sites and for all sides to refrain
from provocations. He has restated the United Nations
long-standing position that the status of the Old City
and the religious sites within is an extremely sensitive
final-status issue that can be resolved only through
negotiations, and that the parties should refrain from
attempts to establish facts on the ground and alter the
character of the Old City.
All of that points to the fact that the situation on the
ground is serious and likely to further deteriorate if not
addressed. We must not forget Gaza, where practical
steps are urgently needed to improve the humanitarian
security situation. In Gaza, too, there are troubling
signs, with more rockets fired at Israel, border incidents
and Israeli operations, which have also caused death or
injury to civilians in recent months. Ongoing political
and security developments in Egypt have also led to
the continued closure of tunnels, the tackling illegal
smuggling and the frequent closure of Rafah.
The United Nations remains actively engaged,
together with the Palestinian Authority and donors,
in addressing some of the most pressing issues in
Gaza, including by ensuring that a safety net is in
place to allow the most critical water, sanitation and
health-related facilities to continue operating. In that
regard, I am pleased to report that the Government
of Turkey recently pledged $1.5 million to the World
Health Organization to address the shortages in a

14-314163/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/04/2014

number of key drugs, which we hope will help decrease
expensive referrals of patients outside Gaza. We are
still waiting for Israel to deliver on its commitment to
the full resumption of the previously agreed package
of United Nations construction works, where some
$26 million worth of projects are still stalled and
another $120 million worth of new work is pending
Israeli approval.

Difficult choices are now required of the parties.
They should realize that not making a choice is the
most detrimental choice of all, namely, to accept that
we are going down the path of a one-State reality on
the ground. This is a time for the parties to reflect on
whether they wish to live up to their stated commitment
to the two-State solution, or whether they will by
default let it slip further away.

Political progress is crucial to address Gaza’s
structural problems. In that context, I had an
opportunity on 24 April to discuss with President
Abbas the very important development towards
Palestinian unity. I was assured by the President that the
agreement would be implemented under his leadership
and on the basis of the PLO commitments. President
Abbas emphasized that those commitments would
hold the future Government of national consensus to
recognition of Israel, non-violence and adherence to
previous agreements. President Abbas also reiterated
his continued commitment to peace negotiations and
to keeping protests non-violent, a message he also
delivered to the PLO Central Council on 26 April.

First and foremost, they must refrain from steps
that will render futile any efforts to find a way back to
negotiations and salvage the two-State solution. Both
sides have to convince each other anew that they are
partners for peace. If Israel is serious about a twoState solution, it must recognize the negative impact
of continued illegal settlement activity. Palestinians
in turn should be reflective of their actions in
international forums. The international community and
the region should also reassess its role, if we remain
convinced — as I do — of the importance of the twoState solution, and ask what we can do to persuade the
parties to make the right choice.

On the basis of those commitments, the SecretaryGeneral is of the view that this development can
constitute an opening that offers at long last the
prospect of reuniting the West Bank and Gaza under
one legitimate Palestinian Authority, including by
holding long overdue elections. For this to have a
chance of success, it needs to be managed the right way.
The Secretary-General calls on all parties to cooperate
to that end. We now expect all factions to support that
process as described by President Abbas, meaning that
they must commit in deeds, not only words, to that
path — first and foremost by adhering to non-violence
in the West Bank and in Gaza.
We are also aware that Israel, facing a continued
rocket threat from Gaza, has reacted with acute
skepticism to this development, as manifested in its
decision to suspend talks and threats of reprisals.
We urge all parties to refrain from measures that
could turn a delicate situation into a full-blown crisis.
We will be following developments closely in the
period ahead, and continue to believe that if unity is
implemented on the terms described by President
Abbas, it is not contradictory with continued peaceful
negotiations, as the President himself has reiterated.
As such, it should be viewed as an opportunity, not a
threat.

4/68

It is important to avoid escalation, diplomatically
and on the ground. Yet it is equally important that
we work in concert to define a long-overdue political
horizon on the basis of principles already laid out, less
the Oslo paradigm is put in real jeopardy. This can no
longer be business as usual. Unrealistic and prescriptive
timelines may be counter-productive, as can rushing the
parties back to the table without having the necessary
framework in place. I believe we must use the current
moment of reflection for a discussion on a substantive
basis for an early resumption of talks, while building
on the United States effort of the past nine months and
relying on continued United States engagement.
The Secretary-General firmly believes there is
still a window for us, the international community
and parties, to act if we wish to realize the vision of
two States for two peoples, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace, security and mutual recognition
of each other’s legitimate rights and those of their
respective citizens, including self-determination. The
United Nations remains as fundamentally committed
as ever in helping parties bring this conflict to an end
with an end to the occupation that began in 1967, an end
to the conflict and an end of claims, in pursuit of lasting
peace and security for both Israelis and Palestinians.
The President: I thank Mr. Serry for his briefing.

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): At the outset, Madam
President, I congratulate Nigeria on its presidency of the
Security Council under your wise and able leadership.
We also express appreciation for Luxembourg’s
skilled leadership of the Council in March. I also
thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, for his briefing to the
Council this morning.
Since the Security Council’s last debate on this issue
(see S/PV.7096), there have been many developments
on the ground and in the political process. In official
letters, we have alerted the Council to the rising tensions
and the deterioration of the situation due to Israel’s
persistent violations and intransigence in negotiations.
We appealed to the Council and the international
community to uphold their responsibilities, stressing
the criticality of the hour to salvage the two-State
solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders and the
long-standing parameters enshrined in the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map.
We have always recognized the necessity of
international support and engagement by all parties
concerned, including the active mediation role of the
United States, the role of the League of Arab States and
the efforts of the Quartet members and the international
community as a whole. Moreover, despite the Security
Council’s paralysis, we have never ceased appealing for
collective action to uphold the law, while underscoring
the urgency of confronting Israel’s widespread
violations and threats to the physical viability of the
two-State solution. Despite all the difficulties, the
Palestinian leadership has remained committed to
negotiations and acted in consummate good faith.
Regrettably, all of that has been to no avail. The
convergence of Israel’s bad faith in the negotiations,
including reneging on the prisoner release agreement
and its unlawful actions on the ground, particularly its
intensification of settlement activities and incessant
aggression in occupied East Jerusalem, seriously
undermined the peace process — now totally
suspended — due to Israel’s unilateral decision to halt
negotiations.
The evolution of the situation has prompted the
Palestinian leadership to undertake actions deemed

S/PV.7164

necessary to assert and protect the rights of the State of
Palestine and the Palestinian people under international
law. All actions have been politically legitimate,
non-violent and aimed at realizing the inalienable
human rights of our people. In that regard, on 1 April,
President Mahmoud Abbas signed 15 instruments of
accession to multilateral treaties, affirming the State
of Palestine’s acceptance of the principles therein,
its readiness to uphold legal obligations and its
commitment to promoting the right of the Palestinian
people in accordance with the law. Among those are
the core treaties of international humanitarian law and
the core human rights treaties. We thank the SecretaryGeneral, Switzerland and the Netherlands, in their
respective capacities as depositariaes, for their serious,
efficient administration of that matter.
That important step was followed by the
advancement of long-overdue Palestinian reconciliation
with the agreement of 23 April. That matter is widely
recognized as critical for the unity of our people and
political system and for the fulfillment of our national
aspirations. Moreover, reconciliation and elections
are central to the advancement of the democratic,
pluralistic and inclusive society we desire to foster.
We are grateful for the support of our Arab brethren,
including Egypt’s sponsorship of the Palestinian
national dialogue, as well as the efforts of Saudi Arabia
and Qatar. Moreover, we are grateful for the support
expressed in that regard by the United Nations, the
majority of Quartet members and friendly States and
organizations from around the world.
We reject the occupying Power’s vulgar interference
in this intetnal Palestinian issue, cynically done both
during the time of division and now as we move
towards unity. We reject its baseless excuses to
suspend negotiations and take punitive measures as
a result, and call on the international community to
hold Israel responsible for obstruction of the peace
process. In that regard, we have made clear the fact
that the new Palestinian Government will adhere to
the PLO political programme and to commitments
and agreements made. Moreover, we reaffirm that
reconciliation and negotiations are not mutually
exclusive, but necessary steps aimed at achieving a just
peace based on international law.
Following the strides made towards reconciliation,
a meeting of the PLO Central Council was convened
on 26 and 27 April in Ramallah under the leadership of
President Abbas, with serious discussions on the way

14-314165/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/04/2014

forward. I had the privilege of attending that meeting. The
Central Council comprehensively addressed all issues
of national priority, including, inter alia, continuing the
efforts to advance the State of Palestine’s status in the
international arena; the vital role of the international
community, including the Security Council and the
General Assembly, in holding Israel accountable for its
violations and in upholding United Nations resolutions
for the achievement of peace; the imperative that any
resumption of negotiations be based on clear terms of
reference, including respect for the pre-1967 borders,
the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative, a halt to all Israeli settlement activities,
including in East Jerusalem, and respect for the rights
of the Palestine refugees in accordance with resolution
194 (III); the imperative of ensuring the release of the
fourth group of Palestinian prisoners, according to
previous agreements, and the release of the thousands
of other Palestinians in Israeli jails; the need to ensure
protection of our holy sites; and the imperative of
alleviating the suffering of our people in the Gaza Strip
and bringing an end to Israel’s unlawful blockade.

its expansionist aims, making a mockery of its alleged
commitment to the two-State solution and tarnishing
the credibility of the peace process. In that regard, as
stated by Ms. Hanan Ashrawi, member of the PLO
Executive Committee, we must clarify:

All of those priorities and goals are being pursued
by the Palestinian leadership consistent with the
relevant provisions of international law and consistent
with the clear commitment made to pursue political,
legal, peaceful and non-violent means to realize the
inalienable rights of our people and a peaceful solution
to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

Moreover, in that regard, we firmly reject any
attempts by the occupying Power to temporally or
spatially divide the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound. Such
actions threaten to gravely destabilize the situation,
with far-reaching consequences, and must he halted.
We reiterate the need to ensure freedom of religion and
access to the city by all worshippers, and condemn the
restrictions imposed by Israel that impeded the worship
of Palestinian Christians and other pilgrims during
Easter week, as well as the constant restrictions against
Palestinian Muslims seeking to pray at the Al-Aqsa
Mosque.

Despite that proven Palestinian commitment to
peace, Israel has maintained its rejectionist stance and
persisted with its grave breaches, constantly reaffirming
its role as occupier and oppressor, not as peacemaker.
Once again, Israel has thwarted peace efforts and, if left
unchecked, it will continue to sabotage negotiations,
upend the situation on the ground and bring a definitive
end to the two-State solution.
In that regard, despite the clear global consensus
on the matter, in recent months Israeli officials
brazenly announced plans to build thousands more
settlement units in the very same Palestinian territory
from which Israel must withdraw if the illegitimate
military occupation is ever to truly end. Israel’s own
Central Bureau of Statistics revealed a 123 per cent
rise in settlement building this year relative to 2013.
In just the nine months since negotiations resumed,
Israel declared plans to construct more than 13,000
settlement units, in addition to the construction under
way on thousands of other units, thereby underscoring

6/68

“Building is not just building; it’s not something
that is so benign. Building is the willful destruction
of the two-State solution. It’s a constant act of
aggression. It’s a war crime.”
In occupied East Jerusalem, such illegal measures
have been taken to extremes, seriously aggravating
the situation and inflaming religious sentiment. We
condemn all of those illegal measures and the acts
of provocation and incitement routinely committed
by Israeli extremists, including settlers, Government
officials and religious zealots, particularly at Haram
Al-Sharif, which aim at unlawfully and forcibly
asserting Israeli control, altering the demography,
character and identity of that sensitive area and
undermining the status of East Jerusalem as the capital
of the State of Palestine.

We underscore the centrality of East Jerusalem as
an integral part of the Palestinian territory occupied
in 1967, and reaffirm that its unlawful annexation
by Israel, which has never been recognized by the
international community, remains null and void. In
line with the collective démarche made to the President
of the Security Council by Palestine, along with the
Chairs of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
the Arab Group, the Non-Aligned Movement and the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, and Jordan and Egypt, the
international community must demand that Israel, the
occupying Power, comply with its obligations under
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the relevant United
Nations resolutions on Jerusalem.

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This period also witnessed the continued use of
lethal violence by the Israeli occupying forces against
the Palestinian civilian population, a population
entitled to protection under international law and which
the occupying Power is obliged to ensure the wellbeing of, but instead purposely violates their right to
life, targeting Palestinians for death, injury and other
forms of harm. More than 60 Palestinians were killed
by the occupying forces in the nine-month period of
negotiations, most of them in refugee camps. That has
included children, among them Wajih Al-Ramahi, 15,
Saji Darwish, 18, and Yousef Al-Shawamreh, 15. It has
also included violence against women, among them the
killing of Amneh Qudeih, age 57, in Gaza.
Here we must refer to the repeated Israeli
allegation of throwing stones as a pretext for killing
Palestinian youth and other civilian protesters. The
murder of Palestinians by Israel, the occupying Power,
for expressing their opposition to the brutal, 47-year
military occupation and its illegal, inhumane policies
and conduct in the Occupied Palestinian Territory
violates international humanitarian law and other
international norms.
Also over the past months, Israeli settler violence
and terrorism has persisted, including attacks on
Palestinian school children, farmers and other villagers;
the murder of an elderly Palestinian man, Saleh Malihat,
who was run over by a settler in a car; and attacks on
olive trees and other Palestinian properties by gangs of
settlers who continue to act with impunity and with ero
accountability for their crimes.
Throughout this period, Israel has also continued its
non-stop arrest of Palestinian civilians. More than 4,000
Palestinians have been detained since the negotiations
began in July. Human rights violations permeate the
entire Israeli prison system, inflicting grave suffering,
deplorable conditions and humiliation on the more than
5,000 Palestinians in Israeli captivity, including the
187 children being held in Israeli prisons. Endangering
their own lives, Palestinians held under administrative
detention also continue to carry out hunger strikes to
protest their imprisonment without charge or trial. We
again draw attention to their plight and call on Israel to
release the fourth group of Palestinian prisoners and to
release all Palestinian prisoners and detainees.
Added to all of this is the humanitarian crisis that
persists in the Gaza Strip due to Israel’s continuing
illegal blockade and the gross collective punishment
of that area’s Palestinian civilian population, along

S/PV.7164

with recurrent violent military attacks. United Nations
agencies, including the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, continue to highlight the severity of this
crisis, but to no avail. Especially among the Palestine
refugee population, which constitutes the majority
of Gaza’s residents, that unlawful situation is
deepening hardships, with massive socioeconomic and
humanitarian consequences. We again call for an end
to the Israeli blockade and for the sustained, regular
opening of Gaza’s border crossings in line with the
relevant resolutions.
Time and again, we have come before the Security
Council and called for action to compel Israel, the
occupying Power, to respect its legal obligations,
including under the Council’s own resolutions. At this
critical time, the long-standing international consensus
on the parameters of the solution, enshrined in United
Nations resolutions, must be reaffirmed, not set aside.
They include a complete end to the Israeli occupation
that began in 1967; the independence of the State of
Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, living
side by side with Israel in peace and security based on
the pre-1967 borders; and a just solution for Palestine
refugees based on resolution 194 (III).
Time and again, we have called on Israel to genuinely
commit to the path of peace, only to face repeated
frustration and disappointment. Despite the burdens of
occupation and 66 years of Al-Nakba, we have done our
part to uphold international law and to act in good faith
in the context of all initiatives and negotiations aimed
at resolving this tragic conflict. Regrettably, up until
the present moment that has all been to no avail and our
people continue to suffer gravely from the occupation,
oppression and dispossession so unjustly inflicted on
them.
Yet we have not given up on peace. We call on the
international community to shoulder its responsibilities
at this crucial juncture to make it a reality. Israel, the
occupying Power, must be required to comply with the
law and must be held accountable should it persist with
its blatant violations. The time is past due for Israel
to be held to the same rules that all States are obliged
to respect, without exception. That requires, inter
alia, a clear rejection by the international community
of Israel’s cynical excuses and pretexts aimed at
entrenching the occupation and evading peace under
the cover of negotiations. Lip service to peace should

14-314167/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

never be accepted as a substitute for genuine steps for
peace.
We are all too aware that the status quo is
unsustainable, as we heard from Robert Serry, and
that peace negotiations can never succeed under such
conditions. The State of Palestine is ready to uphold its
obligations and commitments to make peace a reality.
However, a real partner for peace is missing. Israel,
the occupying Power, must change its behaviour on
the ground and in the negotiations and truly commit
to the path of peace. Here, the role of the international
community, including the Security Council, is vital;
it must act collectively to demand and ensure Israel’s
respect for its legal obligations and to foster the
appropriate conditions for credible negotiations to
achieve Palestinian-Israeli peace.
The Palestinian people will never forgo their
inalienable rights, and the Palestinian leadership will
continue to take all necessary political, legal and
peaceful measures for the fulfilment of those rights
and the achievement of justice, freedom and peace for
our people. We once again appeal for the international
community’s support in that noble endeavour.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): First of all, allow me to
take this opportunity to congratulate Nigeria on its
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month.
Next week, Israel will celebrate Yom Ha’atzmaut,
its Independence Day, which commemorates the Jewish
people’s return to the land of Israel after thousands of
years in exile. In the land of Israel, every hill and valley,
every stream and ravine is steeped in history. In Hebron,
one can visit the spot where Abraham purchased a burial
plot for his wife, Sarah. In Jerusalem, one can visit the
place where King David established his kingdom and
where King Solomon built the Jewish temple.
For thousands of years, the Jewish people
maintained a constant presence in the land of Israel,
watching empires rise and fall and conquerors come
and go, until 1948 when the modern State of Israel
was reborn. Since then, we have taken a desolate
land and made it flourish; we took a language on the
verge of extinction and brought it back to life; and we
took an ancient people and gave them refuge from the
persecutions that plagued them across the centuries and
across the globe.
8/68

29/04/2014

The State of Israel is proof that the strength of a
nation can be measured by the freedom of its citizens.
From the Red Sea to the Caspian Sea, Israel is the only
democracy providing its citizens the right to worship
freely, the right to vote in elections, and the right to
read from an uncensored media. It is also the only
nation that defends the rule of law and upholds rights
of minorities. Israel does not preach these rights; we
practice them. Where else in the Middle East can a
member of a minority group serve as a Supreme Court
justice? In Israel, Salim Joubran, a Christian Arab
Israeli, has done so for more than a decade. I am proud
to represent an ancient people in its modern homeland, a
people whose numbers are few but whose contributions
are immeasurable. A people who confront terror and
pray for peace.
When I think about negotiations between Israel and
the Palestinians, there is a predictable pattern on the part
of the Palestinians — demand, delay and desert. Before
taking a single step towards the negotiation table, the
Palestinian leadership demands that Israel submit to
substantial concessions. Once Israel agrees, they drag
their feet and evoke every delay tactic in the book. Then,
as the deadline approaches and courageous leadership
decisions are required, Abbas deserts the talks. He
did so in 2008. After the Israeli Prime Minister had
offered an unprecedented and far-reaching peace deal,
the Palestinians simply walked away. He did it again in
2009. Prime Minister Netanyahu courageously extended
an olive branch to the Palestinians in his historic BarIlan speech, agreeing to a 10-month settlement freeze.
The Palestinians stalled and did not reciprocate. In
February 2012 — surprise, surprise — just as we were
on the verge of a breakthrough, Abbas abandoned the
talks and flew to Doha to sign a unity deal with Hamas,
an internationally recognized terrorist organization. A
few months later, the Palestinian leadership went to the
United Nations seeking to bypass direct negotiations.
While Israel makes tangible concessions to
advance peace, the Palestinian leadership has let every
window of opportunity fly out of the window. This
goes to the very heart of the problem. The Palestinians
pledge dialogue while fomenting hatred. They promise
tolerance while celebrating terrorists. And they make
commitments almost as quickly as they break them. The
Palestinian leadership recently broke a commitment
by applying to join 15 international treaties and
conventions. It seems to me that they have forgotten that
they also have to abide by those treaties and address the

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

rampant persecution of women, children and minorities
in Palestinian society.
Winston Churchill is famously quoted as saying
“The farther backward you look, the farther forward
you can see”. Only those who can look back and see the
patterns in history can prevent the same mistakes from
occurring over and over again. Nine months ago, Israel
and the Palestinians returned to the negotiation table
and set a deadline of 29 April — today — for reaching
an agreement. True to form, the Palestinians have
performed their distinctive two-faced two-step. When
Israel tries to tango with Abbas, we find ourselves
abandoned on the dance floor as Abbas waltzes off with
Hamas.
The Palestinians have made a career out of
squeezing more and more compromises out of Israel
without granting a single tangible compromise of their
own. In the latest round of peace negotiations, Israel
agreed to do what no other Government in the world
would even consider, releasing coldblooded murderers.
Imagine the pain felt by Israelis every time they watched
those terrorists receive a hero’s welcome from President
Abbas. If these are the values that the Palestinians are
embracing, no wonder they are running into the arms
of Hamas.
All those in the international community who
are here today to commend and support the unity
Government agreement are in fact lending legitimacy
to terror attacks against Israel. Hamas makes no secret
of its intentions. Its Charter calls for the destruction
of Israel. Article 7 says, “The Day of Judgement will
not come until Muslims fight the Jews and kill them”.
Last week, we received a painful reminder of Hamas’s
brutality. Baruch Mizrahi, a 47-year-old Israeli father
of five was driving with his family when the car
was attacked by Palestinian terrorists. Baruch was
murdered and his wife and nine year-old son wounded.
Hamas leader Haniyeh praised the attack, saying that
the killing brought back life to the path of resistance,
and he commended the heroes of Hebron.
The Palestinian Authority’s unity with Hamas
will only bring greater impunity for the terrorists who
fire rockets into our cities. In 2006, when Hamas took
control of Gaza, the international community devised
the Quartet principles in order to prevent international
funding from flowing to terrorist organizations. The
conditions the Quartet set were that Hamas must
renounce violence, recognize Israel and abide by prior
agreements. Some have even rushed to bless the Hamas

S/PV.7164

and Fatah union faster than a Las Vegas marriage clerk.
I have yet to hear Hamas agree to any of the Quartet’s
conditions. Instead of choosing peace with Israel,
Abbas has chosen peace with Hamas. Israel wants to
negotiate with a single legitimate entity representing
the Palestinian people, but it will not negotiate with a
Palestinian Government backed by Hamas. If Hamas is
in the back office, Israel will not be at the negotiating
table. Anyone who wonders why Israel will not negotiate
with Hamas might as well be wondering why nobody
shows up to dinner parties thrown by Hannibal Lecter.
As we speak, millions of dollars are being channeled
to the Palestinian Authority. Now that the Palestinians
have signed a unity agreement, that funding will be at
the disposal of Hamas, an internationally recognized
terrorist organization. I wonder how taxpayers in
London, Luxembourg and Paris will feel knowing that
they will enable Hamas to launch more rockets into
Israel, kidnap more Israelis and send more suicide
bombers into our cafés. Not a day goes by when Hamas
does not seek Israel’s destruction. Last month, the Israel
Defense Forces intercepted a cargo ship sent by Iran,
carrying advanced weaponry destined for the Hamascontrolled Gaza Strip. The weapons included rockets,
ammunition and missiles capable of striking the very
heart of Israel.
The international community is quick to condemn
Israel, but never says a word when Israelis are the
victims of unrelenting attacks. How many times has the
international community criticized Israel for restricting
the entry of certain dual-use goods into Gaza? You do
not have to be Christopher Columbus to discover that
a second country borders Gaza, yet it is never, ever
mentioned by the Security Council. And how many
times has the Council criticized Israel for restricting the
entry of construction materials? And yet when Israel
does allow cement into Gaza, instead of building the
Palestinian people up, Hamas is committed to tearing
them down. They could be using the cement to build
schools, homes and hospitals, but instead they build
terror tunnels to smuggle weapons and attack Israel.
If the international community is truly committed to
advancing peace, it must stop pointing fingers at Israel
and demonstrate real resolve. The Palestinians must be
held accountable for their actions. Targeting civilians
must be unacceptable, and acts of terror should be
condemned publicly and unequivocally.
“No matter how big the lie, repeat it often enough
and the masses will regard it as the truth”, is a remark

14-314169/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

that has been attributed to President John F. Kennedy.
The Palestinians and the Arab States send letter after
letter and lodge complaint after complaint filled with
lies, misinformation and half-truths. Most recently,
they launched a campaign accusing Israel of impeding
freedom of worship and denying access to religious
sites. Certain parties have even criticized remarks made
in our Parliament. I know that freedom of expression is
a foreign concept to most regimes in the Middle East.
One is about as likely to hear a Saudi disagree with his
Government as to see a Saudi woman behind the wheel
of a race car in the next Indianapolis 500 — or any car,
for that matter.
Israel is the only nation in the Middle East that
grants full religious rights to people of all faiths.
After reuniting Jerusalem in 1967, Israel abolished
discriminatory laws and introduced religious freedoms
that allow millions of Muslims and Christians to visit
and pray at their holy sites. Every year, millions of
people visit Jerusalem to celebrate their holy days. The
vast crowds pose considerable public safety challenges,
but Israel is committed to ensuring that Jerusalem is an
open city for all faiths and one that celebrates religious
tolerance and diversity.
This is in stark contrast to the Palestinians’ treatment
of minority faiths. Since the Hamas takeover of Gaza in
2007, more than half the Christian community has fled.
They face a grim choice: convert to Islam or face the
sword. In Bethlehem, which has been under Palestinian
Authority control since 1995, the Christian population
has fallen dramatically. Gunmen have terrorized the
Christian community and looted and desecrated the
Church of the Nativity, one of Christianity’s holiest
sites.
One might think that the United Nations would
make every effort to support Israel’s protection of
religious freedoms. Instead of taking constructive
actions to help mitigate the sensitive situation, Robert
Serry, the United Nations Special Coordinator for the
Middle East, took destructive steps that aggravated
tensions on the ground. It is unfortunate that a United
Nations official abused his position and the United
Nations platform to express his personal opinions. Both
Mr. Serry and the Arab nations need reminding that
core issues, including Jerusalem, must be dealt with at
the negotiating table and not by parties tabling false
accusations.
In its 65-year history, Israel has not experienced
a single day in which it was not confronting terrorist
10/68

29/04/2014

groups — Hamas in the south and Hizbullah in the
north. This month alone, authorities in Thailand foiled
a plan by Hizbullah agents to attack Israeli tourists and
Hizbullah leader Hassan Nasrallah took responsibility
for planting a roadside bomb in northern Israel.
His admission offers concrete proof that Hizbullah
is operating south of the Litani river, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006).
Both Hamas and Hizbullah receive funding and
support from the world’s primary sponsor of terrorism
Iran. A close look at Iranian foreign policy reveals that
their strategy is to defy — “D, E, F, Y”: deceive, evade,
falsify and yield absolutely nothing. Iran has violated
numerous resolutions aimed at curbing its nuclear
programme and it continues to evade International
Atomic Energy Agency inspections. Iran’s campaign
to convince the world that its nuclear programme is
peaceful should have earned the regime at least an
honorary mention at the Oscars for best acting and best
adapted screenplay from a work of fiction.
Clearly the production is working. At a time when
sanctions should be increased they are being eased.
Make no mistake, if you leave Iran as a threshold nuclear
Power, you will be leaving the world on the threshold
of the abyss. Unravelling the sanctions regime against
Iran might prevent Iran from having a nuclear weapon
today, but it would virtually ensure that Iran has a
nuclear weapon tomorrow. That must not be allowed
to happen. Iran’s nuclear weapons capability and longrange missile capability should be fully dismantled.
None of this can disguise the fact that Iran is one
of the world’s worst human rights abusers. The regime
is holding 1,000 people, including 35 journalists, as
so-called political prisoners. Last year, Iran executed
624 people — that is an average of two executions per
day. Among these so-called criminals were 28 women,
three children and a poet named Hashem Shaabani.
Shaabani’s so-called crime was criticizing the regime’s
treatment of minorities. The regime declared him a an
“enemy of God” and hanged him. This offers further
proof that the so-called justice system in Iran is
nothing short of an injustice. The messages of hate and
intolerance come straight from the top. Iran’s Supreme
Leader of Holocaust denial, Ayatollah Khamenei, is
the head of the outlaw regime and continues to make
outlandish claims.
Yesterday Israel marked Holocaust Remembrance
Day. We recall how nations dismissed the murderous
Nazi rhetoric and downplayed the seriousness of the
14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

danger. Ultimately, the Second World War claimed
the lives of 60 million people, including six millions
Jews. Today, in the face of Iran’s nuclear ambitions,
what has the world really learned? The facts are clear
and the threat is very real. Iran is fanning the flames
of conflict across the Middle East. Rouhani and Assad
are brothers in bloodshed directing the world’s worst
humanitarian crisis. Not satisfied at having murdered
the Syrian people with chemical weapons, snipers and
barrel bombs, they are now intentionally besieging
entire neighbourhoods and using starvation as a tool
of war.
The State of Israel is appalled by the violence. In
the face of the horrendous suffering, we are speaking
out against Al-Assad’s ruthlessness. And in the face of
the unspeakable cruelty, we are acting compassionately
and providing medical treatment to hundreds of
Syrians. The Syrian people have seen first-hand that
Israel values human life above all else. This is a rare
quality in the Middle East. Repressive Arab regimes
have kept their people poor and uneducated. They have
brutally and mercilessly suppressed their rights. And
they have poisoned their people’s minds with hatred.
Blaming Israel will not solve the problems
plaguing the Middle East. It will not stop Al-Assad
from dropping barrel bombs or create jobs for the
hungry masses in Egypt or empower women in Saudi
Arabia. The Palestinians must be held accountable for
their actions. Sanctions against Iran must extract a real
price. And dictators should not be allowed to target and
torture civilians with impunity.
Someday, I hope that we will read about attacks
on the Jewish people in history books rather than
newspapers. Someday, I hope that Israel will be
accepted as the nation-State of the Jewish people by
every Member of this Organization. And someday,
I hope that Israeli children will grow up free from
war. But that day has not yet come. As we prepare to
celebrate Israel’s sixty-sixth anniversary as a free and
independent State, I wish to reaffirm the commitment
made in our Declaration of Independence:
“We offer peace and unity to all the
neighbouring States and their peoples, and invite
them to cooperate with the independent Jewish
nation for the common good of all.”
The President: I shall now give the floor to the
members of the Security Council.

S/PV.7164

Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Serry for his thorough briefing. I will begin
remarks today by addressing Israeli-Palestinian issues
before turning to Syria and Lebanon.
The United States recognizes that the path to a
comprehensive peace settlement in the Middle East
is littered with obstacles, but we also believe that the
goal is as essential as the process is turbulent. For
this reason, we will continue to support negotiations
between the parties. However, ultimately, the choice
is up to the leaders and their people. None of us can
make the difficult decisions required for peace, and the
parties have decided to take a pause in the negotiations.
We have clearly reached a difficult moment, but we
continue to believe that there is only one real viable
solution for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict: two States
living side-by-side in peace and security. And if the
parties are willing to go down that path, we will be there
to support them. In that connection, we are grateful
for the strong support the negotiations have received
from the League of Arab States, the European Union,
the Quartet and other key partners. We will continue to
look to them in the weeks and months ahead.
Regarding the recent announcement by Fatah
and Hamas that they intend to form a technocratic
Government to prepare for new elections, the timing
of the announcement was clearly unhelpful in terms
of efforts that were under way between the parties to
reach an agreement on extending the negotiations.
The United States and the other members of
the Quartet have been clear about the principles that
must be accepted by the Palestinian Government in
order for it to achieve peace and build an independent
Palestinian State. Those principles have not changed.
Any Palestinian Government must unambiguously and
explicitly commit to non-violence, recognition of the
State of Israel and acceptance of previous agreements
and obligations between the parties. President Abbas
has been committed to these principles and has declared
that any Government he forms will be committed in the
same way. If a new Palestinian Government is formed,
we will assess it based on its composition and actions
as well as its adherence to these principles.
We continue to oppose unilateral actions that seek to
circumvent or prejudge outcomes that can be negotiated
only between the parties, including efforts to enhance
Palestinian claims to statehood absent a negotiated
final-status agreement. Similarly, we continue to view

14-3141611/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/04/2014

Israeli settlements in the West Bank as illegitimate,
and oppose any efforts to establish new settlements,
expand existing ones or legalize settlement outposts.
Our positions on other aspects of the process are also
well known and have not changed.

become resigned or inured to the devastation that is
taking place daily in Syria and to the Syrian people.
We must keep this litany of horror before us and remain
steadfast in our determination to end the killing and to
hold the perpetrators of those crimes accountable.

The United States remains deeply concerned by the
up-tick in tensions and violence at the Temple Mount/
Haram al-Sharif compound around the Passover and
Easter holidays, and urges all parties to redouble
efforts to reduce tensions while maintaining the status
quo. We continue to maintain high-level engagement on
that issue. My Government also condemns other acts
of violence, including rocket strikes into Israel from
the Gaza Strip, the 14 April murder of an Israeli police
official, and settler attacks and demolitions directed
against Palestinian civilians in the West Bank. We call
upon all concerned to avoid incidents that might make
further disturbances likely. We look to the authorities
on both sides to investigate and hold accountable
persons responsible for acts of violence. We also call
on both sides to respect the terms of the November 2012
ceasefire involving Israel and Gaza.

At the same time, we should be neither surprised
nor deceived by the Syrian Government’s cynical
choice of this inopportune moment to schedule a
presidential election. Although we all look forward to
the day when meaningful balloting can take place in
Syria, that day is not 3 June or any time in the near
future. Although credible elections have been held in
the midst of conflict, such a process is inconceivable
in Syria today, where the regime has crushed political
dissent and nearly half of the population is displaced
by war, including millions of potential voters who have
been forced to flee the country. Inside Syria, do we
reasonably expect the 242,000 people in besieged areas,
or the more than 3.5 million in hard-to-reach areas, to
vote in those elections, when the regime systematically
denies them access even to food and medicine? Does
anybody expect the regime to enfranchise those it has
decided to starve?

In addition, the United States remains troubled
by the humanitarian situation in Gaza. Several
United Nations relief projects, which are important
to improving the conditions there, are still awaiting
Israeli approval. We urge all parties to continue to
work together to increase the access of humanitarian
supplies into that area.
Let me now turn to Syria, where the devastating
conflict is now in its fourth year and where the
violence continues, the number of refugees is still
going up and the flow of humanitarian aid remains a
trickle compared to the overwhelming need. Earlier
this month, many of us attended a presentation during
which we saw graphic photographs depicting the
torture and industrial-style killing of some 11,000
Syrian detainees. Those photographs illustrate but a
small fraction of the horrors inflicted by the Al-Assad
regime. We must add to that the victims of chemical
attacks and barrel bombs, the families deprived of food
by the Government’s starve-or-surrender policy, the
patients forcibly removed from hospitals and the many
thousands of people who have disappeared or remain
in detention.
I realize that those facts are all too familiar
to Council members and the broader international
community, but I stress them because we must never

12/68

Regime-sponsored elections are inconsistent
with the United Nations-led Geneva process and
threaten to further undermine the prospects for a
peaceful resolution to the conflict. My Government
joins with Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Joint
Special Representative Lakhdar Brahimi in calling
on the Government to postpone the balloting and
to instead focus on the steps clearly defined in the
Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) to create an
atmosphere in which a positive electoral process might
move forward.
The humanitarian situation, which has been
calamitous for many months, has grown even worse
of late. The regime’s failure to implement resolution
2139 (2014) has wasted valuable time and claimed
many more lives. The conditions remain dire across
the country, but most notably in Homs, Aleppo and in
areas near Damascus, such as the Yarmouk Palestinian
refugee camp. We should all be clear about where the
fault for that deterioration lies. It is the regime that,
with the stroke of a pen, could allow cross-border
assistance to reach millions in need. But it does not. It
is the regime that continues to pound Syrian civilians
with ruthless barrel bombs. It is the regime that has
coldly integrated the denial of humanitarian assistance

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

into its ever-expanding arsenal of weapons against the
Syrian people.
In addition, as my Government and others have noted,
we have indications that a toxic chemical — probably
chlorine — was used in an attack this month against
the opposition-dominated village of Kafr Zita. Those
reports and others are extremely serious and are of
profound concern to the international community. We
welcome today’s announcement that the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons is sending a
mission to Syria to determine the facts on alleged gas
attacks. Syria must immediately and fully cooperate
with such fact-finding, and anybody responsible for
such attacks must be held accountable.
Finally, with respect to Lebanon my Government
remains concerned about the fragile security situation,
including tensions along the blue line, repeated crossborder violations by Syria, ongoing sectarian violence
and Hizbullah provocations, such as last month’s attack
against Israeli soldiers in the Shebaa Farms region. The
United States urges calm and hopes that all parties will
refrain from violence and adhere to the Government’s
disassociation policy, as enshrined in the Baabda
Declaration. We urge as well the full implementation of
all Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006), which require the
disarmament of militia.
Lebanon’s leaders face the challenge of working
together to address the host of security, economic and
humanitarian problems confronting the country. As we
have discussed, that challenge is exacerbated by the
needs to host the now more than 1 million refugees from
Syria living within Lebanon’s borders. As a member of
the International Support Group for Lebanon, we urge
the international community to respond to that epic
humanitarian crisis by providing robust financial and
other backing through the various funding mechanisms
that are available.
On the political side, it is important for the Cabinet
to continue to steer Lebanon on the sustainable
course of moderation. Lebanon’s political leaders
have a responsibility to their citizens and to their
country’s Constitution to conclude the recently
initiated presidential selection process by 25 May.
That is a Lebanese undertaking that should, and must
be determined by Lebanon alone, free from outside
interference. Both presidential and parliamentary
elections must be conducted in a free, fair and timely
manner.

S/PV.7164

At Wadi Araba 20 years ago, Jordan’s King Hussein
asked us to envision a Middle East in which there would
be “no more death, no more misery, no more suspicion,
no more fear, no more uncertainty of what each day
will bring”. That vision, at that time, seemed far more
within our grasp than is the case today. Our task — and
it is an urgent one — is to reverse course and restore
a sense of progress and hope to the region. To that
goal, I pledge my own Government’s best efforts and
respectfully welcome others’.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Today, 29 April, is the deadline of the
nine-month time frame set for reaching an agreement
between the Palestinians and Israelis. From the
beginning, we have supported that new round of peace
talks on which, despite all the foreseen challenges, many
hopes were laid. It is unfortunate that our worst fears
have been realized. Once again, the monopolization
of the negotiation process between the Israelis and
the Palestinians by the United States of America was
unjustified; the achievement of positive results in such
circumstances was not possible.
Serious differences on final status issues concerning
the Palestinian territories were reaffirmed and the key
problems remain the status of Jerusalem, the borders of
the future Palestinian State, Israeli settlement activity
and the Palestinian refugees. In that context, we are
concerned about the decision of the Israeli Government,
taken several days before the agreed deadline, to cease
dialogue with the Palestinians. My country can only
regret that such a decision was linked to the right of
Palestine, as a non-member observer State of the United
Nations, to participate in several international treaties
and conventions. In addition, another reason cited by
the Israelis for its decision was an agreement among
Fatah, Hamas and other Palestinian organizations to
form a national unity Government.
In that context, of extreme importance was the
statement made by Mr. Mahmoud Abbas, President of
the State of Palestine, at the meeting of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization on 26 April in Ramallah,
to the effect that the future technocratic Palestinian
Government will adhere to the principle of the rejection
of violence, the recognition of the State of Israel, and
respect for previous agreements on the Middle East
peace process.
We in Moscow have always believed that, without
the consolidation of the Palestinian ranks in line with
the Palestine Liberation Organization platform and the

14-3141613/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Arab Peace Initiative, it will be impossible to realize
the legal aspirations of the Palestinian people for a
fair and lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue.
Overcoming the Palestinian divisions is a goal that the
international community has hoped for in calling for a
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East question.
We are convinced that, without Palestinian unity, any
agreements achieved between Palestine and Israel will
not last.
The national unity of the Palestinians should not
be jeopardized. At this crucial moment, it is extremely
important to not allow the Palestinian and Israeli
issue to be derailed. To that end, the two parties must
refrain from any provocative actions that would cause
a deterioration in the situation, first and foremost in
terms of settlement activity and the freezing of customs
fees and duties to Palestine. We strongly condemn
rocket launches against Israeli territory and any other
terrorist acts, which cannot be justified. In the current
situation, we consider it to be of prime importance
that all parties practice zero tolerance for such actions
and any other actions that could be an obstacle to the
negotiating efforts.
Despite the complexity of the situation and the
Middle East peace process, the Russian Federation is
strongly convinced that it should not be abandoned, and
will continue endeavour to resume the peace process,
both bilaterally and in international forums, first and
foremost within the Quartet. We note with satisfaction
the recent increased activity of the Quartet, in
particular its 2 April meeting in Jerusalem with special
representatives. They hold regular teleconferences,
and we are maintaining our contacts with both Israeli
and Palestinian partners. The mechanism for Russian/
Palestinian consultations for exchanges of views on the
situation concerning the Palestinian track of the Middle
East peace process is functioning. We are convinced
that the main task remains a comprehensive, just and
lasting settlement of the Palestinian issue on the basis
of the well-known international legal framework, with
the goal of ensuring a peaceful and safe future for the
peoples of Israel and Palestine.
On the Syrian crisis, we see no alternative to a
political and diplomatic settlement on the basis of the
2012 Geneva communiqué of the Action Group for
Syria (S/2012/522, annex). We are in favour of rapidly
launching a third round of inter-Syrian talks, especially
because the agenda has basically been agreed. As is the
case with the Palestinian and Israeli negotiations, we

14/68

29/04/2014

should seize any opportunity to find a political and
negotiated solution in the Geneva framework.
We consider terrorism to be the main threat, in
the context of the Syrian conflict, and the so-called
moderate opposition should decisively dissociate
themselves from terrorist organizations such as the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, Jabhat al-Nusra and
the Islamic Front and should broaden their negotiating
delegation to include the patriotic forces and internal
opposition.
An important task, in our view, is to unite the
Syrian forces to prevent the creation, in their country,
of a stronghold of global terrorism and extremism. We
note with satisfaction that the Syrian authorities at
this point have been able to remove over 92 per cent
of the chemical agents from their country under the
programme for the elimination of the Syrian chemical
programme despite the serious challenges in the area of
security, which have been deliberately ignored by many
external players over the past several months.
We hope for the successful holding of presidential
elections in Lebanon. That would enable the effective
functioning of all State structures to continue and for
the Lebanese society to consolidate in the interests
of stabilizing the situation and reducing inter-faith
tensions. We strongly support the Lebanese people, as
once again shown at the meeting held in Moscow last
week between the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the
Russian Federation and Lebanon.
Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I thank Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process Robert
Serry for his briefing.
We are concerned that the peace negotiations
between Israel and Palestine have not produced any
meaningful progress before the deadline. The situation
on the ground has also been worsening. Harmful
activities, including continued settlement construction,
controversy over the release of prisoners, rocket attacks
on populated areas in Israel and strong Israeli reprisals
have driven both sides to further confrontation and
mistrust.
Despite those setbacks, we still think that the door
to negotiations is not closed as long as all sides do not
give up on the goal of a more sustainable future for
all. All possibilities should continue to be explored,
including by building on the mediation efforts of the
United States, with the full support of the international

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

community. The role of the United Nations as part of
the Quartet should not be overlooked in continuing the
negotiation efforts.
As for the recent reconciliation agreement between
Fatah and Hamas, in order for that reconciliation to
proceed in a positive direction, we believe that it should
to contribute to the peace negotiations and avoid any
violence and confrontation. At the same time, it should
lead to genuine democracy and well-being for all
Palestinian people.
Turning to the situation in Syria, we are gravely
concerned about the unprecedented scale of death
and destruction, as the conflict enters its fourth
year. We strongly condemn the indiscriminate aerial
bombardments and ground assault now taking place
against densely populated civilian areas in Homs.
Gross violations of human rights and systematic war
crimes are ongoing. Flagrant violations of international
law are also taking place vis-a-vis humanitarian access,
as painstakingly articulated in the Secretary-General’s
most recent report (S/2014/295).
The implementation of resolution 2139 (2014) and
improvements in the humanitarian situation in Syria
are simply not happening. As Under-Secretary-General
Amos reported, access to besieged communities has
not increased and is in fact getting worse, with only
6 per cent of civilians residing in such areas receiving
much-needed assistance. That is simply unacceptable,
and we once again call on the Syrian Government and
opposition groups to allow unhindered humanitarian
access so food and medicine can reach civilians
trapped in the crossfire. People are starving and dying
of disease as barrel bombs drop overhead, while the
Syrian authorities’ bureaucratic hurdles are preventing
humanitarian access, in contravention of resolution
2139 (2014).
In that connection, we condemn the employment
of siege and starvation as methods of warfare, and
call for increased cross-border assistance. The Syrian
Government should cater to the request of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs so that
the most effective routes can be utilized to provide aid
to civilians. We appreciate the work of the World Food
Programme, World Health Organization, UNICEF,
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East and other humanitarian
actors operating in such difficult conditions on the
ground.

S/PV.7164

Regarding Lebanon, spill-over is no longer simply
a border issue. Syrian refugees now account for nearly
25 per cent of the total Lebanese population. We are
also concerned over the escalating number of terrorist
attacks related to the Syrian conflict and condemn last
month’s attacks on the Lebanese army. We appeal to the
Syrian Government and opposition groups to respect
Lebanese sovereignty and to all Lebanese actors to
refrain from actions in Syria that inflame insecurity in
Lebanon, as stipulated in the Baabda Declaration.
To conclude, we reiterate that, as we strive to deal
with the crises in the region, greater initiative must
be harnessed through active diplomacy and increased
cooperation. We need to work together to ensure that
not only peace, stability and coexistence but also
accountability and justice become a reality for the
resilient people of the Middle East.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing.
I will address in order the following topics: the
Israeli-Palestinian peace process, the situation in Syria,
and finally Lebanon.
After nine months of intensive efforts, the talks
between Israel and the Palestinian Authority are now
suspended. We are at the end of the nine-month period
envisaged by Israel, the Palestinian Authority and United
States Secretary of State John Kerry to reach a solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Mr. Kerry and his
team have spared no effort to advance the negotiations.
We welcome that outstanding commitment.
Despite those efforts, non-compliance with
commitments made in July resulted in the suspension of
talks, following a scenario that has been repeated many
times over the past 20 years. On the one hand, the fourth
group of pre-Oslo prisoners was not released; on the
other, the Palestinian Authority joined 15 international
conventions. The announcement of a freeze of payments
of taxes and customs duties collected by Israel to the
Palestinian Authority exacerbates the impasse and
poses a major threat to the stability of the Palestinian
territories.
Those developments have occurred while the
situation on the ground continues to deteriorate.
Settlement has continued and accelerated; it more than
doubled in 2013. Tensions worsened in Jerusalem,

14-3141615/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

including on the Temple Mount and around the Church
of the Holy Sepulchre. Motivated by its historical
responsibilities with respect to Christians in the Holy
Land, France reaffirms its commitment to respect for
places of worship, to which access must be guaranteed,
particular during Easter, the most sacred period in the
Christian calendar.
It is in that context of crisis that the inter-Palestinian
reconciliation agreement was concluded. We believe
that the agreement could be a real opportunity,
if it results, as announced by President Abbas, in
the formation of a national consensus Government
composed of independent personalities, under his
direct authority, and in the organization of elections
in the Palestinian territories. It is not possible, on the
one hand, to assert that Israeli-Palestinian agreement
is impossible as long as the split between the two
Palestinian movements persists, and on the other hand,
to consider the inter-Palestinian reconciliation to be an
obstacle when it occurs.
France is ready to work with a Government of the
Palestinian Authority as long as it clearly expresses
its rejection of violence, its commitment to the peace
process and acceptance of all agreements, in particular
with Israel. Reconciliation defined on that basis would
be a step towards achieving a two-State solution.
The talks today are merely suspended. Mr. Abbas
has undertaken before the leadership of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization that the future Government
rejects violence and recognize Israel. He has
made a significant gesture of opening by publicly
acknowledging for the first time that “the Holocaust
was the most heinous crime in modern history”. Those
statements must be put to his credit, as they are a
gesture of openness that can serve as a basis for the
resumption of dialogue between the parties and to the
revival of the peace efforts.
We have just heard yet again from both sides the
same arguments that try to pin the responsibility for the
stalemate on the other. In truth, that repeated rhetoric,
Council meeting after Council meeting, underlines
once again — as if that were necessary — that the
two parties are incapable of moving towards peace by
themselves, even if the United States supports their
efforts. Sooner or later, we will have to conclude that
either we have to give up and leave the conflict to them
or the international community will have to decide to
intervene with all its weight to reach an agreement
whose fundamental parameters are, after all, well
16/68

29/04/2014

known. It is a paradox that, on the one hand, we are
able to draft a possible peace treaty in broad strokes,
whereas, on the other, every peace initiative has failed
one after another.
I now turn to Syria, where the regime adds the
absurdity of a parody of a presidential election to the
infamy of the denial of humanitarian access. The second
progress report of the implementation of the resolution
2139 (2014) presented last week is incontrovertible
(S/2014/295). The situation of the civilian population
has not improved. The sieges of the cities, three-quarters
of which have been led by the regime, have not been
suspended or even cut back. Indiscriminate bombing
and the policy of terror against civilians continue. All
of that is unacceptable.
At the political level, despite calls by Joint Special
Representative Brahimi and the Secretary-General
himself, Bashar Al-Assad will hold his triumphant
re-election on 3 June, when the tragic parody of a
presidential election will take place. The decision
to hold such an election is contrary to the spirit and
the letter of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex). Meanwhile, civilians continue to be bombed
and massacred. No legitimacy will come out of that
phantom election in a country devastated, which takes
Syria further and further away from a political solution.
France shares the concern of everyone, as expressed
by Ms. Kaag last week, with respect to the alleged
use of chlorine gas in Kfar Zita which caused several
casualties and many wounded. It goes without saying
that the responsible party for the use of chemicals will
be held to account, as required by resolution 2118 (2013).
I would remind the Council that we want all those who
have committed mass crimes in Syria to be referred to
the International Criminal Court for judgement. We are
continuing our efforts in that direction.
Finally, we must also send a message of support
for Lebanon. In the light of the Syrian crisis, France
welcomes the generosity of Lebanon and acknowledges
the burden it has taken on in hosting more than a million
refugees. It also notes that violations of civil peace in
Lebanon and its sovereignty are unacceptable. Lebanon
must not be drawn into the cycle of the Syrian civil
war. We also recall the importance of the fight against
impunity and welcome in that respect the role of the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon.
We are pleased that the National Unity
Government formed on 15 February was sworn in

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

by the Parliament and that the latter has resumed its
legislative activity. We welcome the new momentum in
relaunching institutions, which should be sustained and
consolidated, so that Lebanon can meet the enormous
challenges it faces. In that context, it is crucial that
the Council reiterate its support for the stability,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon by
calling for presidential elections to be held on schedule,
in accordance with the procedures and the Constitution
and recalling the importance of avoiding any vacuum
at the head of the Lebanese State; by supporting the
dissociation policy initiated by President Sleiman which
should provide a framework for the future; and calling
on the international community to mobilize alongside
Lebanon so that it can cope with its crisis on its own.
The meeting of the International Support Group
for Lebanon in Paris on 5 March allowed for the
reaffirmation of the international consensus in favour
of unity, stability and sovereignty of Lebanon and for
the reiteration of its support for Lebanon as it deals
with the multiple impacts of the conflict in Syria. That
commitment should be continued in humanitarian,
economic and security spheres.
Mr. Quinlan (Australia): I
Coordinator Serry for his briefing.

thank

Special

We have today arrived at the nine-month mark
since final status negotiations resumed between Israel
and the Palestinians in July last year. It was the most
ambitious and substantial chance to secure a permanent
peace in years. The extraordinary and singular nature
of that opportunity cannot be overstated. We commend
the persistence and patience of the United States in
encouraging serious negotiations between both sides.
The Israelis and the Palestinians — with the support
of the international community — need to confront
the urgency of the moment and reach an agreement for
talks to continue.
We commend the statesmanship and commitment
that President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu
displayed in launching negotiations last year, but we
urge leaders on both sides to press on. Those who work
with Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas
in their respective Governments must also support
the peace process by showing restraint, especially
during difficult periods. We urge both sides to refrain
from actions or statements that increase tensions on
the ground. And any Palestinian unity Government
must uphold the principle of non-violence and accept

S/PV.7164

previous commitments the Palestinians have made,
particularly on Israel’s right to exist. All rocket attacks
towards Israel from Gaza must cease.
The economic and security gains that a peace
deal would bring to both sides are tremendous.
Conversely, the fallout from failed negotiations would
be devastating. A just and lasting two-State solution
remains in the fundamental interests of both parties and
the wider region. We urge both sides not to be diverted
by mutual recriminations, but to maintain their political
courage so that the immense efforts invested to date do
not prove futile.
The Syrian conflict has now entered its fourth year.
Nearly half the Syrian population needs assistance;
one-third has been displaced and over 2.7 million have
fled as refugees to neighbouring countries. Last week,
the Foreign Minister of Australia visited Jordan and
Lebanon to see first-hand the tragic refugee situation
created by this conflict. She announced an increase to
Australia’s humanitarian response targeted specifically
at Syrian refugee children, who make up half the Syrian
refugee population.
A political solution is urgently needed, and Joint
Special Representative Brahimi has made very sound
proposals on how negotiations should be conducted.
But the Al-Assad regime’s refusal to discuss transition
in parallel with security talks — as Mr Brahimi has
proposed — demonstrates that it is not interested in
serious negotiations, as does President Al-Assad’s
announcement he will run for re-election as President
before substantive negotiations have even begun. The
circumstances of the civil war in Syria — a completely
fractured country — make genuine elections
impossible. They will have no credibility in the eyes of
the Syrian people and the international community, and
will further undermine the prospects for a solution. The
Syrian authorities must return now to the negotiating
table.
In the meantime, reality for millions of Syrians
remains increasingly desperate and brutal. Despite
the unambiguous language in resolution 2139 (2014),
indiscriminate weapons continue to be savagely used
by the regime against civilians. Some 240,000 civilians
remain besieged, the vast majority by regime forces;
millions more are in hard-to-reach areas, and are denied
food and medecine. The Syrian military strategy, which
deliberately targets civilians through indiscriminate
aerial bombardment, barrel bombs and surrender-orstarve tactics, is unacceptable.

14-3141617/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Syrian authorities continue to remove
medical supplies from humanitarian convoys, and to
put up bureaucratic hurdles that prevent the effective
distribution of aid. We welcomed the opening of one
Syria-Turkey border crossing in March, but there are at
least seven more border crossings that could be opened
or better utilized. That needs to happen now. It is the
Al-Assad regime that has the primary responsibility
for addressing the desperate humanitarian situation in
Syria, but there is unavoidable evidence that it is not
complying with resolution 2139 (2014). If this persists,
the Council will need to take further measures.
The Council has heard recently of further horrific
crimes being committed in Syria. It remains essential
that those responsible for such crimes— including those
outlined in the Caesar report — be held to account.
Australia also condemns terrorist acts perpetrated by
the jihadist groups Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
and Jabhat al-Nusra, and the involvement of foreign
fighters, including from Lebanese Hizbullah, in this
conflict. Extremists have no place in Syria’s future. We
commend the efforts of Special Coordinator Kaag and
her team in assisting Syria to meet its obligations to
remove its chemical weapons. It is essential that the final
deadline of 30 June be met. The Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons mission authorized
today to establish the facts about the possible use of
chlorine in Syria must be given access to all it needs.
The Australian Foreign Minister’s visit to Lebanon
and Jordan last week reaffirmed our very strong
support for both countries as they face increasingly
insurmountable humanitarian and security challenges
as a direct result of the Syrian crisis. Last month, the
millionth Syrian refugee crossed into Lebanon — a
staggering 300 per cent increase over one year ago. We
also commend Iraq, Turkey and Egypt for their intake
of Syrian refugees; international support for all these
countries is necessary to manage the burden. During
her visit, Foreign Minister Bishop encouraged Lebanon
to maintain its policy of disassociation regarding the
Syrian conflict. We welcomed the formation of the
new Lebanese Government in February, which was a
crucial step for the country’s political stability. It will
be vital that the Lebanese Parliament elect a president
by 25 May, as scheduled, and that an incoming
President can continue President Sleiman’s efforts to
unite all Lebanese and act as a force for stability during
appallingly this difficult time.

18/68

29/04/2014

Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I should like
to thank you, Madam, for having organized this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I would also like to thank
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing.
Today’s debate is timely, as the Middle East is
going through a critical phase of its current history,
characterized by an impasse in the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process, the intensification of deadly fighting
in Syria, and volatility in the political and security
situation in Lebanon. I shall address the Palestinian
issue first.
The peace process is deadlocked after nine months
of negotiations under the auspices of the United States
of America. The Israelis and Palestinians have been
unable to agree on the negotiating principles. The
negotiation process requires a favourable political
environment and measures that would increase
mutual confidence. Peace efforts cannot bear fruit
if settlement activities continue, if the blockade on
Gaza continues, and if the separation wall continues
to eat up Palestinian land. It is perfectly legitimate to
ask how the Palestinians will build their future State
if Israel continues to modify the demographic data on
the ground by flouting the principles of international
law, its obligations under the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and its international commitments.
Recent incursions by Israeli police and extremist
groups in the Al-Aqsa esplanade, as well as attempts
to impose Israeli sovereignty over the holy sites, could
enflame tensions, undermine the dialogue process
between Israel and Palestine, and destabilize the
region as a whole. We call on Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to show restraint in their respective
statements and to avoid unilateral actions that could
further reduce the possibilities of pursuing the peace
process. We urge both parties to resume dialogue.
We welcome the valiant efforts of Mr. John Kerry,
the United States Secretary of State, to encourage the
parties to reach a comprehensive agreement. We hope
that he will pursue his mediation efforts to ensure a
resumption of negotiations.
In addition, it is an absolute necessity to involve
other partners with influence on the parties, in
particular the European Union and the League of Arab
States, which could help to move the process forward.

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The Palestinian question has been on the agenda of
the United Nations for more than 66 years, and the
Palestinian people are seeing no glimmer of hope in
their efforts to bring an end to the Israeli occupation and
to freely exercise their sovereignty in their territories
within their pre-June 1967 borders.
To conclude on that subject, we invite the
international community to become further involved
in saving the peace process and supporting the twoState solution, for two States living side by side on the
basis of the relevant Security Council resolutions; the
Madrid principles, notably land for peace; the road
map; previous agreements struck between the parties;
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
With regard to the situation in Syria, we deplore
the fact that violence is increasing to a worrisome
degree each day and that the parties cannot engage in
a political dialogue process aimed at a return to peace.
Almost 10 million Syrians, almost half of the population
of the country, are in need of humanitarian assistance.
More than 200,000 Syrians remain besieved in zones
controlled by the Government and more than 45,000 in
areas controlled by the rebels. More than 136,000 have
died and thousands more have been wounded since the
beginning of the conflict. The Security Council must
play a crucial role in settling that conflict and call for
the full implementation of resolution 2139 (2014) to
enable secure and unimpeded humanitarian access for
the United Nations to help and ease the suffering of the
civilian population in besieged cities.
I will conclude my statement by speaking about
the situation in Lebanon. In recent months, the country
has seen a spiral of violence and a series of terrorist
attacks. That is a very worrisome sign of the growing
impact of the Syrian crisis on the security and stability
of Lebanon. Chad firmly condemns all of those terrorist
attacks. The massive influx of refugees from Syria into
Libya, which is already approaching 1 million refugees,
has seriously impeded the ability of that country to
meet the humanitarian needs of the refugees. While we
commend the generosity of the Lebanese authorities,
we urge the international community as a whole to
redouble its efforts to bring substantial assistance to
Lebanon, enabling it to improve its means of providing
for the refugees.
Social cohesion and consensus among all political
actors are needed in Lebanon in order to restore State
institutions and to re-establish order and security.
We encourage all political stakeholders in Lebanon

S/PV.7164

to demonstrate their unity in the face of the terrorist
activities and to move forward on the basis of the
laudable progress that has been achieved recently with
the formation of a new Government.
In order to assist Lebanon in stabiliizing itself,
respect for its soveriegnty and its territorial integrity is
crucial. To that end, we call for the full implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006).
Prince Zeid Ra’ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan)
(spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to extend
my thanks to Mr. Robert Serry for the comprehensive
briefing he gave this morning.
The efforts to achieve peace in the Middle East are
passing through a very sensitive stage due to the lack of
meaningful progress and stagnation in the negotiations
between the Palestinian and Israeli sides, despite
the intensive, continuous and commendable efforts
undertaken by the United States and other influential
international actors. Reaching a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question
on the basis of a two-State solution is at the core of
solving the conflict in the region and is a strategic
regional and international interest. Failure to do so will
expose all countries in the region and its peoples, who
are increasingly frustrated, to new and unprecedented
waves of tension and violence. That failure will have
serious repercussions, not only for the region, but also
on international peace and security.
It is necessary to intensify international efforts
to establish an independent, sovereign and viable
Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
in accordance with the borders of 4 June 1967, based
on the two-State solution and the relevant international
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. The
achievement of that goal is a high priority for Jordan,
and we underscore, in particular, that all agreements on
final status issues must uphold Jordan’s high priorities.
(spoke in English)
I would like now to focus my attention on why the
recent actions by leading right-wing members of the
Israeli Government, as well as members of the Israeli
Knesset, with respect to the Muslim sites throughout the
Haram al-Sharif/Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, as well
as the Christian sites in the Old City, are a challenge
and threat to Jordan, and to peace and security in the
immediate region and beyond.

14-3141619/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Over the past few years, the most extreme parts
of the Israeli right-wing movement have been intent
on overturning the status quo regarding the Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound. Their regular incursions into
the compound, which spike in frequency with the
observance of religious holidays and occasions, have
been nothing short of provocative and menacing.
Moreover, the incursions are gaining in intensity and,
if they continue, will tip the situation throughout the
Al-Aqsa Mosque compound into a colossal crisis.
Last month, a delegation led by the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, which included the Chair of the
Group of Arab States, the Chair of the Non-Aligned
Movement, the Chair of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
together with the Permanent Observer of the State of
Palestine, the Egyptian Permanent Representative and
myself, met with the then President of the Council to
deliver a letter, voice our deep concern and follow up on
a previous letter sent to the Council by the Arab Group
on that subject. While we affirm today everything that
was contained in those letters, I will not go into detail
word for word.
I will limit myself to the essential features of the
broader violations on the part of the Israeli authorities.
They consist of the illegal and intrusive excavations on
both sides of the wall surrounding the Old City; a blatant
disregard for the decisions adopted by UNESCO’s
World Heritage Committee and the Executive Board of
UNESCO; obstructing a UNESCO reactive monitoring
mission to the Old City, and renovating parts of the
wall of the Al-Aqsa Mosque without the approval
of the Jordanian side — and I will get to that point
shortly — regular incursions by Israeli right-wing
politicians, settlers and extremists, as I mentioned
earlier, into the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, as well
as a recent debate organized in the Knesset aimed at
imposing Israeli sovereignty over the Al-Aqsa Mosque
compound.
We join the Arab world and the Islamic Ummah
in condemning those irresponsible and inflammatory
actions. We are also satisfied that virtually every
country in the international community shares a deep
concern about those developments, and we welcome
their supportive actions in that regard. Ambassador
Mansour has spoken eloquently in expressing the
Palestinian position on that and, given that the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem,
remains under foreign military occupation, we appeal

20/68

29/04/2014

to colleagues to listen to his words very carefully.
I would, however, like to explain how the actions of
the extreme Israeli right-wing also threaten Jordanian
interests directly. How so?
The Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, together with the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre, falls under Jordanian
custodianship and protection. And any members of
the Council who have visited either would have seen
Jordanian officials tending to those two sites. Indeed, we
have maintained them since 1924, when the Hashemite
guardianship over the holy sites was formalized.
Presently, it is His Majesty King Abdullah II, who is the
Guardian and Custodian of the Muslim and Christian
holy sites in the Old City of Jerusalem.
As we have noted time and again, East Jerusalem
is occupied territory under international law. The
International Court of Justice has affirmed that. In
paragraph 78 of its 2004 advisory opinion, citing
decisions of this Council, it emphasized the way
that international humanitarian law applies to East
Jerusalem, as well as to the rest of the occupied
Palestinian territory.
As an occupying Power, Israel is also under
obligation, by virtue of article 56 of the 1907 Hague
Regulations, which reflects an established rule
of customary international law to treat religious
institutions, even when State-owned, as private
property. As such, the rights that derive from private
ownership under international law apply, including
the right of the holder of such rights — in this case
the Jordanian Awqaf department — to administer its
property without interference from the occupying
Power. As such, Israel may not interfere with any
aspect of the administration of worship in the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, except to ensure the safety and security of
the site. That is an obligation more than a right, and
must be carried out without undermining the exercise
of religious administration of the Awqaf department.
Paragraph 2 of article 9 of the Jordan-Israeli peace
treaty reflects the special role of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, and article 5 of the Hague Convention on the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict, to which Israel is a party, also imposes a clear
obligation on that country to support the “competent
national authorities ... in safeguarding and preserving
its cultural property”. In that respect, I would like to
make two points. First, the Jordanian Awqaf was the
national authority when East Jerusalem was occupied
and has remained so continuously since June 1967.
14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Secondly, Israel’s actions undermine the exercise
by the national authority of its role in preserving the
Al-Aqsa Mosque by allowing Israeli incursions and
violations. Naturally, the draft law discussed last month
in the Knesset on the extension of sovereignty aims to
overturn, unlawfully, the national authority’s role as
the custodian of that cultural property.
Moreover, in March 2013 an agreement signed by
His Majesty King Abdullah II and President Mahmoud
Abbas reaffirmed the status of His Majesty as the
Custodian of the holy sites in Jerusalem. Under that
agreement, His Majesty enjoys the full right to exert
all legal efforts to safeguard Jerusalem’s holy sites,
including the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound, the Dome of
the Rock, all its mosques, buildings, walls, courtyards
over and beneath the ground and the Waqf properties
connected to the Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well as the
churches in the Old City of Jerusalem, including the
Church of the Holy Sepulchre.
Unless the threat to the Al Aqsa Mosque compound
from the extreme right-wing movement is reversed,
it will not only provoke a massive crisis with the
Muslim world and even parts of the Christian world,
but will also obviously, given what I have just said,
pose a direct threat and challenge to one of the two
neighbours with whom Israel has a peace treaty.
Such actions and incitements must therefore end, and
end permanently, for the sake of a region that can ill
afford yet another crisis, especially since this would be
anything but yet another crisis. Rather, it would be the
crisis to overwhelm all others, and one that we must do
everything in our power to prevent.
Ms. Kazragiene (Lithuania): I wish to thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Robert Serry, for his briefing.
Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
Let me start with the Middle East peace process.
The last time we spoke, my delegation, like all those
around this table, urged the two parties to seize the rare
opportunity created by the perseverance and dedication
of United States Secretary of State Kerry to firmly
pursue the path of negotiation and to abstain from
any moves and actions that could damage the historic
chance for an agreement that would lead to a viable
two-State solution, with both peoples living in peace
and security, paving the way for economic and other

S/PV.7164

ties and exchanges that would benefit all — Israelis,
Palestinians, their neighbours and the rest of the world.
That chance is now slipping away. Israelis and
Palestinians deserve a life of peace, security and safety
in their homes. We cannot allow a further escalation
of violence, more bloodshed and more human tragedy
in an already highly volatile region. It is in the interest
of Israelis and Palestinians alike to return to the path
of negotiation. We reiterate our call to the two parties
to exercise maximum restraint and to abstain from any
actions and violence that could further aggravate this
very difficult and delicate moment. Political will and
leadership of the highest order are required from both
sides.
My delegation expresses grave concern regarding
the recent authorization of a new settlement in
Hebron. All settlement expansion and demolitions, as
well as all acts of incitement and violence from both
sides, must stop immediately. We are also seriously
concerned about the recent disturbances at the Haram
al-Sharif/Temple Mount complex, which is sacred to
Muslims and Jews alike. Both sides must demonstrate
responsibility and do everything possible to prevent a
further escalation of the situation. The settlement of all
outstanding issues must be pursued by way of dialogue
between the parties.
Lithuania condemns the attacks on Israeli territory
from the Gaza Strip, including those during the Easter
and Passover holidays. In light of intra-Palestinian
reconciliation, Hamas must fully subscribe to the
Quartet principles and renounce violence, adhere to
previous agreements and recognize Israel’s legitimate
right to exist.
As I turn to the situation in Syria, I cannot but
refer to the recent report (S/2014/295) of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of — or rather the failure
by the parties to the conflict to implement — resolution
2139 (2014) . The Secretary-General clearly states that
civilians are not being protected and that humanitarian
access to those most in need is not improving.
The warring parties in Syria, the Syrian regime in
particular, continue to violate the Geneva Conventions,
international humanitarian law and the human rights
of the Syrian people, including the most basic right of
all — the right to life. Humanitarian access remains
intermittent and malnutrition remains severe. War
crimes and crimes against humanity, predominantly
committed by the Government of Syria, are mounting.

14-3141621/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Sieges, aerial bombings, shellings and the barbaric use
of barrel bombs continue unabated, causing even more
destruction, suffering and death among the civilian
population. Impunity reigns.
The Council’s recent Arria Formula meeting on
the so-called Caesar report revealed horrifying facts
about the industrial-scale torture and forced starvation
campaign carried out by Syria’s regime. The Council
cannot afford to remain silent on the humanitarian
situation, and it cannot ignore Syria’s continuing
non-compliance with resolution 2139 (2014). Tolerating
violence and impunity breeds more violence and
impunity. The Syrian people have already lost and
suffered too much. It is time to act. We must use the tools
at our disposal to drive home the message that there is
no escaping accountability and justice. One such tool is
the referral of Syrian case to the International Criminal
Court. Let me touch upon two other issues related to
Syria.
First, with respect to presidential elections, holding
elections in June in a country that has never had a real
election, in the midst of war and under the most extreme
humanitarian circumstances is a travesty of legitimacy
and a mockery of elections. Can anyone imagine polling
stations being set up in Aleppo, Homs or any other city,
town or village in Syria under constant and real threat
to human lives, or in the various locations inaccessible
due to siege? Or polling stations being set up where
food and basic humanitarian necessities have not been
able to enter for months? What about the votes of the
refugees and displaced persons, whose numbers have
reached some 9 million?
Furthermore, such elections clearly contradict the
letter and the spirit of the Geneva communiqué of 2012
(S/2012/523, annex). The Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States,
Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, has voiced deep concern about
the impact of such an election on the chances of a
resumption of the Geneva talks.
Secondly, each State party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention undertakes not to use chemical weapons,
including toxic chemicals and their precursors, under
any circumstances. The alleged use of chlorine gas
against the Syrian population violates that commitment
and raises the issue of accountability. The case must be
promptly and thoroughly investigated. Lithuania is also
concerned about recent reports of certain discrepancies
in the chemical weapons removal process that may
indicate that the Syrian authorities have retained the
22/68

29/04/2014

ability to deploy chemical weapons. This too must be
investigated and clarified.
I would also like to say a few words on the dangerous
and highly damaging impact that the spillover of the
Syrian crisis has had on its neighbours. In Lebanon, for
example, shelling, shooting and aerial incursions into its
border zone from Syria, as well as movements of armed
fighters and war material between the countries, have
become part of the daily reality of life. And yet Lebanon
stoically keeps its doors open to refugees from Syria,
who now total 1 million. Lebanon needs the political
support and assistance of the international community.
The Government of Prime Minister Tammam Salam,
formed in February, has a lot to grapple with, including
holding this year’s elections within an established time
frame. We reiterate our call to all parties in Lebanon
to adhere to a policy of dissociation from the Syrian
conflict, uphold the Baabda Declaration and maintain
a national dialogue. The Security Council’s strong
and unanimous support to Lebanon remains critical
to preserving its sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing.
Luxembourg fully associates itself with the
statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union.
The peace process in the Middle East is at a critical
stage. The settlements are expanding, in violation of
international law, the humanitarian situation in the
Gaza Strip is deteriorating, and provocative statements
by extremists on all sides are proliferating. The rocket
attacks on Israel continue; tensions have been growing
on the Temple Mount and, more recently, around
the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem; and
violence persists on the part of settlers, who go largely
unpunished.
Nine months of talks have not enabled an
agreement — or even a framework for negotiations on
a final status agreement — to be reached. But the talks
should nonetheless not stop. Everyone knows that only
dialogue will enable a lasting solution to the IsraeliPalestinian conflict to be found. We therefore reiterate
our full support for the United States Administration’s
efforts and urge both parties to remain engaged in this
process, aimed at creating a sovereign, independent,
democratic, contiguous and viable Palestinian State,

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

living in peace and security side by side with Israel and
with Jerusalem as the capital of both States.
With its European Union partners, Luxembourg has
consistently called for inter-Palestinian reconciliation
under the leadership of President Abbas. It is that
reconciliation alone that can improve the viability of
a future peace agreement and ensure the unity of a
Palestinian State that incorporates the West Bank and
Gaza Strip. We hope that reconciliation will enable
national elections to be held as soon as possible and
ensure Palestinian institutions’ democratic legitimacy.
We welcome President Abbas’s commitment to
respecting the principle of non-violence, supporting
a two-State solution and honouring all agreements
and obligations previously contracted, including the
recognition of Israel’s legitimate right to exist. In that
context, we welcome the clear terms in which President
Abbas condemned the Holocaust the day before
yesterday, calling it the most heinous crime against
humanity of the modern era. The fact that President
Abbas remains fully in charge of the negotiation
process, with a mandate to negotiate in the name and on
behalf of all Palestinians, is, in our view, an assurance
that the peace negotiations can and should continue.
The considerable efforts made in the last few months
should not be in vain. Negotiations must resume in
order to put an end to the occupation implement a twoState solution.
I now turn to the situation in Syria. We are firmly
convinced that the only solution to the Syrian conflict
is a political one. But how can we reach it when the
Syrian authorities put off the issue of a political
transition indefinitely? How can we reach it when
President Al-Assad fiercely persists in his scorchedearth policy, with his eye on the next presidential
election — elections that Mr. Lakhdar Вrahimi has
rightly termed incompatible with the Geneva process?
A leader committed to seeking a political solution
does not put the opposition’s representatives on a list
of terrorists, confiscate their property or threaten and
imprison their family members in order to torture them.
A leader committed to seeking a political solution
does not persist in an all-out military, killer assault,
bombing civilians and starving its own people, its
women and children. A leader committed to seeking a
political solution does not seek re-election in a travesty
of an election when half the population are displaced
or refugees.

S/PV.7164

In order to uphold international humanitarian law
in Syria, resolution 2139 (2014), which we adopted two
months ago, made a series of very clear demands. It
asked for an immediate end to indiscriminate attacks
against civilians, such as aerial bombing and the use
of barrel bombs; for immediate humanitarian access
to areas that are difficult to reach, including across
conflict lines and borders, and by the most direct
routes; and for the removal of bureaucratic obstacles to
delivering aid. Based on the Secretary-General’s first
two monthly reports on the implementation of resolution
2139 (2014), only one thing is clear — that the parties
to the conflict, particularly the Syrian authorities, have
not responded to the Security Council’s demands. The
proof of that is the continuing and intensified barrelbomb attacks on civilians; the roughly 242,000 people
who are still under siege; the 3.5 million who still live
in areas that are difficult to access and who receive
only dribs and drabs of aid; the 5.5 million children
who are in danger of becoming a lost generation;
and the Syrian officials who are still systematically
removing medical supplies from convoys intended
for areas controlled by the opposition. That denial of
medical assistance to civilian populations is described
as arbitrary and unjustified in the Secretary-General’s
most recent report, which we will discuss tomorrow in
consultations with Ms. Valerie Amos.
In resolution 2139 (2014), the Council expressed its
intention to take additional measures if the resolution
was not complied with. We will have to draw the
necessary conclusions, based on our responsibility,
our credibility and the authority of the Security
Council’s binding decisions. We must also insist on
the complete elimination of Syria’s chemical weapons
programme. Luxembourg is seriously concerned about
the new allegations of the use of chemical substances,
particularly in the town of Kafr Zita, near Hama, on
11 April, when explosive barrels filled with chlorine
were dropped on civilians, including many children.
These new allegations of the use of chemical agents,
if confirmed, would constitute a serious violation
of resolution 2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons
Convention. It is therefore essential that the investigative
mission of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons announced today shed some light
on the allegations as soon as possible.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our firm
belief that the perpetrators of the heinous crimes
committed in Syria since March 2011 should be held
accountable for their actions. The time has finally

14-3141623/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

come to refer the situation in Syria to the International
Criminal Court. Justice must be rendered and those
unconscionable crimes must end.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
you, Madam President, for presiding over today’s open
debate. I also thank Mr. Serry, Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process Serry for his briefing.
China has listened attentively to the statements made
by the observer of Palestine representative of Israel.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle
East question. Although the Middle East peace process
has witnessed more than 20 years of vicissitudes,
including major ups and downs, the general trend is
towards peace. At present, peace negotiations between
Palestine and Israel face critical choices that require
firm confidence in peace and patience and courage
from both parties.
First, there must be firm confidence in peace.
Middle East history has proven time and again that
an eye for an eye will only deepen hatred. Only by
transforming swords into ploughshares will peace be
achieved.
Since the resumption of Palestinian-Israeli peace
talks at the end of last July, the positions of both parties
have remained far apart and negotiations have been
difficult. However, progress towards peace is what the
people desire and represents an irreversible trend. A
negotiated settlement of disputes represents the right
direction towards the right goal. At this critical juncture,
both parties must mine strengthened confidence and
remain calm.
Secondly, there must be patience in the peace talks.
Efforts towards progress in the peace talks cannot
achieve results overnight. As long as both parties move
resolutely towards a negotiated settlement, results are
certain to come about. The principle of land for peace,
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace
Initiative and all of the agreements reached between
the parties constitute a realistic basis for peace between
Palestine and Israel and, furthermore, for reconciliation
between the Arab and Jewish nations. Both parties are
on the same peace track and should therefore work
together for the common good, by demonstrating the
patience and perseverance that will eventually lead
them to a land of peace.
Thirdly, there must be the courage necessary for
tough political decisions. The twists and turns in the
Middle East peace process represent an important
24/68

29/04/2014

lesson, namely, that peace talks resemble a struggle
against the tide. One must push forward, or otherwise
risk being pushed backwards. Peace must be built; it
will not self-construct.
Peace talks require proactive efforts. Biding for
time is not an option. For Palestine, mutual recognition
of the other party’s right to exist is an important
prerequisite. Mutual accommodation of the other
party’s concerns is essential.
For Palestine and Israel, mutual recognition of the
other party’s right to exist is an important prerequisite;
mutual accommodation of the other party’s reasonable
concerns is essential. The key lies in the need to think
from the perspective of the other party.
In the current situation, the prompt release of
Palestinian prisoners, a halt to the construction
of Jewish settlements in the occupied Palestinian
territories, the lifting of the blockade against Gaza
and ending the violence against innocent civilians are
imperative to maintaining an atmosphere conducive to
the peace talks.
Meanwhile, internal reconciliation and improved
unity in Palestine will contribute to the goal of an
independent Palestinian State. Palestine and Israel
should become more proactive and positive in their
approach towards the peace talks and the peace process.
China has always attached importance to the question
of the Middle East and has made consistent efforts to
promote the peace process. One year ago, Chinese
President Xi Jinping provided a four-point proposal for
settling the question of Palestine. It emphasized that
peaceful coexistence between Palestine and Israel is
the right direction to take to settle the issues between
Palestine and Israel; peace talks represent the only
realistic path to peace; the principle of land-for-peace
is an important basis for promoting the Middle East
peace process; and international support constitutes an
important guarantee of progress in the peace talks.
That four-point proposal fully reflects the Chinese
Government’s sincere will and practical effort in
promoting the Middle East peace process. China will
continue to promote the peace talks through various
channels and measures in view of strengthening its
contribution to peace in the Middle East.
The present situation in Syria remains volatile.
The people of Syria continue to suffer. The political
process is encountering difficulties. China is highly

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

concerned and remains of the view that war is not an
option — violence only begets hatred. The top priority
is for all Syrian parties to place the interests of the
nation and the country above everything else, end the
violence and hostilities as soon as possible, promote
an inclusive political transition and comprehensively
implement resolutions 2118 (2013) and 2139 (2014) in
order to achieve an early political settlement of the
question of Syria.
The international community should muster
strengthened confidence, persevere in the direction of
the political settlement and encourage all Syrian parties,
in the spirit of the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523,
annex), to start another round of negotiations as soon as
possible in order to achieve a settlement that suits the
specific situation of Syria and addresses the concerns of
all parties. On the question of Syria, China has always
pushed for peace talks, promoted a political settlement
and adopted a balanced approach in engaging both
parties to the conflict.
China attaches importance to the overall and longterm interests of the people of Syria, seeks to maintain
peace and stability in the Middle East, and upholds the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic norms of international relations.
China is ready to continue its constructive role in
efforts to promote a political settlement of the question
of Syria.
Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this quarterly open debate
which allows the Council to reflect on what has
transpired in the past three months in the Middle East,
as we reflect on the way forward.
Let me also take this opportunity to thank
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process, for his comprehensive briefing.
We also thank the Permanent Representative of Israel
and the Permanent Observer of the observer State of
Palestine for their statements.
I will limit my statement to addressing the Middle
East process and Lebanon. Regarding the Middle East
peace process, today marks the end of the nine-month
timeframe that had been set for the parties to have
concluded the direct negotiations between Israel and
Palestine. But it has ended with minimal achievements;
indeed, even with a setback for the reconciliation
between Fatah and Hamas. It is clear that the condition
set for the extension of the negotiations has been

S/PV.7164

an impediment for both parties to move forward.
Nonetheless, the international community and other
mediators should not lose hope. We believe that there is
no alternative to peaceful negotiations.
We encourage the mediators to continue engaging
both sides to make a breakthrough in the stalled
negotiations. In that regard, we express our deep
appreciation to the United States Government, and
especially to Secretary of State John Kerry for his
personal commitment to bringing both parties together
at the negotiating table. We call on the Quartet to put its
full weight behind the prospects of resuming the talks.
We call on the parties once again to avoid taking any
unilateral actions that might negatively affect the peace
process.
We note with concern that the situation in Gaza
is deteriorating, with renewed violence affecting
the economic and humanitarian conditions of the
population. We condemn the continuous firing of
rockets and mortar shells from Gaza into Israel,
breaching the terms of the November 2012 agreement
between Israel and the Gaza authorities.
Rwanda has always supported the solution of two
States for two peoples, with a secure State of Israel
living side by side with a viable Palestinian State, in
peace in security. It is in the interests of both parties to
reach a final agreement. We appeal to them to commit
to doing so and to embrace the opportunities available
in the search for a lasting peace between Israel and
Palestine.
I will now turn to Lebanon. Rwanda expresses
its strong concern at the continuing spill-over effects
of the Syrian conflict in Lebanon. They continue to
escalate. We urge all parties involved in the conflict
to cease all cross-border attacks. We reiterate that
neighbouring countries should respect the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Lebanon. As we all call
on the Lebanese authorities to use all of their means
to discourage acts that may undermine the security of
neighbouring countries.
Finally, we welcome the recent formation of the
Government in Lebanon. The international community
should continue supporting the new Government to
enable it to address the immediate economic, security
and humanitarian challenges facing the country. We
hope that the President-elect and his Government will
uphold Lebanon’s sovereignty, unity and stability,
as well as the continuity of State institutions and the

14-3141625/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/04/2014

promotion of dialogue. It is of paramount importance
that the Lebanese parties continue to maintain their
commitment to the Baabda Declaration and Lebanon’s
policy of disassociation.

Chile will continue encouraging Israel and Palestine
to resume negotiations with a view to achieving just
and lasting peace under international law. We cherish
the hope that this will be possible.

Mr. Barros (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
the Nigerian delegation for having convened this open
debate. We also express our gratitude for the briefing
by Mr. Robert Serry on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

My country remains concerned about the conflict
in the Syrian Arab Republic. We regret to note that the
humanitarian situation has sharply deteriorated and that
humanitarian access has not improved. We reiterate our
call on all parties to implement resolution 2139 (2014),
comply with international humanitarian law and
human rights law, ensure the protection of civilians,
and establish concrete measures on the ground to allow
rapid, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to the
affected population.

Chile’s position on this issue is well known. My
country, which recognized the State of Palestine
in January 2011, supports the two-State solution in
accordance with the principles set out in relevant
United Nations resolutions, including General
Assembly resolution 181 (II) and Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 337 (1973). We do so in the
aim of seeing the establishment of an independent and
sovereign Palestinian State, living side by side in peace
and security with the State of Israel, within secure and
internationally recognized borders are established.
Today, with the conclusion of the nine-month
period set for negotiations between Israel and Palestine,
we see once again the fading hopes of reaching an
agreement in the Middle East. We regret that the parties
did not seize this opportunity to strengthen dialogue
and mutual trust. In particular, we are concerned by
unilateral actions and a number of measures that
threaten peace. For example, increased settlement
building on Palestinian territory, which is illegal under
international law, or visits by senior Israeli official to
the Temple Mount could incite sectarian extremism.
Our country deeply regrets such incidents.
For Chile, it is imperative that the Old City of
Jerusalem be shared under the principles of harmony
and mutual respect, in recognition of its profound
significance for several of the major religions.
Moreover, we are concerned by omissions, such as
the lack of condemnation of rocket fire from the Gaza
Strip. Terrorism has no place in this world. In that vein,
I would like to say that Chile supports the process of
Palestinian reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas,
agreed in 2012 and ratified on Wednesday, 23 April. We
believe that the Palestinian question must be addressed
comprehensively and without neglecting the fate of
the population living in the Gaza Strip. However, we
reiterate our conviction that the Islamic Resistance
Movement, Hamas, must renounce armed struggle and
recognize Israel’s right to exist.

26/68

Regarding the programme removing Syrian
chemical weapons, we regret that, despite the progress
made, the 27 April deadline for the removal and
destruction of chemical material from the territory of
Syria was not met. We hope that the goal of the total
elimination of the arsenal will be met for 30 June. The
international community has made immense efforts to
support the process, and now it is for the parties to fully
implement resolution 2118 (2013) and the standards of
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). Nevertheless, it
is important to reiterate that the majority of the victims
have been cause by the use of conventional weapons.
We reiterate our concern at the reports of possible
chlorine gas attacks in Syria, in contravention of the
provisions of the CWC and of resolution 2118 (2013). In
this regard, we welcome the decision of the Executive
Council of the Organisation for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons to establish a mission to investigate
the alleged attacks.
It is our belief that a political solution is the only
possible one. We believe it is quite urgent for the third
round of negotiations to be relaunched and for the
parties come to them in good faith and in a constructive
spirit in order to bridge the gaps between them and move
towards the implementation of the Geneva communiqué
of the Action Group for Syria (S/2012/522, annex), in
line with the elements agreed upon by the parties and
the process proposed by the Special Envoy, whom my
country supports.
We remain concerned about the impact of the
Syrian conflict on Lebanon’s stability, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. We believe it is indispensable that
the Lebanese political class renew their coexistence pact
and allow themselves to be guided by the dissociation
policy established in the Baabda Declaration.
14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Chile welcomes the parliamentary agreement on the
ministerial statement by the Cabinet of Prime Minister
Tammam Salam. We appreciate that the agreement was
adopted by a broad majority, although we regret that
once again the concept of “resistance”, which Hezbollah
defends, was legitimized. We support the initiatives to
strengthen Lebanese institutions so that the State can
assume all its functions, such as a monopoly on the use
of force and territorial defence. Moreover, we want to
publicly recognize the open door policy with which
Lebanon has welcomed Syrian refugees. We hope that
in this difficult financial climate, donor countries step
up to the plate.
Finally, I note that Chile has deep ties with the
communities of the Middle East, and we will thus
always be willing to join our efforts with those of the
international community to establish avenues for peace
and progress for the people of that region.
Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank you, Madam President, for organizing this debate.
Our respect and appreciation go to Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process Serry for his briefing.
I recognize and extend my respect to the Permanent
Representative of Israel and the Permanent Observer of
the State of Palestine for their contributions.
This open debate, as others have said, takes place
on an important date, and one that is fraught with
paradox. A valuable opportunity seems to be slipping
away from us, and yet we have come here to hear the
actual voices of the international community, which is
not resigned to repeated failure.
I would like to repeat here what my Minister for
Foreign Affairs said yesterday, representing Argentina
in remembering the victims of the Holocaust at the Yad
Vashem Museum. He said that we would like to see an
Israel living in peace and friendship with its neighbours
and in safety. That is the dream pursued not just by the
founders of Israel, but also by the Palestinian people.
The Minister also stated that we recognize Palestine
as an independent State. We have therefore always
supported, and will continue to support, the inclusion
of Palestine in the various international organizations.
Knowing that the door to the two-State solution
would not stay open for long, exactly nine months ago the
international community received with hope — the same
hope that we have today — the news that Palestinians
and Israelis were returning to negotiations. Following
that period, which the parties had established as the

S/PV.7164

period in which to reach a final agreement to resolve all
outstanding final status issues in order to achieve a just
and lasting peace, the outlook is not very encouraging,
as we can see for ourselves. Not only did they not reach
a final agreement, but they did not reach the more
modest goal of a framework agreement and, as of a few
days, they had not successfully concluded talks aimed
at extending the negotiation period.
During that period, rather than shrink, the gap
between the parties’ positions seems to have grown
wider, and the situation on the ground has evolved in
the opposite direction from that needed to establish
the conditions necessary for peace. There has been an
intensification of the illegal settlements campaign; a
sustained increase in the displacements and demolitions
in East Jerusalem and Area C; an increase in settler
violence; an increase in tensions in places of worship in
Jerusalem; and continued clashes between the security
forces of Israel and Palestinian civilians in the West
Bank. Meanwhile, the indiscriminate firing of rockets
from Gaza into Israel has exposed the fragility of the
ceasefire between Israel and Hamas that was reached
in November 2012.
Argentina supports continued dialogue. There is
no other way to overcome the conflict. But dialogue
cannot be the excuse nor provide the framework with
which to consolidate a status quo that is unsustainable.
Negotiations have to be substantial, with the clear
objective of putting an end to the occupation and
achieving full independence for the Palestinian State,
living in peace with Israel on the basis of the parameters
that enjoy broad consensus among the international
community, including the pre-1967 borders.
We are convinced that this is the result that
will provide the best security guarantees for Israel,
because the failure of negotiations will benefit only
the extremists on both sides. Argentina furthermore
believes that achieving an agreement fundamentally
depends on the decisions taken by the parties and the
support received from those outside who are genuinely
pursuing peace.
We must be conscious of the fact that we must
speak in good faith in our interpretation of what has
happened and of what we have failed to do. However,
the victims understand full well what has happened
and what we have not done. In that respect, we
believe that, in addition to providing the necessary
incentives, the international community should speak

14-3141627/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

clearly when acts that are not conducive to peace are
committed. Therefore, Argentina stresses that the
Security Council, in compliance with its institutional
responsibilities, must take a more active role in support
of the two-State solution, react clearly when attacks
occur against Israel, reaffirm the illegal nature of the
settlements, and discuss Palestine’s request to become
a State Member of the United Nations and follow up on
General Assembly resolution 67/19.
Finally, Argentina believes that Gaza should be
an essential part of the two-State solution. Therefore,
we believe that the peace process and intra-Palestinian
reconciliation are not mutually exclusive, but rather
mutually reinforcing to the extent that the latter takes
place under the leadership of President Abbas and
in line with the Palestine Liberation Organization’s
commitments, including the recognition of Israel and a
renunciation of violence.
Unfortunately, the diplomatic opportunity available
in Geneva on 22 January to find an answer to the
Syrian tragedy has not yielded the results that we hoped
for and the Syrian people need. It is undeniable that,
despite having agreed to sit at the negotiating table, the
parties and their supporters from outside still believe
they can win the war and that they can solve the crisis
by military force.
It is therefore not surprising that the successive
reports of the Independent International Commission
of Inquiry of the Human Rights Council and the two
reports of the Secretary-General (S/2014/208 and
S/2014/295) on the implementation of resolution 2139
(2014) confirm that, in their struggle to maintain or
gain power, the parties have sought to achieve the
military advantage even by violating the fundamental
rules governing conflicts.
As a result, it has been noted that more than 100,000
lives have already been lost in Syria and the number of
victims of torture, forced disappearances, extrajudicial
executions, sexual violence, arbitrary detentions,
hunger, thirst and fear continues to rise. Millions of
Syrians have been displaced within and outside the
country, while arbitrary and illegal obstacles deny
them of the very basic means for subsistence and ethnic
and religious minorities watch with growing fear the
growing threat from extremist groups.
Against that backdrop, we cannot allow the reports
of the commission and the Secretary-General to
become bureaucratic routine or ritual. We cannot resign

28/68

29/04/2014

ourselves to the massacres or become accustomed
to these massive violations of human rights as if we
were at the theatre and allowing the performance on
the stage to become an ongoing topic of discussion.
On the contrary, every new report we receive is a
cruel reminder of the Council’s inability to respond
collectively, as well as a sign of hope and of a renewed
call for action. Therefore, despite the differences
prevailing in the Security Council, which are well
known and have been expressed, I have the duty to
reiterate Argentina’s convictions.
First, we must seriously consider referring the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court,
with its corresponding financing, because the magnitude
and nature of the violations that have been committed
are due to a great extent to the climate of impunity
reigning in Syria. Secondly, since January 2013 we
have been saying that we must consider measures to
restrict the transfer of weapons to all parties because it
is clear that weapons in Syria are being used to commit
crimes against humanity and war crimes. Thirdly, we
must explicitly support Mr. Brahimi as the mediator
accepted by the parties so as to contribute to his efforts
to help the Syrians find a political solution to the crisis.
We have spoken about reports of presumed new
attacks with chemical weapons in Syria. We believe
that if these reports are well founded they must
be investigated, recalling the provisions Chemical
Weapons Convention, to which Syria is now party. At
the same time, and although they are not yet complete,
we welcome the ongoing efforts to remove chemical
weapons from Syria, despite the extremely difficult
circumstances. We trust in the sustained commitment
of the Syrian Government to meeting its obligations.
We hope that the mission will conclude successfully
and that its achievement will be a catalyst for ongoing
efforts to achieve peace in Syria.
The solidarity of Jordan deserves recognition, and
the future of Lebanon also deserves our support and
cooperation.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
should like to thank Mr. Serry for his statement and
the representatives of Palestine and Israel for their
contributions to this debate. I will focus my intervention
on the Middle East peace process and Syria.
The future of the Middle East peace process hangs
in the balance. Both the Israeli and the Palestinian
leaderships need to seize the diminishing opportunity

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

before them and focus on the ultimate goal — a
negotiated two-State solution to the conflict, which is
so desperately needed for their peoples. During his
recent speech to the Knesset, the United Kingdom
Prime Minister David Cameron emphasized the
transformative benefits of peace. These include a
prosperous Palestinian State living side by side with
a safe and secure Israel, normalized relations between
States of the region, and a special privileged partnership
between the parties and the European Union. By
contrast, the consequences of letting this opportunity
pass would be very grave both for the parties and for
the region.
With respect to recent announcements on Palestinian
reconciliation, let me reiterate that the United Kingdom
believes that in order to achieve a lasting peace, it is
necessary to end the separation between Gaza and the
West Bank and to reunite them under a Palestinian
authority that is fully committed to peace with Israel.
The United Kingdom has consistently made it clear
that we will engage any Palestinian Government that
demonstrates through actions that it is committed to
the principles set out by President Abbas in Cairo in
May 2011.
The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the increase in tension and violence, leading
to many deaths of Palestinians and Israelis alike. We
condemn the further expansion of Israeli settlements
and continued demolition of Palestinian homes, as
well as the continued rocket fire by extremist groups
in Gaza into Israel. Both are contrary to international
humanitarian law. Increasing tensions around the
holy sites of Jerusalem are also worrying. The status
quo must be maintained and respected. We urge the
responsible authorities to maintain calm and avoid
letting those with an extremist agenda dictate the
atmosphere around the holy sites.
Finally, let me welcome President Abbas’s remarks
on the Holocaust. The entire international community
must stand united against those who deny the terrible
truth of the Holocaust.
The situation in Syria worsens every day. The
regime continues to act with complete disregard for
civilian life, humanitarian needs and resolution 2139
(2014). The Secretary-General has been very clear that
the Security Council must act in the event of further
non-compliance. Recent credible reports that chemical
weapons have again been used by the regime in Syria

S/PV.7164

call into question the regime’s commitment to comply
with its obligations and to dismantle its programme in
full.
We raised our concerns in the Executive Council
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) on 11 April, and welcome today’s
OPCW announcement that it would launch an
investigation into these reports. We commend the work
of the United Nations-OPCW joint mission, but the
situation on the ground is concerning — missed Syrian
deadlines, ambiguities in the declaration, alleged recent
use of chemical weapons, and limited progress on the
destruction of chemical weapons production facilities.
As we approach the completion of the extraction
phase, the joint mission will continue to have a vital
role in ensuring that the Council is fully appraised on
compliance with resolution 2118 (2013).
The Syrian people deserve peace and justice.
The international community must ensure that all
those responsible for war crimes and crimes against
humanity are held to account. The United Kingdom
continues to call for the situation in Syria to be referred
to the International Criminal Court and will continue
to support the moderate opposition in their efforts to
protect Syrians from the regime and from extremist
groups.
The Al-Assad regime’s announcement of elections
to be held on 3 June is a cynical attempt to sustain his
murderous dictatorship. Elections will be conducted
amidst regime attacks on civilians and hundreds of
thousands living under regime siege in horrendous
conditions. These elections can have no value or
credibility when held in a climate of fear, when
non-violent opponents to Al-Assad have been detained
or disappeared, and when millions of Syrians who live
as refugees are prevented from voting.
A clear route to credible elections exists through
the establishment of a transitional governing body, as
set out in the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex).
We call on the Al-Assad regime to return to Geneva
and to negotiate on the basis of the format and agenda
proposed by the United Nations-League of Arab States
Joint Special Representative for Syria, Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi. All Council members bear a responsibility
to work for a negotiated political solution, and in
particular to put pressure on Al-Assad to engage with
the process in good faith.

14-3141629/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.
I first want to thank Special Coordinator Serry
not only for his briefing but especially for his abiding
commitment to the Middle East peace process. My
comments will focus on the Middle East peace process,
Syria and Yemen.
I want to say categorically that the road to peace
in the Middle East is becoming increasingly slippery.
We note that Israel has announced that it is suspending
its participation in the talks owing to the reconciliation
between Fatah and Hamas. Coming as it does just two
days before the 29 April deadline set in July 2013 by
United States Secretary of State John Kerry for the
talks to conclude, we must state that it is a considerable
setback for the peace process.
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas
has given assurances that as part of the new unity
Government in Palestine, Hamas will recognize
Israel, commit itself to non-violence and adhere to
previous agreements. President Abbas has expressed
his continued commitment to peace negotiations with
Israel. We expect Abbas to keep the faith. We hope that
these pronouncements will reassure Israeli authorities
and encourage them to return to the peace talks.
We have heard concerns expressed by wellmeaning world leaders about a lack of political will on
both sides to make the necessary tough decisions. We
are convinced that peace between Israel and Palestine
cannot be imposed by the international community.
We can only facilitate. Peace must emanate from both
parties. It requires the traditional give-and-take that is
inherent in peace negotiations. Without equivocation,
we want both sides to demonstrate greater flexibility in
their long-term strategic interests. In our times, it has
become axiomatic that there is no alternative to a twoState solution with Israel and Palestine living together
side by side in peace, stability and security.
Turning to Syria, we note the accelerated movement
of chemical weapons material to storage sites in the
port of Latakia over the past month. With the recent
movements, Sigrid Kaag, the Special Coordinator of
the joint mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations,
confirmed yesterday that the Syrian Government has
removed or destroyed in-country approximately 92 per
cent of its declared stockpile of chemical weapons
material. This renewed commitment on the part

30/68

29/04/2014

of the Syrian Government appears to be a positive
development that would facilitate the completion of the
task of the Joint Mission of the OPCW and the United
Nations.
We share the view of the Secretary-General that the
precarious and unstable nature of the security situation
underlines the critical importance of expediting the
removal of chemical weapons material from Syria as
quickly and as safely as possible. At this opportune
moment, we encourage the joint mission to continue
to engage the Syrian authorities in order to sustain the
momentum to complete the removal operations in the
coming days.
On the humanitarian situation, it is clear that it
is becoming ever more dire as the civil war in Syria
intensifies. Repeated calls by well-meaning nations
across the world for the warring parties to lay down
their arms and embrace dialogue have gone unheeded.
The parties to the conflict and their supporters must
ensure that civilians are protected regardless of their
religion, community or ethnic affiliation. Both the
Syrian Government and the armed groups have the legal
obligation and moral responsibility to do so. They must
take all necessary measures to put an immediate end
to violence against civilians, including indiscriminate
attacks on civilians. We want to urge all parties to take
all necessary measures to provide safe and unhindered
humanitarian access throughout the country, thereby
ensuring the full and immediate implementation of
resolution 2139 (2014). A military option would leave
in its trail the victors and the vanquished. It would shut
the door on a durable peace. That is why we urge the
warring parties to return to the peace talks without
preconditions.
Regarding Yemen, we take positive note of the
progress so far recorded in the political process in the
country. The commencement of work by the Constitution
Drafting Committee is an indication that Yemen is on
the path to sustainable peace, security and stability.
The efforts of the Government to put into effect the
agreement mediated by the Gulf Cooperation Council
on the implementation mechanism for the transitional
process is a visible demonstration of its commitment
to injecting positive change into the Yemeni domestic
arena.
Regarding the report of the National Dialogue
Conference, we believe that the speedy implementation
of its provisions would engender confidence-building
among the different segments of Yemeni society and
14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

foster peace among the warring parties. Within the
framework of the National Dialogue Conference, the
Government now has a unique opportunity to address
those issues pertaining to relations between the northern
and the southern regions, engender greater inclusion for
women and youth, and indeed lay a credible foundation
for lasting peace and prosperity in Yemen.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statement
to no more than four minutes in order to enable to Council
to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations with
lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
those texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): Allow me to start by
congratulating you, Madam President, and your team
on the excellent work done during your presidency of
the Council this month. I should also like to commend
the members of the Permanent Mission of Luxembourg
for their professionalism in steering the work of the
Council during the exceedingly busy month of March.
Imagine an early morning of a spring day in
Jerusalem — the soft breeze carrying the smell of
thyme; the first sunshine thread bringing warmth; the
knell of a church bell sounding in the distance, echoing
the muezzin calling for prayer; quick steps on gravel of
an early riser going to the temple; a city on the verge of
resuming its bustling activities. That is what Jerusalem
should sound like.
But today, the story is completely different there.
The sounds are those of crashing rubble from houses in
East Jerusalem being demolished by Israeli authorities;
the voices are those of shouting soldiers and settlers,
and the hurried steps are those of scared Palestinian
children running away. Jerusalem, the holy city of the
three monolithic religions, is becoming a city of one
voice. Jerusalem is being denied its inclusive tradition
by the inadmissible and illegal behaviour of settlers
protected by Israeli forces, in particular in the holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque, where those shielded settlers are
spreading fear and intimidation and Israeli forces are
closing the gates and refusing access to worshippers.
How many letters of complaint must the Council
receive for it to condemn these illegal activities and to

S/PV.7164

compel Israel to abide by its obligations? Yes, it has
obligations under the customs and rules of international
law, under the Charter of the United Nations and
under resolutions adopted by this body; obligations
under article 4 of the 1954 Hague Convention for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict, to refrain from any act of hostility directed
against this holy site; obligations under article 38 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, to respect people’s
religious convictions; its obligations under article 18
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights to respect a people’s right to observe
and practice their own religion.
How many of these provisions, treaties and norms
should Israel be allowed to disregard before the Council
reacts? The Israeli practices in Jerusalem are only part
of a wider scheme to create new realities on the ground,
making the two-State solution a more difficult objective
to attain. Indeed, people are being segregated based
on their national and religious identities and isolated
in very restricted areas in an alarming reminder of
apartheid.
Demolition, the confiscation of land, forced
displacement and the authorization of illegal settlements
are just a few examples of these Israeli practices.
Indeed, on 28 March Israel demolished a two-storey
building, followed by the demolition of European
Union-funded humanitarian shelters in Jabal Al-Baba
on 8 April to make room for new settlements. As if this
were not enough, the decision authorizing settlers to
move in to Al-Rajabi House in Hebron illustrates yet
another expansion of this settlement policy.
As Council members know, Israel did not live
up to its commitments to release the fourth batch of
Palestinian prisoners. Moreover, nine months ago,
while commending Mr. Kerry’s efforts to relaunch
the peace process between Palestinians and Israelis,
we cautioned that Israeli persistence in its illegal
settlements activities would hinder these efforts and
jeopardize the negotiations. Today, the reaction of the
Arab and Muslim world, the European Union and many
other countries to these illegal settlement activities and
policies is unanimous, and has culminated in a collective
condemnation through the adoption of four resolutions
by the Human Rights Council. Our challenge today
remains to strengthen the resilience of the peace process
and press for a just and comprehensive solution to all
aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict, in a rejection of

14-3141631/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/04/2014

partial solutions and in accordance with United Nations
relevant resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference and
the integral provisions of the Arab Peace Initiative.

That is more than 140 times as many refugees per
inhabitants as in your esteemed country, Madam
President.

Turning to my country, Lebanon, the Government of
national interest has reiterated its respect for all United
Nations resolutions and reaffirmed its commitment to
the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and its
call on the international community to help us to put an
end to the Israeli violation of our sovereignty. Almost
daily overflights and unilateral aggressive actions,
such as Israel’s bombing of the houses of civilians in the
south of Lebanon, not only exacerbate tensions but also
undermine joint efforts of the Lebanese Armed Forces
and the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon to
fulfil their mandate under the said resolution.

Every effort must be pursued to support my
country facing such challenges. In this regard, Lebanon
expresses its deep appreciation to the Government of
France for hosting the International Support Group for
Lebanon on 5 March, and commends the members of the
Group for their unwavering commitment. Lebanon also
looks forward to the Rome Conference on building up
the capacities of the Lebanese Army, and considers the
generous contribution of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
to be the cornerstone in this endeavour. Furthermore,
my country highly values the contributions made to the
multi-donor trust fund. These are but the first seeds
of financial assistance to respond to the dire need for
greater aid to help the country cope with more than
1 million Syrian refugees. Lebanon calls for more
generous contributions in this regard.

My Government has also highlighted the following
priorities: preserving the sovereignty of the State,
ensuring the stability of the country, and guaranteeing
its security. In this regard, I am proud to announce that
the Lebanese Armed Forces have begun the successful
implementation of security plans in Tripoli and the
Bekaa, and to undertake measures to curb the threat of
terrorist attacks.
Furthermore, the Government of Lebanon is
determined to expedite the implementation of the road
map established to mitigate the socioeconomic impact of
the Syrian crisis in the country, based on the assessment
study prepared jointly with the World Bank. In the said
report, the figures speak for themselves. Lebanon’s
gross domestic product shrank by $7.5 billion, while
the cost to the Treasury was estimated at $5.1 billion,
including $3.6 billion in expenses directly used to
provide services for the Syrian refugees, and Treasury
revenues dropped by $1.5 billion due to the decline in
economic growth.
Today, the number of refugees fleeing Syria into
Lebanon and registered with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has exceeded
1,034,000. As has been stated by Mr. António Guterres,
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
“if the flow of people seeking safety in Lebanon
continues, there could be over 1.6 million refugees
in the country by the end of this year. But even
now, Lebanon already has the highest per-capita
concentration of refugees of any country in recent
history, with nearly 230 registered Syrian refugees
for every 1,000 Lebanese.”

32/68

In addition, Lebanon has proposed measures to curb
this existential threat through the provision of direct
assistance to Government institutions, to honour the
commitments made during the pledging conferences, to
increase the number of refugees included in resettlement
programmes based on the principle of burden-sharing,
and, most importantly, to focus serious efforts on
widening the humanitarian space to accommodate the
Syrian refugees in safe camps inside Syria or in safe
zones along the border.
More than three years into the conflict, Syria is
now, in the words of the Secretary-General, the “biggest
humanitarian and peace and security crisis facing the
world” (S/2014/208, para. 49). These words translate
the sufferings of the Syrian people — millions of
internally displaced people and millions upon millions
of refugees. Today, more than ever, the international
community should overcome its inability to put an end
to this raging conflict and to offer to the Syrian people
their basic right to choose and live in dignity and peace
by paving the way to a political process that will fulfil
their aspirations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month, and to thank Mr. Robert Serry for his
important briefing this morning on developments

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in the Middle East, especially the peace prospects. I
should like to affirm Egypt’s support, despite all the
difficulties and challenges it is facing.
I should also like to affirm our association with the
statements to be made by the representatives of Iran
in the name of the Non-Aligned Movement, Oman on
behalf of the Group of Arab States, and Guinea on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Today, we meet again at a crossroads in the
developments in the Middle East. Today is 29 April,
the last day of the negotiations, launched under the
mediation of the Secretary of State of the United
States, between the State of Palestine and Israel nine
months ago to reach a final settlement. I should like at
the outset to repeat Egypt’s support for the efforts of
the United States to reach a peaceful settlement based
on the two-State solution of two States living side by
side in peace within the borders of 4 June 1967, and
with Al-Quds al-Sharif as the capital of the State of
Palestine. Moreover, I should like to congratulate the
State of Palestine on its recent adherence to the four
Geneva Conventions and a number of other international
human rights treaties, demonstrating the commitment
of the State of Palestine to international law.
On this occasion, I should like to call on Israel to
review its latest decision to freeze negotiations and
impose additional sanctions on the Palestinian side, as
if the occupation and its daily practices, as well as the
construction of illegitimate settlements and the siege of
Gaza, were not sufficient to exert pressure on Palestine,
its Government and its people.
Events of the past three months reflect once again
the same logic that has prevailed in the Middle East
since the beginning of the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories. The Government of Israel continues to
behave in contradiction to the resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly and to violate the
rules of international law, international humanitarian
law, and conventions and accords previously reached
with the Palestinian side and the United States mediator
in the peace process. These violations include its refusal
to release the fourth batch of refugees, its building of
new settlements and expansion of existing settlements,
its siege imposed on the city of Gaza, its prohibition of
access of Palestinian Muslims to the Al-Aqsa Mosque;
and its restrictions on Palestinian Christians seeking
access to the Church of the Holy Sepulchre for the
Easter ceremony in another attempt to overturn the
status quo at the holy sites.

S/PV.7164

Of course, all those procedures have not safeguarded
the security of Israeli as violations have persisted every
day and Israel has continued to feel a lack of security,
despite its arsenal of weapons of mass destruction and
traditional weapons, which are of a higher quality than
those in all other countries of the region.
Israel does all that yet expects the international
community to support such acts or at least to remain
silent. The Israeli Government has been very upset
by the European Union guidelines on boycotting
settlements and refusing to do business with institutions
that support or fund settlement activities. It continues
to try to encourage investment in Israel. We praise
the international community and companies that
have developed strategies to put an end to settlement
activities. We confirm that the problem is related not
to the State of Israel per se, but to the insistence of the
current Israeli Government on pursuing its expansionist
activities in the settlements in order to suppress
the peace process or to delay any genuine peaceful
settlement with the Palestinians. We therefore call on
Israel once again to stop such acts and instead to resort
to logic. We call on the Security Council to assume
its responsibilities and to put the pressure necessary
to compel Israel to adhere to international law and its
provisions and to cease its ongoing provocations in
occupied lands, especially holy lands.
Moreover, Israel punishes the Palestinian Authority
when it seeks to return to the peace process, work
to unify the Palestinians, or adhere to international
organizations and treaties. What kind of logic is that and
how can peace be achieved from the Israeli viewpoint?
Egypt supports the efforts towards Palestinian
reconciliation and affirms that it will do its utmost
to achieve a real consensus and peace process based
on international legitimacy. Until then, Israel, as the
occupying Power, must assume its full responsibility
for the occupied territories and be aware that pointing
its finger at other countries will deceive no one and
or exempt it from accountability. The Security Council
must take all necessary measures to ensure Israel’s
adherence to such commitments.
I now turn to the situation in Syria, where
destruction and the killing of civilians is on the rise.
Egypt supports the efforts of the Secretary-General and
the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States to find a political
settlement. We call upon all parties, especially the
Syrian Government, to take no decision that is not in

14-3141633/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

line with the Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012
(S/2012/523, annex).
We affirm once again that current events in Syria
cannot be used as a pretext for ignoring the importance
of implementing relevant Security Council resolutions
to put an end to the Israeli occupation of the Syrian
Golan. We also express concern over the visits of senior
Israeli officials to the occupied Golan during the past
three months, as well as their provocative statements
suggesting that the Golan is an integral part of Israel, in
full disregard of relevant Security Council resolutions.
To conclude, I would like to congratulate Ms. Angela
Kane and Ms. Sigrid Kaag on their diligence and earnest
efforts to implement resolution 2118 (2013). I call upon
the members of the Security Council, especially the
permanent members, to implement paragraph 14 of
resolution 687 (1991) on creating a zone free of weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East without waiting
for the next tragedy to occur.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Al-Abdallah (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. Let me also thank Mr. Robert Serry
for his briefing. I should like to stress my delegation’s
support for the statements to be made later on behalf of
the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement.
The current year, 2014, is a major landmark when
it comes to the question of Palestine. It is a year of
solidarity with the Palestinian people. That reaffirms
the importance for the international community and
the world’s conscience in general to pay attention to
the rights of the Palestinian people. However, Israel
persists in its policies that run counter to the will of
the international community. It is the very course that
Israel has persistently taken for the past six decades.
Israel persists in its attempts to judaize the
holy city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and to change its
demographic characteristics. We have all witnessed
Israel’s settlement policies, its holding of thousands of
detainees, its disrespect for holy sites, and its expulsion
of Palestinian citizens, particularly from Al-Quds. We
have witnessed its ongoing apartheid policy and policy
of ethnic cleansing. All such violations run counter to
international law and international humanitarian law

34/68

29/04/2014

and the most fundamental of human rights. All of those
practices are taking place under the very nose of the
Security Council without any attempt to put an end to
them.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as a guardian of
Islamic holy sites, strongly condemns the attacks and
continuing acts of provocation in holy sites and attempts
to prevent the faithful from reaching Al-Aqsa Mosque,
which is tantamount to denying the fundamental
right to worship. Israel is entirely responsible for the
deterioration of the situation in East Jerusalem and for
any negative consequences caused by the acts of the
Israel Defence Forces or of settlers. We condemn all
attempts to change the historical or religious nature
of the various holy sites in the city. We call for an
immediate end to all acts that lead to demographic
changes in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, including the settlement
campaign, the demolition of Palestinian homes and
the collective expulsion of Palestinians, all of which
contravenes international law.
Israel continues to challenge the will of the
international community and all efforts to hold
successful negotiations. It flouts all the agreements
that surround the peace process, beginning with its
refusal to release all the detainees it had agreed to
release, extending settlement activities and changing
the demographic nature of the city. As hopes for efforts
to hold successful negotiations were raised over the
past few months, the occupation forces were doing
their utmost to undermine those efforts. For example,
according Israeli Government statistics, the rate at
which settlements were built increased by more than
23 per cent this year compared to last.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia welcomes the
accession by Palestine to a number of international
treaties, conventions and organizations, thereby
demonstrating its respect for international law and its
readiness to fulfil its obligations thereunder. It also shows
that it respects international law as it seeks to fulfil the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, its freedom
and right to self-determination. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia also welcomes Palestinian reconciliation, which
unifies Palestinian decision-making. The Palestinian
Authority has thus reasserted its respect for all its
international commitments.
It is truly ironic and bizarre that Israel should
complain about such reconciliation when its own
Foreign Minister is calling for ethnic cleansing and

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

some members of its Cabinet have repeatedly expressed
doubt about the two-State solution. In the past, Israel
used the conflict between Hamas and the Palestinian
Authority as a pretext not to cooperate; it is now using
the pretext of agreement between the Palestinian
factions to do the same thing. Those pretexts are empty.
Israel hides behind them because it has no desire to
see negotiations that would end the settlement and
occupation succeed.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is committed to the
Arab Peace Initiative set forth by the Kingdom itself.
We call on the Security Council to compel the Israeli
Government to end to its acts of aggression, which run
counter to international law, international humanitarian
law, the Fourth Geneva Convention, and the resolutions
of the Security Council on the occupied territories
in Palestine, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Golan,
including settlement activities in Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and other occupied territories.
We call for the complete lifting of the siege
against Gaza and for measures to ensure a boycott of
all products coming from Israeli settlements. We call
on the United Nations and the Secretary-General to
make every effort to bring pressure to bear on Israel
to release all Palestinian detainees in accordance with
international law, international humanitarian law and
the Fourth Geneva Convention, and particularly to
immediately release Palestinian children from Israeli
prisons pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) and other
relevant resolutions. We call for the release of all Syrian
detainees in Israeli prisons who are sons and daughters
of the occupied Golan.
A few minutes ago, the Israeli representative
launched a pathetic attack on my country, which
shows how illogical the Israeli Government’s position
is when it comes to peace in the Middle East. It is
turning right and left, throwing accusations to and fro,
and attempting to divert the attention of the Council
and the international community from its breaches
of human rights and international humanitarian law
in the occupied Palestinian territories; its treatment
of detainees, peaceful demonstrators, women and
children; its siege on Gaza; and numerous other
violations that make the lives of Palestinians miserable
and that suppress their rights.
The situation in Syria is the greatest humanitarian
tragedy of this century. The situation continues to
deteriorate as the Syrian authorities use any and all
means in the war, including a policy of starvation and

S/PV.7164

scorched earth. Homs and other parts of the country are
besieged as indiscriminate artillery is used to force the
people to their knees. Resolution 2139 (2014) calls on
all parties to cease all attacks on civilian areas, as well
as on the Old City of Homs, does it not? The Security
Council has expressed its determination to take more
steps in case of non-compliance with that resolution,
has it not? Was the resolution not adopted two months
ago, since when thousands upon thousands have been
killed?
Now the Syrian authorities are violating resolution
2139 (2014) under our very noses, but the Council is
unable to even agree on a simple statement condemning
such acts? We call on the Council to take the necessary
further measures in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2139 (2014), because the Syrian regime
continues to flout that resolution. Furthermore, given
the Syrian regime’s continued use of chemical materials
against its own people, we also call for the immediate,
unreserved and unconditional lifting of the sieges of
Homs, Aleppo and all other areas under siege in Syria.
My delegation has already warned of the Syrian
Government’s lack of responsiveness to the very bases
on which the Geneva Conference on Syria was built.
The agreement called for a transitional body with full
authority to fulfil the aspirations and hopes of the
Syrian people. Now the Syrian authorities are showing
the international community that they do not care for
the aspirations and hopes of their people by calling for
so-called presidential elections. How can the parties in
Syria meet in Geneva to set up a transitional Government
while one of the parties is at the very same time calling
for false elections to impose a fait accompli on the
ground for an additional seven years. The insistence on
holding presidential elections in the current situation
is confirmation of the fact that the Syrian authorities
will continue to suppress the aspirations of the Syrian
people and to deprive them of self-determination.
The Security Council is unable to implement even
those of its resolutions that were adopted unanimously.
That truly undermines the credibility of the Security
Council, any hope placed in the United Nations, and
indeed any respect from world public opinion for United
Nations resolutions and decisions. More importantly,
over the past three years thousands upon thousands
of Syrians have been subjected to barrel bombs and
the worst forms of killing and torture, yet the regime
enjoys full impunity. Those who do not take a stand
against such acts are complicit in them.

14-3141635/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Mr. Mukerji (India): Let me begin by expressing
our appreciation to Nigeria for convening this quarterly
open debate, which will allow the Council to take stock
of recent developments in the Middle East, including
the State of Palestine. I would like to thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Robert Serry, for his comprehensive briefing
earlier today.
It is unfortunate that the negotiations between
Israel and Palestine, which began in late July 2013 with
the aim of reaching a deal within nine months, ended
without any outcome. There is no doubt that the dialogue
process generated hope as it came after a hiatus of more
than two years in talks between the parties. We express
regret that the parties failed to seize the opportunity
presented by direct negotiations to strike a peace deal.
It is a serious setback to the Middle East peace process.
We hope that both sides will demonstrate the necessary
political will to return to the negotiating table and that
they will strike a mutually acceptable political solution
to the crisis.
In the West Bank and East Jerusalem, the plight
of ordinary Palestinians is worsening every day due to
roadblocks and the related infrastructure of occupation
that put restrictions on the free movement of persons
and goods. The blockade of Gaza is also continuing and
adversely affecting humanitarian assistance services,
economic activities and infrastructure development. It
is also driving militant elements to vent their frustration
through violence, thereby further complicating
the situation on the ground and increasing Israel’s
vulnerability and security concerns. We firmly support
a negotiated solution to the Israeli-Palestinian issue
that would result in a sovereign, independent, viable
and united State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its
capital, living within secure and recognized borders,
side by side and at peace with Israel.
As a member of the Council in 2011 and 2012, India
supported Palestine’s bid for full and equal membership
of the United Nations, and continued our support as a
co-sponsor of General Assembly resolution 67/19 in
November 2012, which upgraded the status of Palestine
to that of non-member observer State. The proclamation
by the United Nations of 2014 as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People was a
positive step, and the Indian delegation fully supports

36/68

29/04/2014

the activities of the Council on the exercise of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to make
this a meaningful year. India has always supported the
nation-building efforts of Palestine through technical
and economic assistance, including budgetary support.
We are also implementing a series of development
projects under the India-Brazil-South Africa Fund in
Palestine.
Turning to Syria, the removal of almost 92 per cent
of Syria’s declared stockpile of chemical weapons out
of Syria is a positive development. However, we regret
the stalemate in the political process. We hope that
both parties will resolve their differences and return
to the third round of direct talks with strong political
will and commitment. We also urge both sides to
sincerely implement resolution 2139 (2014), ensuring
humanitarian access, to immediately cease attacks
against civilians, and to lift the siege of populated areas.
Those measures, we believe, can go a long way towards
alleviating the human suffering caused by the conflict
that began some three years ago. Unilateral sanctions
that adversely impact on the population of Syria must
be lifted in order to alleviate humanitarian suffering.
Before I conclude, I would like to stress that there
can be no military solution to this conflict. India fully
supports a Syrian-led, inclusive political dialogue that
resolves the current crisis and meets the legitimate
aspirations of all sections of Syrian society.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke
in Arabic): Some colleagues have insisted in their
statements today on addressing the situation in my
country under the agenda item “The situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question”.
Although some countries have meant well while others
did not, it is deeply saddening that none of the speakers
has mentioned the terrorist attacks that took place in my
country today, including in ancient city of Homs, where
36 people were killed and 85 injured, most of them
children. That was just one incident among many. In
the Al-Shaghour district of Damascus, a mortar attack
on a school killed 24 children and injuring 86. These
were just some of the children who lost their lives today
while speakers spread false fears. I have provided the
Council with photographs of some of the victims.
Once again, some delegations have insisted on
delivering elaborate statements about the situation

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

in my country, Syria, under the agenda item “The
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question”. Their misleading and provocative statements
only contribute to extremism and terrorism in Syria
and the region at large and distract from the essence
of the item, which is to find a way to put an end to
the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including
the Syrian Golan. In that respect and in connection
with the pictures that I distributed earlier, the armed
terrorist forces that killed dozens in Damascus and
Homs today are described by some colleagues as part
of the “moderate opposition”, and those colleagues
provide them with arms.
In that respect, I would like to point out that Saudi
Arabia, Qatar and Turkey and other Council members
from the West contributed to that dubious approach by
asking last month to convene two meetings on Syria
in the General Assembly. The first coincided with
the Security Council meeting devoted to the periodic
briefing by the Secretariat on the situation in the
Middle East (see S/PV.7118) and the second coincided
with the meeting of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
They thereby attempted to distract attention from the
Palestinian question, under the item concerning the
situation in the Middle East, and to play a negative role
in the Syrian question.
That is clear evidence of their hypocrisy. Refusing
to be a part of those outrageous attempts to silence our
conversation today, which sould be chiefly devoted to
putting an end to the Israeli occupation, once again
I will not reply under that item to delegations that
violate the Charter and the principles of international
law by providing shelter to and supporting, arming
and training terrorists and mercenaries; by facilitating
their infiltration into Syria across its borders with
neighbouring countries while spreading terrorism,
destruction and extremism in my country; and through
their earnest attempts to undermine any Syrian-led
peaceful solution.
It is absurd that some delegations of States that do
not even have a constitution or a parliament, and where
women are deprived of their fundamental rights, should
speak about the importance of establishing democracy
in Syria, whose Vice-President is a woman. Some
delegations that have become addicted to shedding
Syrian blood over the past three years have been
competing in calling for conferences, sessions and
meetings to be held to spread misleading reports on the

S/PV.7164

situation in Syria. Some have resorted to crying wolf
today in a theatrical, amateurish and inaccurate manner
about the situation of the Syrian people. Meanwhile,
they have said not one word about putting an end to the
Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan, as if reclaiming
the Golan were not a right of the Syrian people and as
if the Golan were not an occupied Syrian territory on
which a number of resolutions are issued yearly calling
upon Israel to withdraw from it to the borders of 4 June
1967.
With regard to Israeli settlements and the suffering
of the Syrian people under occupation in the Golan
for the past 50 years, why do those States not mention
the heinous suppression and racial discrimination
there, or the detention, torture and deprivation of
natural resources, including oil, gas and water? A
Syrian citizen under occupation in the Golan will not
be treated in Israeli hospitals if he refuses to carry an
Israeli identification card. He cannot study in schools in
Arabic, in accordance with the Syrian curriculum, if he
does not hold an Israeli identification card. Education
in Arabic, be it according to the Syrian or any other
curriculum, is prohibited there. In addition, the Isreali
occupation forces do not allow the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent to work in the occupied Golan or to establish
clinics and hospitals there, pursuant to the resolutions
of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent
Movement, which dates back to 1919. Moreover, the
occupation forces have built a racist segregation wall
east of the Syrian village of Majdal Shams and refused
to provide international organizations with maps of the
landmines they planted in the Golan, which have killed
more than 726 Syrian citizens, including 227 children.
Israel’s assistance and support to terrorist groups,
including those affiliated with the Al-Qaeda in the
disengagement area in the occupied Syrian Golan,
are a flagrant violation of resolution 350 (1974),
the mandate of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force, and international law. Israel has gone
so far as to build a field hospital near the separation
line in the Golan. Its Prime Minister visited injured
terrorists treated in Israeli hospitals and insisted on
their return to the separation line in the occupied
Syrian Golan to continue their terrorist activities there.
Israeli assistance to terrorists endangers the lives of
United Nations staff working there and undermines
their effectiveness. These are members of the so-called
moderate opposition, as I said earlier. Those terrorist
organizations have repeatedly abducted peacekeepers,

14-3141637/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

including the Filipino batallion. We have sent reports
about it to the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
with all the details, and called for official investigations
in that regard. However, to date the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations has provided us with no
results of such investigations, assuming they have even
carried them out in the first place.
Israel has not only provided logistical support to
terrorists, but it has directly interfered with military
forces more than once. For example, last month,
it shelled a school and a mosque in the village of
Al-Hamidiyah in the occupied Syrian Golan, in flagrant
violation of international law, which exposes once again
the coordination between the Israeli occupation forces
and terrorist groups, just like that arranged by Saudi
Arabia, Qatar and Turkey. There is a clear alliance
between those three countries, on the one hand, and
Israel on the other, all of which are cooperating with
several terrorist groups in an attempt to destroy Syria,
shed the blood of its people and suppress the prospects
of establishing an independent Palestinian State. A
colleague who spoke before me described my country
as a brotherly country; he is a liar, because we in Syria
do not want that alleged fraternity; we do not want him
or his regime, which sheds the blood of our people. We
do not want a terrorist, criminal fraternity.
We should not deceive ourselves or the world.
Everybody knows for sure that Israel, an occupying
Power that is based on occupation and expansion,
has never been concerned with peace. It occupied the
Syrian Golan and Jerusalem. It has encroached upon
various countries of the region, relentlessly violated
international law and the Charter of the United Nations,
and attacked the holy sites of Muslims and Christians
alike. Now it is trying to usurp the Al-Aqsa Mosque
in an attempt to establish a Jewish State of Israel, to
drain Palestine of its population and to put an end to
the right of return. It manipulates peace negotiations
and initiatives under the pretext of so-called security
concern in order to devote its efforts to occupation and
to overturning a status quo that cannot be changed.
How can Israel speak about peace after all that? How
can it evoke peace when it engages in all those practices
that undermine the basic principles of peace? Is it not
insolent for Israel to claim that the removal of any
settlement is a painful matter that it cannot tolerate,
while the persecution of the whole people of Palestine
is acceptable?

38/68

29/04/2014

The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Pakistan.
Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Special
Coordinator Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive
briefing this morning.
We meet here as ominous developments have
taken place in the Middle East. The atmosphere has
once again become toxic. Israel has halted peace talks.
Apparently, that ends United States Secretary of State
John Kerry’s nine-month peace initiative. Israel is
pondering economic sanctions against Palestine. That
would definitely worsen the economic plight of the
Palestinian people. Palestine has announced that it is
considering all options to respond to the Israeli decision
to sever contact for talks. Palestinians have decided to
give priority to reconciliation and national unity. This
hiatus should not be treated as irreversible or a point
of no return. It should be seen as a pause and a time
for introspection. Talks, we would like to believe, are
halted, not abandoned.
We welcome the Palestinian initiative to forge
national unity. The talks between Palestine and Israel
are also a priority because without the peace process
there will be no lasting peace and stability. We agree
with Secretary Kerry’s conclusion that leaders have to
make the compromises to forge ahead. The difficult
issues of final border arrangements, settlements and
release of prisoners will not be resolved away from the
negotiating table. That is the inexorable logic of the
two-State solution.
Pakistan calls for urgent steps to resuscitate and
renew the stalled peace talks. The considerable time
and political capital invested in the process should
not be frittered away. The cost of failure is huge. The
flare-up in Gaza last month and again last week gave a
glimpse of what a complete break-down might lead to.
That said, dialogue for the sake of dialogue, without
the political will and commitment to make difficult
choices, is neither desirable nor conducive to peace in
the region.
Pakistan condemns the storming of the Al-Aqsa
Mosque compound by Israeli extremists. The annexation
of Palestinian lands by the Israeli occupation forces is
illegal. The debate in the Israeli Knesset on annexing
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and provocative actions, such as
the disruption of Easter celebrations, undermine peace,
heighten tensions and further destabilize the region.

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Pakistan supports continued supervision by the
Islamic Waqf of the Muslim and Christian holy sites in
occupied East Jerusalem, with a special role assigned
to Jordan. We call for a moratorium on settlements, the
release of detainees, a recommitment to meaningful and
substantive dialogue, and the lifting of the blockade in
Gaza. It is important that tensions be reduced and that
minimal trust be built for the early resumption of talks.
Peace, security, stability and sustainable economic
development in the Middle East depend directly on the
creation of an independent, viable and contiguous State
of Palestine, based on pre-1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital, living side by side with Israel,
and with both sides recognizing each other’s legitimate
rights. Israel must also withdraw from all Arab
territories, including Lebanon and the Syrian Golan.
Let me now turn to Syria. We welcome the progress
made so far in removing and destroying chemical
weapons in Syria and appreciate the cooperation
extended by the Syrian Government to the joint mission
of the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. We back Ms. Sigrid
Kaag’s call for the removal of all chemical weapons
from Syria. While we share her concern over reports
about the use of chlorine gas as a weapon, the best
course of action is to investigate the reports about the
use of toxic chemicals to establish the facts beyond a
shadow of a doubt.
Let us not forget that every day conventional
weapons cause far more casualties than chemical
weapons. Killings are increasing and the number
of refugees and displaced persons is going up. The
Secretary-General has informed us that combatants
in Syria are not heeding this body’s decision to give
humanitarian aid unfettered access. As a result, some
300,000 Syrians trapped in conflict zones continue to
be deprived of basic food and medicine. Worst of all,
the Geneva talks are in a state of limbo.
We call on all parties to the conflict in Syria,
and on nations that have special relations with them,
to come back to the negotiating table to find a longterm political solution that respects the aspirations of
all Syrians. We also call on the parties to honour the
decisions taken by the Council in its resolution 2139
(2014) on humanitarian access. Syria should not be
pushed to the back burner because of other pressing
issues.

S/PV.7164

Finally, we condemn terrorist attacks in Syria,
including those that took place today. We offer our
deepest condolences to the people and families of the
victims in Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate. I also thank Special Coordinator Robert Serry
for his briefing, and the Permanent Representative of
Israel and the Permanent Observer of Palestine for their
statements.
The nine-month deadline for signing a final status
agreement between Israelis and Palestinians expires
today, 29 April. In the absence of any progress, and
despite wide international support of the commendable
efforts of the United States, the realization of a twoState solution seems increasingly elusive. We are all
losers in this situation. The disappointment of those
who have engaged in the process in good faith is
understandable. Failing to deal with the fundamental
aspects of the question of Palestine in the present will
only create greater challenges for the future.
Brazil notes with disappointment that Israel has
not fulfilled its previous undertaking to release a final
group of Palestinian prisoners. The continuation of the
settlement campaign in the occupied State of Palestine,
including East Jerusalem, is particularly harmful. We
reiterate that settlements are illegal under international
law and detrimental to the peace process. They
undermine the prospects for a negotiated solution to the
conflict and seriously threaten the viability of a twoState solution. We also strongly condemn the acts of
violence against Israeli civilians and rockets launched
from Gaza into Israel, which are contrary to the cause
of peace, erode confidence and generate more violence
and distrust.
We welcome recent efforts to achieve intra-Palestinian
unity, which is key to consolidating a democratic and
sustainable Palestinian State, and we call on all parties
to fully commit to the obligations assumed by Palestine.
Due to the current state of paralysis in the negotiation
process, no one can blame the State of Palestine for
advancing its legitimate rights in multilateral forums.
At a time when collective responsibility more
necessary than ever, the international community
risks also being rightly accused of omission in the case

14-3141639/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/04/2014

of Palestine. No early-warning conflict-prevention
mechanism is needed to notice the Palestinians’ appeal
for the Security Council’s attention. The Council
should take on a more proactive role and consider
establishing basic parameters for the negotiations that
are consistent with the extensive corpus of United
Nations resolutions. In so doing it would strengthen
respect for international law and exercise its authority
and functions, as laid down in the Charter of the United
Nations. On the occasion of the International Year of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People, we call on the
interested parties committed to a two-State solution,
particularly civil society, to join their efforts in trying
to influence the leadership on both sides to shoulder
their responsibilities in constructing an environment
conducive to peace in the Middle East.

unilateral sanctions on the living conditions of the
Syrian people. The increasingly radical nature of some
opposition armed groups, and the spillover effects in
neighbouring countries, especially Lebanon, Iraq,
Jordan and Turkey, are also a matter for concern.
Brazil reiterates its call for full, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access to all those affected by violence
in Syria, without politicization, as prescribed by
resolution 2139 (2014). The Government of Syria bears
the greatest responsibility in this regard, although the
armed opposition must equally and fully comply with
its humanitarian obligations. Invoking a humanitarian
crisis to justify militarization can only intensify the
suffering of the civilian population, especially its
most vulnerable segments, and increase human rights
violations.

Turning to Syria, Brazil is deeply troubled by the
scale of the destruction and indifference to human
suffering. It is a grave mistake to assume that in the
absence of a political solution the crisis should be
resolved by using force. During the second Geneva
Conference on Syria in January, Brazil called for an
immediate end to the provision of weapons to all parties
in Syria, among several measures. The continued
militarization of the conflict only brings about more
violence, instability and suffering. Today the number
of internally displaced persons amounts to nearly
one-fourth of Syria’s residents. Approximately 15 per
cent of Syria’s total population are now refugees, not
to mention the shocking number of fatal victims of the
conflict.

I would like to say a few words on Lebanon,
to which Brazil is united by historical and cultural
ties. Brazil remains extremely concerned about the
increased instability in Lebanon, whose people have
lately been victims of a series of terrorist acts, a
particularly perverse development given Lebanon’s
generosity in hosting a million Syrian refugees. We
welcome the formation of a new Government, which,
we are confident, will be able to shield the country
from further instability and strengthen its sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity. We also call on
the international community to keep up its support
for Lebanon’s State institutions, including the army,
and we reaffirm our strong support for Lebanon’s
dissociation from the Syrian conflict, as set out in the
Baabda Declaration. We urge all Lebanese political
actors to avoid further escalation and to embrace the
path of understanding. In that regard, Brazil fully
supports the legal conduct of presidential elections,
as enshrined in the Lebanese Constitution, and urges
all parties to cooperate in ensuring the success of the
electoral process.

Disputes on other international fronts should
not contaminate the common goal of attaining peace
and promoting a Syrian-led political process. The
immediate and full implementation of the Geneva final
communiqué of 2012 (S/2012/523, annex) by all parties
remains the most important goal, and we urge them to
demonstrate a strong political will and firm commitment
to that process. Brazil continues to support all efforts to
resume contacts between the parties. National dialogue
and reconciliation are key to ensuring that the elections
in Syria will fully conform with the provisions of the
final communiqué. Violations of human rights by both
sides, consistently denounced by the Human Rights
Council’s Independent International Commission of
Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, should be roundly
condemned.
Also in line with the Commission’s reports, we
reiterate our concern about the negative impact of

40/68

Finally, Brazil reiterates its support for the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), whose
maritime task force has been led by a Brazilian
commander since February 2011. UNIFIL has been
instrumental in promoting stability in Lebanon and in
preserving security along the border between Lebanon
and Israel.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Vrailas (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union and its
14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

member States. The candidate country Montenegro; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement.
To save time, I will deliver a shortened version of
my statement. The full text is being circulated in the
Chamber and will be posted on our website.
The European Union is extremely concerned over
recent developments related to the peace process that
are putting into question the continued negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians beyond the original
deadline of 29 April. The European Union reiterates
its full support for the peace efforts brokered by the
United States of America, and calls on both parties to
remain focused on negotiations and the unprecedented
benefits that peace can bring. Negotiations are the best
way forward. The extensive efforts deployed in recent
months must not go to waste. We call on all sides to
exercise maximum restraint and to avoid any action that
may further undermine peace efforts and the viability
of a two-State solution.
The European Union has consistently supported
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, but on clear and
certain terms. We reiterate that such reconciliation
should take place behind President Abbas and in line
with the principles set out in his speech of 4 May 2011.
The European Union expects any new Government
to uphold the principle of non-violence and to remain
committed to achieving a two-State solution and a
negotiated, peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, and to accepting previous agreements and
obligations, including Israel’s legitimate right to exist.
Reconciliation on those terms is an important element
for the unity of a future Palestinian State and for
reaching a two-State solution and a lasting peace.
The European Union welcomes the prospect of
genuine democratic elections for all Palestinians.
The fact that President Abbas will remain fully in
charge of the negotiation process and have a mandate
to negotiate in the name of all Palestinians provides
further assurance that the peace negotiations can and
must proceed.
The European Union is convinced that there can
only be a political solution to the conflict in Syria.
The regime’s constant obstruction led to the failure of
the first two first rounds of the Geneva negotiations,
which need to be resumed without delay. We call on

S/PV.7164

the Syrian regime to accept the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/523, annex) and to show a clear commitment
to the negotiation agenda and the method of work, in
particular treating in parallel the issues of terrorism and
transition. We recall that the opposition delegation, led
by the Syrian National Coalition, has already accepted
those conditions.
The European Union deeply regrets the declaration
by the Syrian regime that it will organize presidential
elections on 3 June. Any election in Syria should
take place only within the framework of the Geneva
communiqué of 2012. Elections organized by the
regime outside that framework would be a parody
of democracy, have no credibility whatsoever and
undermine efforts to reach a political solution.
The European Union is gravely concerned about
the disastrous and deteriorating human rights situation
in Syria and strongly condemns all violations and
abuses of human rights, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The European Union calls on the Security
Council to urgently address the prevailing culture
of impunity and refer the situation in Syria to the
International Criminal Court.
The European Union deplores the lack of progress
on the implementation of resolution 2139 (2014). We call
on all parties to comply with the resolution immediately
and without further delay. The continued withholding
of consent to basic relief operations, across borders and
across the lines of conflict, is arbitrary and unjustified.
The European Union calls upon the Security Council
to take further measures if non-compliance continues.
The European Union reiterates the call on the
Syrian regime to fulfil its obligations to have its
chemical weapons arsenal, including production
facilities, destroyed by the end of June. All outstanding
questions surrounding Syria’s declaration must be
addressed. Those responsible for the use of chemical
weapons in Rif Damascus on 21 August 2013 must be
held accountable.
The European Union is deeply concerned about
recent media reports alleging the use of chlorine gas
against the Syrian population. Any use of a toxic
chemical for purposes other than those explicitly
permitted under the Chemical Weapons Convention
constitutes a violation of article I of the Convention.
The perpetrators of any such breach must be held
accountable.

14-3141641/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The European Union commends once again those
neighbouring countries, notably Lebanon and Jordan,
that continue to keep their borders open and provide safe
haven for refugees from Syria, including Palestinians.
We will continue to support them. The European Union
is committed to the unity, stability, independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon and
reiterates its continued commitment to contributing
to meeting Lebanon’s growing needs. We welcome all
such efforts of the international community, including
the International Support Group for Lebanon, in which
the European Union and some of its member States
play an active role. We also welcome the formation of
the new Government, led by Prime Minister Salam,
and encourage it to act without delay in tackling the
existing challenges for Lebanon.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the central issue concerning the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.
I would like also to thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for
his comprehensive briefing. My delegation obviously
aligns itself with the statements to be made on behalf of
the Group of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.
Algeria regrets that all serious and credible efforts
exerted recently to salvage the prospects of a peaceful,
just and lasting solution, especially those engaged by
the United States of America, have been challenged
and undermined. Israel’s continued unlawful actions
on the ground provide the starkest evidence of the
contrast between its deeds and its professed intention to
participate in a peace process. They clearly demonstrate
that the occupying Power is not on the path of peace
and that the only goal it pursues is to set aside any
future prospects for a peaceful settlement through a
wide range of activities carried out daily with the aim
of altering the demographic composition and cultural
character of the Palestinian territory.
In that regard, Algeria rejects and condemns
the continuing policy of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and
reaffirms that those activities remain the major
obstacle to peace and impair all efforts and negotiations

42/68

29/04/2014

to achieve the two-State solution. We also recall
that the occupying Power continues its illegal and
inhumane blockade of the Gaza Strip with disregard
for international humanitarian law and all resolutions,
especially resolution 1860 (2009). Similarly, we continue
to register numerous acts of provocation and incitement
by Israeli extremists and officials in occupied East
Jerusalem, particularly at Al-Aqsa Mosque, which are
aggravating tensions and religious sensibilities.
Algeria welcomed and supported the conclusion of
the reconciliation agreement between our Palestinian
brothers, which is an important step towards the
fulfillment of the Palestinian aspirations. Unity in
the Palestinian ranks is a positive and necessary step
for peace. It should be perceived as so by all parties.
Algeria congratulates the Palestinian Government on
the recent accession by the State of Palestine to several
international conventions. Those steps will undoubtedly
go a long way towards consolidating the wide support
gained through General Assembly resolution 67/19,
which accorded the status of non-member observer
State to Palestine. While reaffirming the important
significance of that political achievement for the
Palestinian people and for the Government of the State
of Palestine, Algeria expresses its full support for the
enhancement of Palestine’s status to ensure its rightful
place among the international community, including by
its admission to full membership of the United Nations.
Almost 67 years have passed since the adoption
in 1947 of General Assembly resolution 181 (II),
providing for the establishment of two States, and more
than 25 years since the proclamation of the State of
Palestine in Algiers in 1988. Yet, the Palestinian people
are still pursuing their homeland and still yearning to
achieve their inalienable right to self-determination.
The international community must exert all efforts
to compel Israel to abide by its obligations and
commitments in order to achieve the two-State solution
on the basis of the core principles of resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850
(2008), the Madrid terms of reference, and especially
the principle of exchanging land for peace.
Algeria expresses its hope for genuine and rapid
progress to be renewed during the current International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, to
resolve all final status issues, in particular the central
issue of occupation, which remains the source of the
problem and the core of the problem of the entire Middle
East. It is our firm conviction that peace cannot be

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

achieved in the Middle East without the international
community, in particular the Security Council, taking
a firm and courageous stand to end the occupation of
Palestinian land and all Arab territories occupied by
Israel since 1967 and to allow the Palestinian people to
exercise their right to self-determination and establish
an independent State within the 1967 borders and with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, allow me to
express our sincere congratulations to the Nigerian
presidency for successfully leading the Council’s work
in April, and to convey my delegation’s best wishes to
the Republic of Korea for its upcoming presidency.
Turkey has supported all efforts towards a lasting
solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, comprising
two States living side-by-side in peace and security,
based on the pre-1967 borders, the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
Today was meant to mark the deadline for the
conclusion of the peace talks launched between Israel
and Palestine in July last year. Unfortunately, one of the
parties decided to suspend the talks last week. We deeply
regret that decision. Turkey is of the view that the peace
process and the Palestinian reconciliation efforts are
not mutually exclusive and should not be presented as
such. That view is also mentioned recurrently in various
United Nations reports. Indeed, the need for Palestinian
unity has been a reality since the division in 2007 and,
if well guided and supported, such unity would help lay
the groundwork for sustainable and lasting peace in the
region. With that understanding, Turkey welcomed the
agreement reached between Fatah and Hamas and the
decision to form a unity Government that will embrace
all Palestinians.
As a matter of fact, it is hard to describe the
political environment within which the peace talks
were held as conducive. The Israeli side did not live
up to its commitments to release the fourth batch of
pre-Oslo Palestinian prisoners, and it continued its
illegal settlement and demolition activities and its
violation of the basic rights of the Palestinians in the
occupied territories. Settler violence, provocations
against religious and holy sites, including Al-Haram
Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and attempts to
meddle with the status of Jerusalem intensified. The

S/PV.7164

embargo imposed against Gaza remained in force and
the construction of the separation wall, in defiance of
international law and Security Council resolutions,
continued.
The international community has a responsibility
to take all the necessary steps to end the humanitarian
crisis in Palestine. Turkey, for its part, continues to
help alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian people
through bilateral projects in several parts of Palestine,
including the Gaza Strip. Last year, we delivered urgent
aid, including generators, fuel, flour and medicine, to
Gaza. In addition to our ongoing project to build a
hospital, the Turkish Government recently allocated
another $1.5 million to a World Health Organization
project aimed at providing further support to the health
system in Gaza. However, long-term solutions are
urgently needed to avoid greater humanitarian risks.
Only a comprehensive and just settlement abolishing
these restrictions will enable the robust and sustainable
development of the Palestinian economy. We therefore
call once again for the immediate lifting of the embargo
against Gaza in accordance with resolution 1860 (2009)
and the ceasefire commitments of November 2012.
The year 2014 has been proclaimed by the General
Assembly as the International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People. This should be a year for all of
us to mobilize our means and capabilities to support
Palestine in the economic and political realms. A
politically and economically strong Palestine will
surely be a stronger partner for Israel and the entire
neighbourhood for years to come. Turkey supports
the inalienable right of the State of Palestine to fully
enjoy the privileges of statehood, including becoming a
Member of the United Nations and other international
organizations and joining international treaties.
The Syrian regime missed yet another deadline to
eliminate its declared chemical weapons before 27 April.
Turkey is also deeply concerned about the reports
concerning the regime’s recent chlorine gas attacks on
civilian populations. We welcome the decision of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
to send a mission to Syria to investigate those incidents.
If the allegations are true, they constitute a violation of
the regime’s commitments.
The humanitarian situation in Syria, on the other
hand, is deteriorating every day due to the increasing
number of people in need of urgent assistance and the
regime’s continued arbitrary denial of access. The

14-3141643/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

provisions of resolution 2139 (2014) are very clear on
stopping violence against civilians, putting an end
to sieges and allowing rapid, safe and unhindered
humanitarian access and cross-border humanitarian
operations via the most direct routes. Using the issue
of humanitarian access as a bargaining chip cannot
be tolerated. The regime’s policy of deliberately
minimizing the number of access points into Syria
is a violation of resolution 2139 (2014), and imposing
such preconditions is unacceptable. The United Nations
should therefore find ways and means to provide
humanitarian assistance through a greater number
of border gates, in order to ensure access to a larger
population.
Since the beginning of the crisis, Turkey has
spared no effort to alleviate the suffering of our Syrian
neighbours, consistently maintained an open-door
policy, facilitated zero-point humanitarian assistance
and responsibly provided for the needs of the Syrians
who sought shelter in the 22 camps in Turkey and in
various Turkish cities. As of April, the number of Syrians
in Turkey is fast approaching 1 million. Unfortunately,
neither Turkey’s nor Syria’s other neighbours’ resources
are limitless. What we expect from our partners is an
active engagement and meaningful contribution in
shouldering this burden.
The Syrian regime, which clearly displayed
reluctance to discuss the political transition in Geneva,
once again revealed its lack of sincerity when it comes
to finding a political solution to the crisis, with the
announcement of the so-called presidential elections
in June. Such elections, which will apparently be
organized under conditions whereby nearly half of the
population is displaced, some still under indiscriminate
attacks by the forces of the regime, will not only be
null and void, but also be in flagrant contravention of
the Geneva communiqué (S/2012/523, annex) and will
constitute another blow to efforts to find a political
solution to the crisis. The way ahead towards a solution
to crisis is clearly set out in the communiqué, that is,
the immediate establishment of a transitional governing
body with full executive powers.
Peace and security in the Middle East are not
unattainable goals, as long as there is strong political
resolve. In that sense, we call on the leaders of Israel
and the State of Palestine to overcome the hurdles and
get back to the negotiating table with a genuine desire
to put an end to the decades-long search for peace.

44/68

29/04/2014

I would like to assure you, Mr. President, that
Turkey’s strong commitment to peace and security in
its region will continue until we reach that goal and that
Turkey will never shy away from its responsibilities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I would like to express my
sincere gratitude to you, Sir, for having convened today’s
meeting. I would also like to thank Mr. Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing. I am also grateful to Ambassador Mansour,
the Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine, and
Ambassador Prosor, Permanent Representative of
Israel, for their statements.
Today, I will touch on two issues: first, the Middle
East peace process and, secondly, the situation in Syria.
On the Middle East peace process, Japan has
been following recent developments with concern. We
would like to call on Israel and Palestine not to take any
unilateral actions that might negatively affect the peace
process. Japan reiterates its full support for the United
States mediation efforts and strongly requests both
parties to continue the peace negotiations persistently.
It is also important for the international community
to foster a proper environment that would allow both
parties to continue their talks.
Originally, today I would have liked to give the
Council a detailed update on two Japanese initiatives
aimed at mobilizing private sector investment in
Palestine, had both parties agreed to an extension of
their direct talks. The first initiative is a project called
the Corridor for Peace and Prosperity. Its flagship
project, the Jericho Agro-Industrial Park, is scheduled
to start operations this summer. The second is the
Conference on Cooperation among East Asian countries
for Palestinian Development. At the second ministerial
meeting of the Conference, held in Jakarta on 1 March,
Japanese Foreign Minister Kishida pledged a total of
$200 million for Palestinian assistance. As part of that
pledge, an aid package in the amount of $62 million
was already disbursed last month. Synergy effects
between the Japanese initiatives and the initiative for
the Palestinian economy announced on 24 April by
United States Secretary of State Kerry could result
in enormous gains. I would like to further elaborate
on those initiatives at an appropriate occasion in the
future.

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Turning to the situation in Syria, we are deeply
concerned that no substantial improvements have been
witnessed on the humanitarian situation, even after
the Council unanimously adopted resolution 2139
(2014) in February. Japan demands that all parties, in
particular the Syrian authorities, immediately cease
all attacks against civilians in accordance with the
resolution. They must also ensure immediate, safe and
unimpeded humanitarian access to all areas affected by
the conflict. Japan pledged an additional $120 million
for humanitarian assistance at the conference held in
Kuwait on 15 January. The entire amount has been
disbursed. That has brought our total humanitarian
assistance to $275 million.
Regarding the political process, unfortunately,
there is no concrete prospect for the resumption of
the second Geneva Conference on Syria. The Syrian
Government’s refusal of Ambassador Brahimi’s
proposal to hold parallel discussions on both terrorism
and the transitional governing body has made it even
harder to overcome the current impasse. The Speaker
of the Syrian Parliament recently announced that
presidential elections will take place on 3 June. In that
regard, I would like to recall that both the SecretaryGeneral and Ambassador Brahimi have repeatedly
warned that the holding of elections under the current
circumstances would damage the political process.
Japan strongly urges both the Syrian Government and
the opposition parties to come back to Geneva with
the political will to achieve a political transition in
accordance with the Geneva communiqué of the Action
Group for Syria (S/2012/522, annex).
As for the chemical weapons, about 8 per cent of the
chemicals still remain in Syria. They should be removed
swiftly in order to achieve the target of eliminating the
Syrian chemical weapon programme by the end of the
June. The Syrian Government must intensify its efforts
to expeditiously meet its elimination obligations set
by resolution 2118 (2013) and the relevant decisions
by the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). We, for our part, have disbursed a
total of $18 million to the trust funds established under
the OPCW and the United Nations. Japan would like
to renew its commitment to providing the greatest
possible cooperation in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Oman.
Mr. Al-Hajri (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): It is a
pleasure to address the Security Council on behalf of

S/PV.7164

the Arab Group and to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Your diplomatic skills and
knowledge of international affairs are, we are sure, the
best guarantee for achieving success in the Council’s
deliberations and the desired results.
The Security Council is meeting today to debate a
most important issue on its agenda, namely, the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
to which we have long awaited a solution from the
international community. We all know that Palestinian
lands are languishing under Israeli occupation, and
have been for a long time. The situation is deteriorating
on a daily basis owing to the arbitrary practices of the
occupying Power.
The Arab Group expresses its utmost concern with
respect to the continuing Israeli siege and its intensified
campaigns and inhumane, illegal and violent attacks
aimed changing the demographic composition of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif and other cities in Palestinian
territory by withholding identity cards, the forced
expulsion of inhabitants, the building of settlements
and the intensification of settlement activity, and
attacks against Muslim and Christian holy sites.
The Arab Group condemns the continuing
incursions by the Israeli occupation forces and settlers
into the mosque. Such provocative acts by the Israelis
and the gross violations of Muslim and Christian holy
sites make it the duty of the international community as
a whole to immediately intervene to put an end to such
crimes, because the desecration of holy sites is a threat
to the peace and stability of the region and the world.
We call on the international community, in particular
on the occasion of the International Year of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, to join that people, who
are fighting to regain their inalienable rights. The
international community must bring pressure to bear
on Israel to free all Palestinian prisoners and detainees,
as well as those from the occupied Syrian Golan in
Israeli prisons.
The Security Council is called upon now more
than ever to fulfil its responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security, resolve the crisis in
the Middle East in accordance with the Charter and the
principles of international law. It should do so by taking
urgent measures, compelling Israel to immediately put
an end to such provocations of religious sensitivities

14-3141645/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

and by condemning State terrorism against civilians,
which is a threat to peace and security in the region.
The Arab Group realizes that the United Nations
has adopted many resolutions that have been ignored
by the occupying Power. The time has come for the
occupying Power to abide by Council resolutions and
to put an end to its illegitimate occupation. If Israel
persists, that would constitute a threat to the Council’s
legitimacy and a sign of its inability to maintain
international peace and security.
The Arab Group stresses that the annexation by
Israeli occupation forces of Palestinian land and the
Syrian Golan is a grave threat to international peace
and security. It is a source of major outrage and anger
in the region. It cannot be condoned.
We cannot fail to welcome the agreement on
Palestinian reconciliation. It will unify the Palestinian
will to face the major challenges on the question of
Palestine. We call on all international parties, including
the Council, to provide all the necessary support for
Palestinian national reconciliation to succeed. Do not
place obstacles before it. We condemn the continuing
Israeli violations of Lebanese sovereignty by land, sea
and air and the electronic war being waged by Israel
against Lebanon through espionage activities along the
borders with occupied Palestine. Such data is being used
for piracy and spying on Lebanese telecommunication
networks. We call on the international community
to fulfil its duties in accordance with the Charter to
achieve international peace and security.
With respect to the Syrian crisis, the Arab Group
continues to stress the need to resolve the crisis by
peaceful means, through a process based on the Geneva
communiqué of 30 June 2012 (S/2012/523, annex) and
within the framework of the efforts being undertaken
by Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative
of the United Nations and the League of Arab States.
We call on the international community as represented
in the Security Council to continue to make efforts to
put an end to the suffering of the Syrian people. In his
latest report, the Joint Special Representative informs
us that the number of refugees outside Syrian borders
will reach 4 million by the end of this year if the crisis
were to continue. The number of victims in the next two
years may well reach 350,000. There is no alternative
to a peaceful political settlement of the crisis. The
Group appeals to the international community to make
more immediate efforts to stop the war machine in

46/68

29/04/2014

Syria, protect civilians and facilitate the delivery of
emergency humanitarian assistance to those who need
it.
The aspirations of the Palestinian people have
always been addressed to this international body so that
they may be protected from the inhuman, illegal and
arbitrary practices of successive Israeli Governments.
Therefore, the Security Council, in the context of the
Year of International Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, must compel Israel to cease and desist in those
policies that destroy any peace process that would lead
to a just and lasting peace in the Middle East. We call
on it to accept the Arab Peace Initiative and begin true
negotiations in order to achieve peace based on the
Initiative and resolutions of the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): Allow
me, at the outset, to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General, for
his comprehensive briefing on the latest developments
in the Middle East, particularly with regard to the
question of Palestine.
The Security Council is meeting at a time when
peace negotiations have unfortunately reached a dead
end, following intensive efforts by the United States
Administration and the personal efforts of Secretary
of State Kerry. My country’s position has always been
to support the United States initiative in favour of
negotiations and a time-bound settlement. That position
remains firm and is based on the principles of the Arab
Peace Initiative and the tenets of a two-State solution
respecting the 1967 borders.
The Kingdom of Morocco, a member of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation and of the League
of Arab States, calls on the international community
to fully shoulder its responsibilities with respect to
the deterioration of the situation involving the Islamic
holy sites in occupied Palestine and the attempt to
change the demographic composition of the city of
Al-Quds Al-Sharif. His Highness the King of Morocco
presided over the Al-Quds Committee this month in
the presence of President Abbas and made an appeal
to the international community to fully shoulder its
responsibilities. His Highness said, “the protection of
Al-Quds is the core of the question of Palestine. East
Jerusalem must be the capital of Palestine.” He called

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

for a genuine Palestinian national reconciliation led by
the Palestinian Authority under Mahmoud Abbas. He
expressed the wish for that reconciliation to be positive
and that it protect the highest interests of the Palestinian
people, particularly through the establishment of the
State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital,
living side by side in peace with Israel.
Following national reconciliation, the Palestinians
are now on the right road. We express our sincere
congratulations on that reconciliation because it
unifies Palestinian decision-making and strengthens
the Palestinian position in peacemaking, efforts
towards the two-State solution, and international
legitimacy towards a peaceful and lasting settlement
and the establishment of a State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital. There are many hopes
being pinned on the negotiations being undertaken by
Secretary of State Kerry in an effort to achieve peace.
We ask that all obstacles be overcome and that all
commitments be fulfilled without blackmail.
With regard to Syria, now that three years have
gone by, the situation continues to deteriorate. Lives
are being wasted and the country is being destroyed.
In accordance with the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2014/295), the number of victims has
escalated and more than 6.5 million are displaced
inside the country and 2.6 million are refugees outside
the country. They require much help and humanitarian
assistance. The parties must respect resolution 2139
(2014), on humanitarian assistance.
The Kingdom of Morocco has set up a field hospital
in the Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan, pursuant to
our promise made at the pledging conference. We call
on both sides to put an end to the conflict by seeking
peaceful solutions to it. We stress the unity and
territorial integrity of Syria. We joined in the second
Geneva Conference, which we believe is the starting
point for a political settlement, as agreed by the entire
international community.
To conclude, let me also stress our commitment to
the independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon,
which must be maintained.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM). At the outset, I
would like to convey the Movement’s appreciation to

S/PV.7164

the delegation of Nigeria for convening today’s open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the question of Palestine, and for its skilled leadership
of the Security Council this month. I also wish to
express our appreciation to Mr. Robert Serry, Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General and Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing to the Council today.
Since our last debate on this matter (see S/PV.7140),
regrettably, little progress has been made towards
the long-overdue realization of a just and peaceful
solution to the question of Palestine, which has been
on the United Nations agenda for more than 66 years.
Despite serious international efforts and constant,
repeated calls for a peaceful and comprehensive
solution in conformity with international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions, the Israeli military
occupation of Palestinian and Arab lands remains
ongoing, and the Palestinian people continue to be
tragically denied their inalienable rights and freedom.
Furthermore, the peace process is once again at a
dangerous impasse, with negotiations suspended due to
Israel’s repeated rejectionist stance.
The failure to resolve the question and the
prolongation of the conflict, despite the clarity of
international law, including the demands made by the
Security Council, continue to damage the credibility of
our international system, undermine the rule of law and
compound conflict and human suffering.
In this year 2014, a year proclaimed by the General
Assembly as the International Year of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People, the Non-Aligned Movement
calls for the redoubling of international efforts to
actively support and advance a peaceful, just and
lasting solution based on the long-standing parameters
rooted in the relevant United Nations resolutions and
initiatives. In that connection, NAM welcomes the
affirmed readiness of the State of Palestine to uphold
its international responsibilities and obligations in
accordance with the multilateral treaties to which it has
recently acceded. We stress the importance of respect
for the rule of law in any effort to achieve peace and
justice. NAM also welcomes the recent steps towards
Palestinian reconciliation, and we emphasize that unity
is imperative for the realization of the Palestinian
people’s legitimate national aspirations.
At this crucial stage, NAM implores the Security
Council to act forthwith to uphold its Charter duties for
the maintenance of international peace and security by

14-3141647/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

tangibly contributing to a solution to the PalestinianIsraeli conflict — the core of the Arab-Israeli
conflict — which remains a source of grave concern
for the region and international community as a whole
and for the prospects of global peace and stability. The
Security Council cannot remain on the sidelines while
the situation continues to deteriorate and the chances for
a peace based on a two-State solution and in accordance
with the pre-1967 borders are being sabotaged by the
intransigent refusal of Israel, the occupying Power, to
abide by international law, including humanitarian and
human rights law.
In the recent period, the Movement has remained
greatly concerned, specifically about the illegal policy
being pursued by Israel, the occupying Power, against
the Palestinian people, their land and their holy sites,
about the negative impact on the ground and about the
peace negotiations. Despite the international efforts
and calls for peace, Israel has continued to behave in
a manner blatantly contradictory to the law and the
clear objectives of the peace process. Every aggressive
and provocative action taken on the ground by Israel
in violation of international law and the human rights
of the Palestinian people has undermined the goal
of resolving the core issues — the Palestine refugee
question, Jerusalem, settlements, borders, security,
water and prisoners — and finally achieving a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in all its aspects.
As a result, tensions have continued to rise, and the
gap between the hopes and expectations for the political
process and the reality on the ground remains vast. An
overview of just the recent period, including as reflected
in official communications conveyed to the Security
Council, reveals that, rather than negotiating in good
faith and abiding by its legal obligations, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention, Israel has in fact intensified
all of its illegal activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, particularly its
illegal settlement colonization campaign, which is
destroying the contiguity of the Palestinian land and
threatening the two-State solution.
Israel’s illegal actions have included the
continuation and escalation of settlement construction,
the construction of the wall, the confiscation of land,
the demolition of homes, the forced displacement of
Palestinian civilians, military raids resulting in the
killing and injury of civilians, the arrest and detention
of Palestinians, including children, violence and terror
by extremist Israeli settlers and religious fanatics

48/68

29/04/2014

and the ongoing blockade of the Gaza Strip. Those
violations have worsened conditions on the ground
and cast serious doubts regarding Israel’s intentions
and claimed commitment to a just peace, based on the
two-State solution and in accordance with the relevant
United Nations resolutions.
NAM is especially alarmed by the increasing acts
of aggression in occupied East Jerusalem, especially
in and around Al-Haram Al-Sharif and the Al-Aqsa
Mosque, that have resulted from provocations by
Israeli extremists. The blatant disrespect for that holy
site and its worshippers and the continued threats of
further incursions are grave acts of incitement that are
aggravating religious sensitivities and already high
tensions. Israeli Government officials continue to
recklessly fuel such tensions by encouraging extremists
to acts of provocation that threaten to ignite a religious
conflict, which would have far-reaching consequences
for the region and beyond. NAM therefore once again
draws the Security Council’s attention to those serious
matters, which threaten international peace and
security. We call for actions to halt all Israeli incitement
and provocations, as well as for respect for the sanctity
of religious sites and the rights and access of Muslim
and Christian worshippers, including Palestinians, in
the city.
NAM must also reiterate its grave concern about
the continuation of the illegal Israeli blockade of
the Gaza Strip, which continues to inflict severe
humanitarian hardship on the Palestinian people. NAM
condemns that collective punishment of the Palestinian
people and urges the international community to
persist with its calls on Israel, the occupying Power,
to end the blockade and all illegal actions against
the Palestinian people under its occupation and to
respect its obligations under international law. If Israel
persists in its contempt for the law, the international
community must act forthwith to uphold the law and
ensure accountability.
The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its longstanding solidarity with the Palestinian people and its
support for the realization of their legitimate national
aspirations and inalienable rights, including to selfdetermination and freedom in their independent State
of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well
as a just solution for the plight of the Palestine refugees
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III). NAM reaffirms the role of the international
community, foremost the Security Council, in

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7164

responsibly acting to promote the achievement of a just,
lasting and comprehensive peace that will bring about
a complete end to the Israeli military occupation of the
Palestinian and other occupied Arab lands occupied in
1967, and usher in a new era of peace and stability in
the Middle East, a role that is starkly highlighted in this
period of yet another impasse in the peace negotiations.

against its neighbours and other countries — acts that
have been well documented by the United Nations
as war crimes and crimes against humanity — and,
moreover, a regime with a dark record of developing,
producing and stockpiling different kinds of inhuman
weapons, including weapons of mass destruction,
should accuse others of threatening peace and security.

Lebanon has suffered from consecutive Israeli
attacks against its territory, with a heavy human and
material toll, followed by subsequent years of occupation
and aggression. Unfortunately, Israel still continues to
violate Lebanese air space and to intensify its incursions
over Lebanon. Such activities are a blatant violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and the relevant international
resolutions, in particular resolution 1701 (2006). The
provisions of that resolution should be implemented
in a manner that guarantees the consolidation of the
foundations of stability and security in Lebanon and
prevents Israel from undertaking its daily violations of
Lebanese sovereignty.

I would like to reiterate the position of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, namely, to see peace and justice
prevail in the Middle East, which requires full respect
for international norms and regulations by all, without
discrimination.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Movement condemns all the measures taken by Israel,
the occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan,
which have intensified after the outbreak of the Syrian
crisis. The Non-Aligned Movement demands once
again that Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and
withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of June 1967, in implementation of resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
In this debate, the representative of the Israeli
regime made some unsubstantiated and fictional
allegations against my country. I would like to provide
a brief reaction in my national capacity.
First, I categorically reject those allegations, such
vain efforts by him, which are not even cognizant of
what this debate in the Security Council is all about.
It does nothing but put the blame on others in order
to divert international attention from its own apartheid
policies, mockery of democracy, atrocities, acts of
brutality, violations and acts of aggression against
Palestinians and other peoples in the region, as well as
its violations against the territorial integrity of other
States in the region, in particular its recent cases of
aggression against Lebanon and Syria.
It is indeed ironic that a regime famous for its
repeated violations of internationally recognized
borders and for attacking or threatening to use force

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
your leadership and for your work as President of the
Council. I would also like to thank Mr. Robert Serry
for his briefing on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.
Guatemala firmly believes that diplomacy and
dialogue are the best path to achieve a long-term solution
to all the conflicts that persist in the Middle East, even
though each situation has distinct characteristics that
prevent the use of one-size-fits-all formulas. With that
in mind, I will briefly touch upon two of the conflicts
that in our view are of particular importance — the one
in Syria and the Middle East peace process, including
the Palestinian question.
With respect to the conflict in Syria, Guatemala
continues to believe that the first step in any dialogue
must be the cessation of violence. Such a premise is
certainly beyond dispute in Syria. For more than three
years, that conflict has destroyed an entire people,
the value of human life, respect for human rights and
even the cultural heritage of that great country. Armed
struggle is simply not an option. We have viewed with
horror the constant news of human rights abuses that
have been committed in Syria. We cannot but add our
voice to the calls for all violations and crimes to be
investigated and brought to justice in due course.
Similarly, we are concerned by the call for
presidential elections that have been announced for
3 June. Given the current context of violence and
conflict in Syria, the concept of holding elections is
irrational. Indeed, without claiming to judge the legal
framework under which the elections have been called,

14-3141649/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

we believe that the present circumstances make it
impossible to convene a democratic process in which
all citizens can freely vote and be elected or express
their free will without fear of reprisals.
For that reason, we believe that conversations
between the parties must resume. The efforts to achieve
agreement on partial ceasefires are a first step that can
be replicated in other areas. It is also imperative for
there to be compliance with the resolutions already
adopted by the Security Council and, where relevant,
for the necessary measures to be implemented by all
parties.
With respect to the Middle East peace process,
recent developments are not encouraging. We commend
the efforts of the United States Secretary of State to
keep alive the hope of a two-State solution. In that
regard, we hope that it will still be possible to reach an
agreement to extend the deadline for negotiations.
We have watched with great alarm Israel’s refusal
to continue to comply with the agreement reached at
the beginning of the negotiations, as well as the actions
to which that has led on the part of the Palestinian
State. The refusal to undertake formal negotiations, the
insistence on not modifying traditional positions and,
in general, the tendency to take unilateral decisions
that undermine all possibility of progress, suggest little
interest and will in reaching a two-State solution with
both sides living in peace within secure borders.
We believe that the recent agreement signed
between Fatah and Hamas putting an end to the
divisions that have separated them for seven years
could have a positive effect, so long as they maintain
the premise of an eventual unity Government that
will continue to respect the two-State solution as the
basis of all negotiations. Palestinian reconciliation has
the potential to lead to an environment of peace and
reconciliation in Palestine, so that any peace agreement
will yield its hoped for fruit.
We are aware of the enormous challenges that this
process presents for both sides, both nationally and
internationally. We therefore hope that they find a way
to work positively in order to comply with existing
agreements and commitments. At the same time, the
parties should make a serious commitment to advance
on all the issues that would constitute a possible final
agreement. We believe that the involvement of the
international community, in particular that of the
Quartet and regional actors, is indispensable throughout

50/68

29/04/2014

the process. We urge both sides to refrain from any and
all acts that could endanger the discussions currently
underway.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative ot Namibia.
Mr. Naanda (Namibia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate,
which affords the broader United Nations membership
an opportunity to contribute to the important
deliberations on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. I also wish to thank
the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for his briefing.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
The Palestinian people continue to suffer from
injustice and oppression and are denied freedom
and peace in the land of their birth, which remains
under occupation by Israel. Namibia is increasingly
concerned about reports that the situation in the
Palestine territories continues to deteriorate, and
that Israel continues to undermine the possibility
of a two-State solution through its actions in East
Jerusalem, which include pushing Arabs out of the city,
maintaining the separation wall and the imposition of
a restrictive building-permit regime. Israeli policies
in Jerusalem not only affect its Palestinian population
but pose a severe threat to the possibility of resolving
the Arab-Israeli conflict by political means. Namibia
wishes to remind the Security Council that it is the
collective responsibility of the entire global community
to consider practical steps to address Israel’s actions,
particularly in East Jerusalem, since those actions
constitute a sophisticated type of ethnic cleansing and
another form of apartheid.
We condemn any attacks against civilians in Gaza
and call on all parties to adhere to the terms of the
Gaza ceasefire agreement. We also call on Israel to
unconditionally lift the unjust blockade imposed on the
Gaza Strip, since it deprives Palestinians of the most
rudimentary requirements of a decent livelihood. We
further call on Israel to withdraw from all occupied
Palestinian territories, cease its settlement activities
and allow the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to perform its
humanitarian activities unhindered. We also call on

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.7164

Israel to comply with the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

resolutions on the peaceful settlement of the question
on Palestine.

We are deeply concerned about the statement by the
Israeli Prime Minister in which he calls for suspension
of the peace talks because of the reconciliation
agreement reached between the Palestine Liberation
Organization and Hamas. The international community
and the bodies of the United Nations should continue to
play their crucial third-party role in dissuading Israel
from taking unauthorized measures and in facilitating
and fostering a climate of dialogue aimed at reaching
a peaceful solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
including resolving the future status of Jerusalem. The
humanitarian situation of Palestinians in the city must
also be addressed. A very urgent key factor for peace in
the region is that Jerusalem should be put back on the
political map.

In conclusion, 2014 has been proclaimed the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People, in accordance with General Assembly
resolution 68/12, adopted on 26 November 2013. That is
a commendable milestone on the path to the momentum
and political will needed to make an Israeli-Palestinian
peace a reality. It therefore remains the responsibility
of the United Nations and the international community
to make sure that the question of Palestine is resolved
in all its aspects.

I wish to join others in reaffirming Namibia’s
unwavering support for the Palestinian people in their
just and legitimate struggle for self-determination
and independence, and I call on the Security Council
to fulfil its mandate and take appropriate action to
end Israel’s continuing occupation of Palestine. The
international community has an obligation to ensure that
the people of Palestine realize their inalienable right to
self-determination and the creation of an independent,
sovereign State of Palestine, on the basis of the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We must
ensure that Palestine is unconditionally admitted as
a full Member of the United Nations and its agencies
and takes its rightful place in the global community
of nations. We are pleased to note that the State of
Palestine has acceded to 15 international conventions
and that its signature is expected to enter into force on
2 May. In that regard, Namibia would like to call on the
Security Council to resume its consideration of the State
of Palestine’s application for full membership in the
United Nations and to make a positive recommendation
on that to the General Assembly.
We remain convinced that our deliberations here
today are fruitful and will contribute to the search for
a comprehensive, just and lasting solution that can
bring the Israeli occupation to an end and enable the
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable rights
in an independent State of Palestine, with Jerusalem
as its capital. Real and lasting progress towards peace
and freedom for Palestine can be achieved only through
the implementation of all the relevant United Nations

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Raja Zaib Shah (Malaysia): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
open debate on the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. My delegation
would also like to express its appreciation to Mr. Robert
Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process, for his briefing.
Malaysia associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement and with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Guinea on behalf of
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Riyad
Mansour, Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine,
for his statement this morning. Malaysia reaffirms its
principled support for a just and lasting solution to the
question of Palestine that recognizes the legitimate
right of the Palestinian people to an independent State,
living side by side in peace and security with Israel,
based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its
capital.
Malaysia has remained committed to the
implementation of such internationally recognized
initiatives as the Arab Peace Initiative, the Oslo
Accords, the Quartet road map, the Madrid terms of
reference and the relevant Security Council resolutions.
We are at a significant juncture in the Middle East
peace process. The Palestinian people are joining hands
in unity, and their leadership is intensifying its efforts
to achieve independence. Israel, on the other hand, is
sending dangerous signals that it is not ready for peace,
and is escalating illegal and provocative actions on the
ground. Despite the efforts of United States Secretary

14-3141651/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/04/2014

of State John Kerry to facilitate direct negotiations,
what we have observed so far only demonstrates the
asymmetry between the occupied and the occupier.

levels. In that regard, Malaysia reiterates its demand for
an immediate end to the illegal blockade of the Gaza
Strip.

Malaysia remains steadfast in its desire to assist
the Palestinian people in their efforts to establish a
framework within which to administer a sovereign
Palestinian State. In that connection, my delegation
welcomes the Palestinian leadership’s decision to
accede to 15 international conventions. We reaffirm
our longstanding commitment to supporting
Palestine’s continued efforts to obtain diplomatic
and legal recognition in the United Nations and other
international organizations. Malaysia has always
supported a consolidated national unity between
Fatah and Hamas, and we commend both sides on the
reconciliation agreement achieved last week. However,
my delegation regrets that this move was met by the
Israeli side with a suspension of negotiations, as well as
further economic sanctions on top of those it imposed
when Palestine signed the international conventions.

Malaysia reiterates its grave concern over the
deteriorating humanitarian situation in Syria. All parties
should comply with the provisions of resolution 2139
(2014) and allow for humanitarian aid to be provided to
all of those in need. That also applies to the situation
faced by Palestinian refugees in the camps of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) at Yarmouk. We
welcome UNRWA’s tireless efforts to provide for the
distribution of food, particularly the resumption of the
delivery of much-needed supplies after more than two
weeks of being denied entry into the camp.

We continue to be gravely concerned about
the situation in the pccupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem. Malaysia strongly condemns
the Israeli security forces and extremist settlers’ brazen
desecration and illegal invasions of the Al-Aqsa Mosque,
which intensified in recent days following a debate by
the Israeli Parliament on sovereignty over the holy
site. The Security Council has made its views known
on Jerusalem’s status in numerous resolutions adopted
between 1968 and 1980, specifically in resolutions
672 (1990) and 673 (1990), on Israel’s violations of
the Al-Aqsa Mosque. The Council should not remain
silent while the occupying Power flagrantly violates
those resolutions and ignores its legal obligations and
responsibilities under the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Those violations also include the deliberate extension
of illegal settlements in the West Bank and East
Jerusalem.
The situation in the Gaza Strip remains critical. My
delegation is shocked that an Israeli air strike injured
innocent civilians in Gaza shortly after the FatahHamas reconciliation deal took place. It was just one
example of Israel’s escalation of military activities in
recent weeks, as well as a manifestation of collective
punishment. Civilians continued to be shot at and
killed near border fences and in fishing boats, while
trying to earn their livelihoods in a shattered economy.
We remain deeply alarmed that the food and energy
security needs of the population of Gaza are at severe

52/68

My delegation continues to support international
efforts to call upon all parties in Syria to immediately
end the crisis in a peaceful and meaningful manner
through dialogue and negotiation, for the sake of the
Syrian people and the region as a whole. In that regard,
we support the efforts of Joint Special Representative
Lakhdar Brahimi and urge all parties to work together
towards a political solution that is Syrian-led and
inclusive. It is our hope that the parties concerned will
be able to put aside their differences in order to ensure
an outcome that will benefit the people of Syria.
Malaysia also reiterates its objections to Israel’s
actions in the occupied Syrian Golan, including the
construction and expansion of illegal settlements in
violation of international law and the Charter of the
United Nations. In that regard, Malaysia calls for the
withdrawal of Israel from the occupied Syrian Golan
in line with resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497
(1981).
My delegation welcomes the progress made by the
new Government of Lebanon and recognizes the high
priority it has placed on ensuring security and stability
and protecting the national sovereignty of the country.
At a time when the effects of the Syrian conflict
continue to escalate and spill over into Lebanon,
Malaysia urges all parties involved in the conflict
to cease cross-border fire and other violence. In that
regard, we reiterate that Israel must cease its violations
of Lebanese sovereignty — whether by air, sea or
land — and withdraw its troops from Lebanon, with
full respect for the Blue Line, as set out in Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006).

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iceland.
Mr. Jónasson (Iceland): “The best thing is when
you pass out, because then the pain stops.” That is a
quote from a University student in Hama contained in
a report by the High Commissioner for Human Rights
on the large scale practice of torture in Syria. No one
should ever have to experience anything like that.
The violations committed in the conflict against
the civilian population, including children, are horrific
and incomprehensible. Nobody who commits such
violations can expect to escape accountability. We
continue to call on the Security Council to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
We strongly support the Geneva process and
a political solution to the crisis in Syria. However,
the Council must also exercise its leadership role in
fostering a political and peaceful solution. The parties
have demonstrated that they are not willing to lay down
arms without international action, and the Council has
yet to demonstrate that it is doing everything in its
power to prevent further human tragedy. Considering
the serious consequences to regional peace and security,
I ask the Council to please take action.
The Government of Syria, along with all other
parties to the conflict, must strictly abide by international
humanitarian and human rights law, including by
affording immediate access to humanitarian assistance
to ease the suffering of civilians. That is not a choice; it
is an obligation. It is unacceptable that people are still
starving — as the world has witnessed in Yarmouk.
We would like to use this opportunity to commend
all who have been working under the extremely
challenging circumstances in Syria to provide
humanitarian assistance to the population, including the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
On the Palestinian question, the peace process
has come to a standstill. We applaud Secretary of
State Kerry for his direct involvement and dedication
during the past few months and we sincerely hope that
the parties will return to the negotiating table. We all
know, however, that the process itself is not the aim.
A process is only a means to an end, which is to reach
an agreement on all final status issues that will, most

S/PV.7164

importantly, lead to the end of the occupation and result
in two States living side by side in peace and security.
If negotiations do not resume soon, the Security
Council will have to revert its attention to the conflict
and become actively engaged in finding a peaceful
settlement.
Although the peace process has come to a standstill,
the same cannot be said about the situation on the ground
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem. Settlement activities have accelerated since
direct negotiations started last year. Also, Palestinian
property rights continue to be violated by the near
impossibility of acquiring building permits and by the
restricting of access to their land. Settler violence also
continues unabated.
With that in mind we call upon Israel, the
occupying Power, to strictly comply with its obligations
under international law, including international
humanitarian law and human rights law. That entails
ceasing all settlement activities and preventing
provocations around the holy sites in Jerusalem, with
the understanding that all such provocations can have
far-reaching consequences on peace and security in the
region far beyond Israel and the State of Palestine.
Finally, we welcome the recent reconciliation
between Fatah and Hamas. It is hoped that will lead to
a unified approach to a peaceful settlement with Israel.
However, any unity Government that emerges from the
deal should uphold the principle of non-violence, remain
committed to achieving a two-State solution and a
negotiated peaceful settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and to accepting previous agreements and
obligations, including Israel’s legitimate right to
exist. Furthermore, the reconciliation should lead to
an improved situation on the ground. In that regard,
we once more stress the importance of ending the
indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza and of lifting
the blockade against Gaza.
We also welcome the accession of the State of
Palestine to the main human rights treaties for the
benefit of the Palestinian population. This step can
only strengthen the rule of law.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I welcome the initiative to convene this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including

14-3141653/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

29/04/2014

the Palestinian question. I also thank Mr. Robert Serry,
Special Coordinator for the United Nations Peace
Process in the Middle East, for his presence here today.

in the occupied Palestinian territories, including
East Jerusalem, in accordance with the provisions of
numerous resolutions of the General Assembly.

Since 1947, when Peru was a member of the United
Nations Special Committee on Palestine, my country
has consistently maintained a clear position on the
question of Palestine, in accordance with the rules and
principles of international law. Peru recognizes the
need to implement General Assembly resolution 181
(II), which established the basis for the creation of two
States on the territory of Palestine, one Arab and one
Jewish, living side-by-side as neighbours within secure
borders, in mutual recognition, in a climate of peace
and security and free of threats or acts of force.

In keeping with our longstanding and consistent
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes,
my delegation reaffirms its full support for and
encourages efforts seeking lasting peace in the Middle
East, which can be achieved only as a result of direct
negotiations between the parties and on the basis of the
full implementation by all parties of their obligations
under the Madrid terms of reference, the Quartet road
map and other agreements, as well as full respect for
international law, including the relevant Security
Council resolutions. In that regard, my delegation
regrets the latest developments that led to the suspension
of the direct negotiations under way with the support of
Secretary of State John Kerry.

Consequently, and conscious of the inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to set up an independent State
and in the belief that the establishment of a Palestinian
State is a key element for the peaceful and definitive
resolution of this conflict, Peru has recognized
Palestine as a State and supported the resolutions
adopted on this matter in the United Nations, including
our co-sponsorship of the historic General Assembly
resolution 67/19, which granted Palestine the status of a
non-member Observer State of the Organization.
Based on those same principles, Peru voted in
favour of Palestine’s request to become a member
State of UNESCO. The importance Peru attaches
to this subject was shown by the recent official visit
by President Humala Tasso to Israel and Palestine,
which served to reassure both parties regarding Peru’s
historical position of support for the two-State solution
and to reiterate our support for the Palestinian people.
In the same spirit, and consistent with respect for
the two-State solution, Peru recognizes the undeniable
right of the State of Israel to develop in peace and
harmony with its neighbours, within secure borders
and free of any threat to its people. Peru therefore
firmly condemns all acts of aggression against Israel.
While we recognize Israel’s right to preserve its
own existence and security, it must be said that that right
must be exercised with respect for human rights and
within internationally defined and recognized borders.
In that connection, my delegation reiterates that the
acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible under
international law, which is why any actions seeking to
impose its laws, jurisdiction and administration are null
and void. We call on Israel to immediately cease the
practice of settlement, house demolitions and evictions

54/68

Peru believes that a united Palestine that recognizes
the fundamental right of Israel to exist is an essential
element for reaching a final political solution to this
protracted conflict. My delegation therefore hopes that
the parties will resume the dialogue in order to relaunch
the peace process in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting and for your work at the helm of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to thank Special
Coordinator Robert Serry for his briefing this morning.
Today’s date coincides with the deadline for
the signing of a framework agreement between the
Palestinians and Israelis. Despite the support and the
good offices of the United States of America, Israel
has not responded to international and Arab efforts.
That State is therefore responsible for the failure of
the negotiations as a result of a number of measures
undertaken by it and the fact that it has shown no
genuine desire to reach a solution. Those measurs
include the attempts to undermine the integrity
of Jerusalem, continued settlement activity in the
occupied Palestinian territories, the refusal to release
Palestinian prisoners and other arbitrary, illegal and
immoral activities.
The success of any agreement is precluded by
Israel’s intransigent position, which jeopardizes the
very possibility of creating an independent and viable

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

sovereign Palestinian State. I reiterate our concerns
regarding the impact of continuing Israeli policies that
regrettably undermine any hope for peace, including
continued settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories and East Jerusalem under the
threat or the use of force, the exploitation of water and
natural resources belonging to Palestine, the arrest of
Palestinians, the destruction of entire villages and the
demolition of buildings, and the continued aggression
against the Holy Al-Aqsa Mosque.
The State of Qatar has repeatedly stated its
attachment to the principles of the Arab Peace Initiative
to achieve a lasting and just peace in the region. Any
agreement must be clearly based on recognition of
the rights of the Palestinian people, including the end
of the occupation and the creation of an independent
Palestinian State on Palestinian territories occupied
since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, a
withdrawal from the occupied Syrian Golan, a
recognition of the right of return of refugees and the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.
Israel’s continued blockade of the Gaza Strip, its
prohibition on the building of a port or rebuilding the
airport, and its refusal to allow Gaza to import building
materials to repair destruction for which Israel itself
was responsible all create a situation of crisis. The
blockade must therefore be lifted and border crossings
reopened, pursuant to the agreement made in November
2005 by the various parties.
The State of Qatar has called for the end of the
split between the two parts of Palestine and for the
unification of all of Palestine and its children. We
therefore welcome the national reconciliation, which
we view as a significant step forward. We call on the
international community to support the reconciliation
process, which will enable us to achieve the peace we
all want to see.
The proclamation of this year as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People was both
important and a logical precondition for achieving a
solution based on lasting, just and sustainable peace.
We would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm the
solidarity of Qatar with our Palestinian brothers in their
rightful struggle. We urge the international community
to do likewise.
The Syrian crisis is entering its fourth year.
Its disastrous impacts have reached horrendous
proportions. Syria has since the beginning of the

S/PV.7164

crisis been the theatre of war crimes, grave violations
of human rights, violations of international law
and violations of international humanitarian law. A
great deal of evidence clearly demonstrates that such
crimes and violations have taken place, including
crimes against humanity perpetrated in the regime’s
prisons and elsewhere. We therefore doubt that it will
be possible to achieve the political solution that the
international community is calling for.
The State of Qatar participated in the second Geneva
Conference on Syria and has worked to convince the
Syrian opposition to take part in that Conference, given
the need for a political solution based on the Geneva
communiqué of the Action Group for Syria (S/2012/522,
annex) of 30 June 2012, which was accepted by the
Security Council as the basis for any political solution.
However, the failure by the regime to demonstrate
its sincerity and its attempts to delay those negotiations
clearly show that they do not want a political solution.
The regime has gone even further and surprised the
international community by undertaking measures
aimed at scuttling the entire process. The Syrian
regime has not limited itself to causing the exodus of
millions of Syrians. It is also preventing the delivery
of humanitarian assistance and blocked the movement
of humanitarian actors by flouting administrative
processes. It has closed a number of medical and
surgical centres and prevented non-governmental
organizations from working with their partners on the
ground, including blocking their movement.
All that is quite clear from the second report of the
Secretary-General (S/2014/295) on the implementation
of resolution 2139 (2014), with which we agree. The
time for negotiations on humanitarian access is over.
Resolution 2139 (2014) was adopted two months ago
and has still not been implemented. The humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate. The security situation
is doing likewise, as clearly shown by the report of the
Secretary-General.
The continuing violence, systematic and large-scale
killing and the use of heavy weaponry by the regime
in urban areas, in particular the use of barrel bombs,
is absolutely horrifying. We cannot remain silent in
the face of the even more disturbing information that
we have received regarding the use of toxic gases in
populated areas. That is a very serious development,
and we call for the setting up for a commission of
inquiry on the issue. The international community’s

14-3141655/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

silence on that subject, in particular after the chemical
weapons attacks in Ghouta, is simply unacceptable. In
that respect, the Security Council must take swift and
effective measures to deal with those blatant violations
of the fundamental principles of international law and
protect civilians in Syria. We must also be diligent and
create a mechanism to bring to justice those who have
committed war crimes and crimes against humanity in
Syria.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Abdou
Salam Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
Mr. Diallo (spoke in French): I would first like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on the able manner
in which you are leading the work of the Council.
I would also like to thank Mr. Robert Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
comprehensive briefing.
The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People welcomes the tireless
diplomatic efforts of the international community, in
particular those led by the United States Administration
over the past several months. The negotiations were the
best opportunity in recent years to find a negotiated
solution.
As the deadline established nine months ago
is now upon us, the Committee notes with concern
the apparent lack of progress and the revising of
expectations downwards. Once again, the talks have
been compromised by the illegal settlement activities,
which increased by 130 per cent, and non-compliance
with the commitment to release prisoners who, under
the Oslo agreements, should have been released a long
time ago.
Support for the peace process was the main theme
of the United Nations international meeting that the
Committee held in Quito on 25 and 26 March. We
continue to support the search for a comprehensive
settlement on the basis of the agreed terms of reference,
in particular the 1967 borders. The Committee calls
upon the parties to honour their commitments, to show
good will and cease all illegal activities and refrain
from making new demands, which will only arouse
distrust.
Last week, the Committee also held a round table
with leading international law experts to discuss the

56/68

29/04/2014

implementation of various measures, in particular
regarding the legal status of Palestinian prisoners, and
solutions available to Palestine given its accession to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949, The Hague conventions
and other international treaties. The discussions we had
on those issues will inform the work of the Committee
and, hopefully, that of the Council. The Council
will agree that settlement activity is a violation of
international law and a violation of its decisions. The
Committee therefore asks the Council, as the guarantor
of international peace and security, to ensure respect
for international law and its own resolutions. We ask
the Council to urge the occupying Power to end its
arbitrary detention and mistreatment of prisoners,
release prisoners and provide medical care to detainees.
While continuing to support the peace process,
the Committee appreciates the legitimate Palestinian
initiatives aimed at promoting human rights and
accountability, which are initiatives that unfortunately
met with immediate threats of economic retaliation
from the occupying Power and the most extensive
confiscation of Palestinian lands in recent years.
However, the international community seems
ambivalent with respect to the continuing illegal
settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian
territory. The resolution on the settlements just adopted
by the Human Rights Council (A/HRC/25/L.37/Rev.1)
is, from that point of view, a first step towards rectifying
that imbalance. The international community should
increasingly apply the relevant international standards
in a uniform manner.
We are particularly concerned by the proliferation
of provocative acts by extremists and certain Israeli
political leaders in the vicinity of the holy sites in
Jerusalem. Such measures restrict freedom of worship
and further exacerbate tensions. The Israeli actions
aimed at changing the legal status and the physical,
demographic and cultural characteristics of occupied
East Jerusalem, the future capital of the Palestinian
State, are prohibited by international law. To shed light
on the situation, the Committee, in cooperation with
Turkey and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation,
will hold, in Ankara, on 12 and 13 May, an international
meeting on the question of Jerusalem.
The Committee once again condemns attacks
against civilians from either side and under any pretext
whatsoever. We welcome the recent agreement on
intra-Palestinian reconciliation and look forward to
seeing it implemented in good faith by both parties.
14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Finally, I would like to say that, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 68/12, the Committee
is continuing its programme of activities for the
International Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian
People. It is in that context that a joint meeting was held
on 9 and 10 March in the Egyptian capital between the
League of Arab States and the Committee. It resulted in
the reiteration, in the Cairo declaration, of the region’s
strong solidarity with the Palestinian cause.
The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent Observer
of the League of Arab States to the United Nations.
Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, at the
outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Nigeria’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I also thank Mr. Serry for his briefing this
morning.
Since its inception, the League of Arab States has
played its role with respect to the question of Palestine,
given that it is a cause crucial to the Arab nation. In that
context, we have worked at creating a real vision of the
nature of the Arab-Israeli conflict. We have worked to
try to find a just solution to the issue, and for almost
70 years the Arab League mechanisms have been based
on that objective. In that regard, I would like to recall
the Arab Peace Initiative adopted at the Beirut summit
in 2002, which was welcomed by the international
community as a true vision that could complement the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, which is, in fact, the guarantor of peace and
security.
Based on our conviction as a regional organization
of the importance of the Security Council, successive
Arab summits have stressed the need to address and
remain in contact with the Council, so that peace in
the Arab region may be realized, through the complete
withdrawal of the Arab territories occupied in 1967, in
particular the occupied Syrian Golan and Lebanon, and
through the respect by Israel, the Occupying Power, of
international law, resolutions of the Security Council,
resolutions that Israel has arrogantly ignored for years.
It is therefore necessary for the Security Council
to address Israel’s attempts to undermine the peace
process through a two-pronged strategy. First, it agrees
in principle to negotiations and begins them, but then
imposes a status quo that subverts their purpose on the
ground. The best example in that regard is the Israeli
authorities’ approval of a settlement project at the very

S/PV.7164

moment when the negotiation under the auspices of the
United States of America were beginning. Secondly,
it seeks pretexts for stopping negotiations with the
Palestinians. We see that in the Israeli reaction to the
Palestinian reconciliation.
That reconciliation will lead to the unity of the
Palestinians, of the people and the Government. It
is an essential part of the peace process because it
affirms the unity and the contiguity of the Palestinian
territories between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. It
is one of the bases for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace that enjoys international support. It is also one
of the bases for the establishment and construction of a
Palestinian State on the territories occupied in 1967, in
accordance with the principle of two States.
The success of the national reconciliation, which
will lead to the formation of a national unity Government
that will represent the Palestinian people, is the sole
guarantee of achieving the unity and contiguity of the
Palestinian territories. It is therefore necessary for the
international community and the Security Council to
welcome that as positive step, instead allowing Israel to
use it as an excuse for stopping negotiations.
Developments over the last 60 years have shown that
the peace process in the region will not be successful
unless Israel makes a complete withdrawal from the
Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967,
in particular the Syrian Arab Golan and the south of
Lebanon. In that regard, the Arab League reaffirms that
Israel’s position, which is in violation of international,
Security Council resolutions and what peace requires,
could force the Arab League to revisit the way the
international community and its mechanisms deal
with the question of Palestine and the Arab-Israeli
conflict. It is now necessary to change methodologies
and find new mechanisms for Arab action on the basis
of international resolutions aimed at ending the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories.
The League of Arab States has many questions
about the possibility of bringing about a comprehensive
and just peace. With respect to the issue, the Arab
League has made appeals in the past and continues
today to make appeals at the ministerial level and at its
summits for the world to recognize the serious nature
of the Israeli violations of international humanitarian
law on the ground and the way that the State of Israel
deals with the issues of the settlements, prisoners,
the separation wall and the unjust blockade imposed

14-3141657/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

on Gaza, despite the numerous calls to the Security
Council to live up to its mission.
The limited nature of the Security Council’s
response has very frequently disappointed us. Indeed, it
caused us at our last summit, held in Kuwait on 25 and
26 March, to present numerous demands, inter alia, that
the international community undertake efforts to bring
an end to Israel’s occupation actions in the Palestinian
territories and the implementation of the relevant
resolutions, in particular resolutions 465 (1980) and
497 (1981), which reaffirm the illegality of Israel’s
settlement policy and the necessity of dismantling the
settlements as violations of international law.
Secondly, we appeal to the Security Council to
adopt a resolution restricting and condemning Israel’s
expansionist projects and putting an end to the Israeli
settlement policy.
Thirdly, we have reaffirmed the need for the
international community to implement the advisory
opinion of the International Criminal Court of
9 July 2004 (see A/ES-10/273) and General Assembly
resolution ES-10/15, on the illegality of the racial
separation wall, adopted on 20 July 2004, which called
upon the Secretary-General to establish a register of
damages related to the construction of the wall.
Fourthly, we strongly condemn the Israeli
declaration that the Al-Aqsa Mosque is an integral
part of the territory of Israel, as well as the attempts
by Israeli law to dismantle the Mosque by splitting it
between Jews and Muslims. That is a serious escalation
in its ongoing attacks against the sanctity of the Mosque
and the holy sites of Islam and Christianity. UNESCO
must live up to its responsibilities in that respect.
With regard to the Syrian Arab Golan, it is
necessary to reaffirm that the continued occupation of
the Syrian Arab Golan since 1967 is a constant threat
to peace and security in the region and in the world.
Secondly, t is also necessary to condemn Israel for its
practices in the occupied Syrian Arab Golan based on
illegal seizure of land and resources. It is also necessary
to condemn the construction of settlements and other
forms of expansion, as well as the exploitation of natural
resources. We must call on the international community
to respect international law in that sphere. Thirdly, we
demand that the United Nations, the Security Council
and the Human Rights Council require Israel to respect
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and to protect

58/68

29/04/2014

the freedom of movement of the inhabitants of the
Syrian Arab Golan so that they can visit their relatives
in Syria. The international community must live up to
its responsibilities in that respect.
With regard to the Syrian crisis in general, despite
the appeals of the Arab League to the Security Council,
in the light of the current situation and the impasse
in negotiations in Geneva between the delegations
of the opposition and the Syrian Government, the
Kuwait summit welcomed the adoption of resolution
2139 (2014), on the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Syria, and called for its implementation.
We have also appealed for the adoption of a political
solution, as stipulated by the declaration issued at the
first Geneva Conference and the efforts of the Joint
Special Representative.
In regard to the situation in Lebanon, the Arab
Summit expressed solidarity with Lebanon and support
for the political and economic efforts of the Government
of Lebanon to guarantee the unity and stability of the
country. In particular, we called for the implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions so as to halt
Israeli violations of Lebanese territory, airspace,
maritime borders and civilian areas.
In conclusion, inasmuch as international relations
are intensely intertwined and complex, we feel that
the conflict in the Middle East is not limited to its
regional dimension. It is a multifaceted conflict that
is a threat to international peace and security and
has deteriorated in various areas of the region. The
situation speaks to the inability of the Security Council
to assume its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. I would like to recall
the first paragraph of the Charter of the United Nations,
which calls for preserving future generations from the
scourge of war.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mamabolo (South Africa): At the outset, I
would like to congratulate the Federal Republic of
Nigeria on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council this month, and we welcome this open debate
under its leadership. We also welcome the opportunity
to participate and share our views in this important
debate on the situation in the Middle East, with
particular reference to the Middle East peace process.

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

I would also like to thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry,
for his briefing to the Council today.
South Africa aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.
On countless occasions, we have met in the Security
Council Chamber to lament the fact that the deadlines
set for the peace negotiations have not ushered positive
ways forward with regard to the Middle East peace
process. We regret that despite efforts of the United
States over the past nine months, we see, instead of
progress, regression with the talks frozen indefinitely.
The stakes are high for both the Palestinians and
the Israelis, and the suspension of the talks will not
contribute to the achievement of a two-State solution,
in which we all envision a State of Palestine, living side
by side in security with Israel. South Africa is deeply
concerned by the latest setbacks in the Middle East
peace process.
In addition to the suspended talks, obstacles
created by the illegal occupation of Palestine remain.
South Africa reiterates its position that the solution
envisioned by the Oslo Accords is being taken apart
piecemeal with every new settlement that is announced.
Not only are the settlements illegal under international
law, but they also remain a major stumbling block to
the achievement of sustainable peace. Essentially, the
Israeli settlement activities are confiscating Palestinian
territory that is important for a future State, and at the
same time they are aimed at isolating East Jerusalem
from other main Palestinian cities.
South Africa welcomes the unity agreement between
the Palestine Liberation Organization and Hamas as a
positive step. We have long argued that the division
between the two main Palestinian parties has weakened
Palestine’s ability to negotiate a fair dispensation. More
importantly, that unity will strengthen the Palestinian
State and service delivery to its people through the
establishment of a united Palestinian Government
within weeks. We also welcome the announcement
that elections will be held in Palestine in six months.
In our view, a unified Palestinian voice will contribute
significantly to the realization of a two-State solution.
We reiterate our call on the Security Council
to fully exercise its functions under the Charter of
the United Nations. With regard to the Palestinian
question, we express our firm belief that the Council

S/PV.7164

should provide sustained support to the peace process
and work towards its full and satisfactory completion.
We have yet another failure to achieve peace behind
that. Perhaps the time has come for us to be much
more creative in our endeavours to find a lasting and
peaceful solution.
South Africa continues to believe in the right of the
self-determination of the people of Palestine. We remain
unshaken in our belief that the two-State solution, with
East Jerusalem as the capital of the Palestinian State,
remains the viable option for durable and lasting peace.
The delicate process of negotiations between Israel and
Palestine requires trust, and trust is earned by action,
not by mere words.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the delegation of Nigeria for convening this important
debate to discuss the situation in the Middle East,
including the question of Palestine. The Kuwait
delegation aligns itself with the statements made on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation and the Group of Arab States.
The holding of periodic debates on this agenda
item promotes international interests in the stability
of the region and the Palestinian question, which
is at the core of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to defy the resolutions of
international legitimacy. The peoples and States of the
region are therefore hopeful that the Security Council
will shoulder its responsibilities and implement its own
resolutions in that regard.
The Middle East peace process is at a delicate,
unpredictable stage. Israel is fully responsible for the
grave deadlock in the Palestinian-Israeli negotiations
because it refuses to commit to the terms of reference
for the peace process, the two-State solution and the
establishment of a Palestinian State within the 4 June
1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. It also
refuses to release the fourth tranche of Palestinian
prisoners. It pursues its policies of provocation and
aggression, which weaken the peace process and set
the stage for serious turmoil in the Middle East in
which peace and security cannot prevail. The Arab and
Palestinian peoples are fed up with Israel’s defiance
towards any real initiative to establish a just and lasting
peace.

14-3141659/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Among the most salient provocations are Israel’s
current policies against the Al-Aqsa Mosque, in
violation of its commitments under the relevant
United Nations resolutions and international law. The
international community should pressure the occupying
Power, Israel, to abandon its systematic extremist
policies for the Judaization of Jerusalem because they
are dangerous, threaten the stability of the region and
intensify hatred, racism and extremism in the region.
Such actions, which seek to change the demographic
and legal character of Jerusalem, are illegal. We call
upon the Council to take immediate action to protect
Jerusalem and to hold Israel to its commitments as per
the resolutions of international legitimacy and the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949. Israel is also continuing its
settlement policies and to confiscate Palestinian land,
homes and farms. And it continues to hold Palestinians
without trial in Israeli prisons. All such policies and
practices of are not only a challenge to the international
community and a breach of international humanitarian
law but constitute a threat to any real chance for peace
in the Middle East.
General Assembly resolution 68/12, which
proclaims 2014 the International Year of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, serves to reiterate the
support of the international community for the steadfast
Palestinian people and their inalienable rights. It also
expresses support for a peaceful, lasting and just
settlement of the Palestinian question based on United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid terms of reference, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and
the Quartet road map. In that regard, Kuwait supports
the efforts of Palestine to accede to all the specialized
agencies of the United Nations and all international
treaties and protocols. We also support the resolutions
adopted by the League of Arab States at its summit in
Kuwait in March.
We call upon the international community to
pressure Israel to end its illegal blockade of Gaza,
to open all border crossings as per its international
commitments, to end all illegal settlement activities
and to commit to all Security Council resolutions,
including those with respect to withdrawal from all
lands occupied in 1967. Kuwait demands that Israel
implement resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw from the
Syrian Golan to the border of 4 June 1967. In addition,
Kuwait is committed to supporting Lebanon and calls
upon Israel to end its continued violation of Lebanese
sovereignty and to withdraw from all Lebanese
territory, in implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).
60/68

29/04/2014

To conclude, we welcome Palestinian national
reconciliation in line with the Cairo declaration of 2011
and the Doha declaration of 2012. This is a positive
step and we commend the Palestinian people and their
leadership for their steadfast commitment to regain
their rights. We will continue to support Palestine at
all levels — political, financial and other — until there
is an end to the Israeli occupation of Palestine and
Palestine is established as an independent State with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
With regard to Syria, only a political solution can
be reached. We call for the resumption of negotiations
in implementation of the Geneva communiqué
(S/2012/522, annex). We furthermore call on the
Security Council to follow up on implementation of
resolution 2139 (2014) so that humanitarian assistance
can be provided to the Syrian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Let me begin by thanking
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate. I am
also grateful to the United Nations Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Robert
Serry, for his comprehensive briefing.
Indonesia associates itself with the statements
delivered by the representatives of the Islamic Republic
of Iran and Guinea, on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Algined Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, respectively.
The timing of today’s meeting is of the essence,
in view of the critical fact that the nine months of
peace negotiations between Palestine and Israel were
scheduled to be concluded at this time — in fact, today.
It is common knowledge that Indonesia is a steadfast
supporter of the Palestinian people and their quest
for peace through the realization of their dream of an
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. In that regard, Indonesia is deeply distressed
that, last week, the Government of Israel decided to
call off the ongoing negotiations. It used as an excuse
the historic agreement among Palestinians to form a
Government of national unity.
Last year, the General Assembly designated
2014 as the International Year of Solidarity with the
Palestinian People, with the objective of boosting
international support for the right of Palestinians to

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

self-determination. In that light, it must be evident
to the international community that Palestinian
reconciliation is as much their inalienable right as that
of self-determination.
Indonesia therefore takes this opportunity to
congratulate the Palestinians upon reaching that historic
agreement. We strongly believe that Palestinians’ desire
to unite is a right to be encouraged, since it guarantees
that Palestinians can speak as one, and not with separate
voices. In other words, the suggestion that Palestinians
can enjoy a place at the negotiating table with Israel
if they are divided is only a trick aimed at justifying
Israel’s unwillingness to continue negotiations.
For years, Indonesia has called on Israel to halt
policies that frustrate the prospects of peace. Those
policies, and not Palestinian unity, constitute the real
problems and challenges for negotiations. Among those
policies is the continued development of settlements.
As was highlighted recently by the Israeli Bureau
of Statistics, there was an astounding 123 per cent
increase in settlement construction in the West Bank
between 2012 and 2013.
Like many other countries, Indonesia has frequently
asserted the illegality of settlement construction
and the danger it poses to negotiations. We have also
frequently drawn attention to the importance for Israel
to demonstrate good faith in the negotiation of the
other core issues, that is, the status of East Jerusalem,
permanent borders, security, refugees and water. To us
and to other members of the international community,
those are far more intractable issues than the choice of
the Palestinians to set aside their divisions.
Let us remember that, for over 60 years, peace
has eluded the Palestinian peoples due to the Israeli
occupation. By deploying the tools of intimidation and
fear, Israel has established the great insecurity that
it now seeks to perpetuate by choosing to abandon
negotiations.
We call on Israel to rethink that option and to
return to the negotiating table, which is the only door
to peace. We again call on Israel to withdraw without
delay from the territories it has occupied since 1967
and to allow the realization of an independent State
of Palestine as demanded by the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, the Quartet road map and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

S/PV.7164

Finally, it is also our view that the international
community must continue to assist Palestinians in the
necessary preparation for their eventual statehood. In
that regard, last month, Indonesia and Japan co-chaired
the Second Conference on Cooperation among East
Asian Countries for Palestinian Development. The East
Asian nations and international organizations that took
part in the Conference recommitted themselves to the
development of Palestine, as well as to the ongoing
Middle East peace process, through capacity-building
and by reinvigorating the business environment in
Palestine. We encourage other nations to undertake
similar initiatives and urge those that are already
undertaking such measures to step up their efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): Every now and then,
we get the opportunity to assemble in the Security
Council to revisit the long story of the suffering of
the Palestinian people. That suffering is the result of
a regime of oppression and systematic violations of
human rights that are without precedent anywhere
on Earth. The homes of ordinary Palestinians have
been bulldozed, their land confiscated, trees and
farms destroyed, settlements evicted, roads and
neighbourhoods blocked and fragmented, and borders
walled. That systematic policy of oppression has
reduced the lives of Palestinians under occupation to
subsistence level. Unfortunately, all of it is happening
before the eyes of the international community, in the
absence of any resolute action on its part.
The peaceful resolution of the question of
Palestine has now been on the Security Council’s
agenda for more than six decades. During those long
66 years, even when its own resolutions were blatantly
flouted, the Council often vacillated when it came to
taking concrete action that could make a meaningful
contribution to a fair solution to the issue. Due to the
Council’s inability to fulfil its responsibilities vis-à-vis
the conflict, as mandated in the Charter of the United
Nations, the long quest for a final agreement on the
creation of an independent State of Palestine — on pre1967 ceasefire lines in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip
and East Jerusalem, living peacefully side by side with
the State of Israel — remains ever elusive.
It is now time for a bold new strategy for addressing
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The international
community should set out a plan for a fair and long-

14-3141661/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

term settlement of the Palestinian problem on the
basis of the parameters outlined in the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map. The United
Nations cannot be a silent witness to the collective
punishment imposed on the Palestinians by Israel,
the occupying Power, and should play its due role in
resolving this protracted crisis. The Security Council
in particular must not evade its role, particularly since
its own resolutions on the matter, adopted over time,
remain unimplemented.
The role of the Security Council as the honest
broker in a deal between Israel and Palestine is all the
more important as the recent efforts to get the parties
to negotiate a settlement themselves seem to be going
nowhere. Nine months of peace talks between Israel
and the Palestinian Authority, facilitated by the United
States, have just failed. This week, the Israeli security
cabinet voted to end negotiations, citing Fatah’s
reconciliation with Hamas. But even before that, there
were challenges. Israel baulked at the release of the
final instalment of Palestinian prisoners, which was
one of the Palestinians’ basic demands for the talks
.Despite American pleas, Israel also announced plans
to expand settlements in the occupied territories and
suspended the reimbursement of Palestinian tax money
to the Authority.
Although the international community routinely
restates its commitment to the concept of a two-State
solution, the construction of Israel’s barrier in and
around the West Bank and the expansion of settlements
on occupied land make that solution less feasible.
Meanwhile, Israeli settlement activities, the blockade
of the Gaza Strip, Israeli military raids into Palestinian
territories, and constant provocations to violence by
extremist Israeli settlers continue to exacerbate tension
and reinforce doubts about Israel’s commitment to a
two-State solution. The illegal settlement activities
especially present an existential threat to the viability
of a future Palestinian State. Even during the latest
round of negotiations, 14,000 new settlement units
were announced. If peace in the Middle East is to be
achieved, the international community must prevail on
Israel to cease further settlements, which are illegal
under international law, and to dismantle the existing
ones, in line with its obligations under article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention. It should also tear down the
walls.

62/68

29/04/2014

Israelis have suffered in the past and they know
better than anyone that the aspirations of a nation
cannot be denied forever. Even the mighty pharaohs
could not prevent that, and neither could apartheid
Rhodesia and South Africa. The creation of the State
of Israel is proof of it. We therefore expect the Israeli
leadership to reflect on its own history and facilitate a
two-State solution. We are hopeful, because we have
seen positive outcomes in recent times in places such
as South Sudan and Timor-Leste. Those countries have
achieved their sovereignty and independence with the
aim of living in peace and harmony as equal members
of the global community. Can Israel and Palestine
follow the same path?
The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has long been a
major catalyst of instability and turmoil in the Middle
East, fanning and fuelling violence and extremism in
that region as well as the wider world. The Security
Council has the responsibility under the Charter to
secure peace and stability by addressing the root
causes of this prolonged conflict and negotiating a just
solution to it. We must invest the necessary political
capital and resources in order to realize the inalienable
and legitimate aspiration of the Palestinian people for
an independent, viable, contiguous State of Palestine
based on the 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as
its capital, living side by side with Israel in peace
and harmony. Achieving that goal would amend the
historical injustice visited on the Palestinians and
greatly contribute to lasting peace and stability in the
Middle-East and around the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sri Lanka.
Mr. Silva (Sri Lanka): I join other speakers in
commending you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate.
We align ourselves with the statement made by the
representative of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement.
The year 2014 has been a critical year for the
Middle East peace process. It is important that the
international community remain committed to finding
a just and durable solution to the situation in the
Middle East. We must not give up hope at this crucial
juncture. We believe it is the responsibility of the
parties concerned to create an environment conducive
to peace. Improved conditions for Palestinians can only
help to improving the situation in the region as a whole.

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The ongoing settlement activities, which are illegal
under international law, must end as soon as possible if
a sustainable solution in the region is to be found. The
international community has repeatedly called for a
freeze on settlement activity. We encourage the parties
to exercise restraint for the sake of the greater goal of
peace.
The blockade of the Gaza Strip is another obstacle to
the peace process. Restrictions on imports and exports
due to the blockade are stifling economic growth, and
should be lifted in accordance with resolution 1860
(2009), an act that would contribute significantly to the
economic advancement of Gaza and the well-being of
its people. We note with concern that the United Nations
has been hard pressed to keep the vast majority of the
people of Gaza supplied with minimum necessities. We
would like to emphasize our strong support for the work
of United Nations agencies in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.
The security needs of the people of Israel must
also be respected. A climate conducive to peace will be
encouraged by a approach of mutual sensitivity to each
other’s concerns. Indiscriminate attacks on civilians
will only worsen feelings of suspicion and insecurity
and widen the gap between the parties. Sri Lanka
supports the implementation of the General Assembly
resolutions regarding the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people to statehood and the attainment of a
two-State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders. Sri
Lanka also supports the Palestinians’ application for
admission to full membership of the United Nations.
We also recognize that the viability of the two-State
solution will depend on the political unity and economic
advancement of the Palestinian people.
We hope that every effort will be made to achieve
success in the peace process so that both the Israeli and
the Palestinian people will be able to enjoy peace and
prosperity in their own lands. We should not let go of
the chance, once again, to achieve a sustainable peace
when there is much international goodwill supporting
the process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. León González (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba fully supports the statement made by the

S/PV.7164

representative of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
The Middle East continues to hold the attention
of the international community. Time and again, the
Council convenes such debates without any progress,
while the major problems persist. The illegal Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian and other Arab territories
remains the main obstacle to achieving peace and
a just, lasting and comprehensive settlement in the
Middle East.
It is essential that the Council play its proper role
in defending international peace and security and that
it immediately adopt concrete, practical measures
to ensure that Israel ends its aggression against the
Palestinian people. There will be no peace in the
Middle East so long as such aggression persists and the
legitimate, inalienable rights of the Palestinian people
are ignored. Israel’s conduct in deliberate violation
of United Nations resolutions, international law and
international humanitarian law constitutes a threat to
regional and international peace and security.
The General Assembly took a historic decision when
its members, by majority decision, granted Palestine
non-member observer State status in the United
Nations. The international community must continue
to support the Palestinian people’s legitimate call for
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as
its capital.
The construction and expansion of the illegal
Israeli settlements on occupied Palestinian territory;
the difficult and painful reality of Palestinian prisoners;
and the deteriorating humanitarian situation in the
besieged Gaza Strip, where the living conditions of
the inhabitants have worsened as the unjust blockade
has tightened, are unacceptable. Israel has announced
plans to build more than 7,600 new settlements,
together with the ongoing construction of thousands
more throughout the occupied territories, including
East Jerusalem and its surroundings, since negotiations
resumed in 2013. Furthermore, Israel demolished at
least 200 Palestinian homes in 2013, forcibly displaced
hundreds of people, and continued the construction of
the wall, isolating entire communities and hindering
the establishment of the State of Palestine. Israeli forces
continued their incursions into the occupied Palestinian
territories, perpetuating the violent, destructive
image of the occupation. In 2013, more than 4,000

14-3141663/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestinians — including children — were arrested
or detained, adding to the thousands of Palestinian
prisoners in Israeli jails. Only an end to the settlement
policy, the release of Palestinian prisoners, ensuring
the right of return and the immediate, unconditional
and complete lifting of the cruel and illegal blockade
imposed on the Gaza Strip will lead to the launching of
a genuine political process to peace in the region.
Cuba will continue to support the Palestinian
people in their just struggle for self-determination, and
welcomes the proclamation of 2014 as the International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People. We hope
that it will mark a historic milestone in the Palestinian
people’s achievement of all of its rights, including the
acceptance of the Palestinian State as a full Member
of the United Nations. Cuba welcomes Palestine’s
application to accede to 15 international instruments.
We demand an end to the occupation of all of the Arab
territories and reiterate our position in favour of a just
and lasting peace for all people of the Middle East
region.
Cuba continues to attach attention to the situation
in Syria and reiterates that a political solution, attained
through dialogue and negotiation, is the only alternative
to the conflict in that country. We oppose the calls of
those who promote regime change in Syria and the use
of force and violence. We cannot fail to reiterate our
concern over the loss of innocent lives resulting from
the Syrian conflict. We condemn all acts of violence
against the civilian population in that country and
reject the supposed protection of human life as a pretext
for foreign intervention. We also reject the complicity
of the mainstream media, which distort reality while
avoiding any consequences of their actions.
The Council’s duty is to promote peace, not
violence. It is to prevent destabilization, not to
contribute to the financing, arming or training of any
destabilizing actors. We emphasize the call to preserve
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Syria and its people’s right to self-determination
without foreign interference or intervention of any
kind.
We encourage the international community to
continue assisting Syria in the implementation of the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the fulfillment of
the agreements on the destruction of its stockpile of
chemical weapons under existing commitments. We
also welcome the progress achieved in eliminating

64/68

29/04/2014

chemical weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic and the
cooperation of the Syrian Government with the joint
mission of the United Nations and the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. We also
underscore the current efforts undertaken in complex
conditions, to remove the chemical weapons from
Syrian territory.
We reiterate that it is essential that those with
influence on the opposition groups use it to promote the
success of the mission, rather than hinder the process.
Cuba regrets that the second round of talks on Syria
ended without agreement among the parties. We share
the yearning of the international community to pursue
the dialogue and reach agreement on ending the conflict
through a peaceful process led by the Syrian people.
Cuba reiterates its unequivocal condemnation of all
acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its aspects
and manifestations, wherever and by whomsoever
committed, including State terrorism. In that regard,
Cuba condemns the acts of terrorism committed in the
Middle East, including in Syria, as well as support for
irregular armed groups, including mercenaries, which
only contribute to destruction and death and hinder
diplomatic efforts to resolve the conflict.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guinea.
Mr. Touré (Guinea) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to underscore that I am speaking
on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC), in my capacity as its New York chair, in this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.
Today’s meeting bears a special significance as
it coincides with the end of the well-intentioned and
much-appreciated efforts of the United States Secretary
of State to move the Middle East peace process
forward. The Organization of Islamic Cooperation
believes that the renewed suspension of the peace
talks and the indefensible status quo underscore the
need to step up progress towards peace and stability
in the region, which is undergoing rapid change. At
this decisive moment, if the kind of credible political
process to which the OIC remains fully committed
is to continue successfully, certain conditions must
be met. This means serious commitment on the part
of the international community to bringing all illegal
acts on the ground to an end, and to demanding respect
for internationally agreed parametres, as defined by

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

United Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative,
the Madrid terms of references and the Quartet road
map; and for the establishment of an independent and
sovereign Palestinian State based on the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital; and for the
settlement of all core issues.
The OIC has repeatedly drawn the international
community’s attention to Israel’s recent actions,
especially its continuing settlement activities, which
threaten to undermine the two-State solution and to
exacerbate the situation on the ground. These actions
constitute a grave breach of international law, seriously
detract from the credibility of the peace efforts,
undermine the contiguity and viability of the State of
Palestine, and jeopardize the prospects for realizing the
two-State solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders.
In this regard, the OIC stresses that the international
community, in particular the Security Council, must
ensure that its resolutions are respected and assume
its full responsibility to address the illegal situation
that Israel, the occupying Power, has created in an
attempt to further entrench its occupation and further
its de facto annexation of Palestinian land. The Council
must take binding action to put an immediate end to
Israel’s construction of settlements in all of their
manifestations, reverse all of Israel’s attempts to distort
reality, and eliminate the grave repercussions thereof
on the Palestinian people, their land and resources.
The fragile situation on the ground resulting
from Israel’s fait-accompli policies are of profound
and legitimate concern to the OIC. These illegitimate
and illegal policies seek to alter the historical,
religious and demographic composition and character
of the city of Jerusalem, isolating it from its natural
environs, compromising the status of its holy sites and
undermining the status of East Jerusalem as the capital
of the State of Palestine through illegal and aggressive
acts, including attempts to enact illegal laws to impose
Israeli sovereignty over the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
In this regard, the OIC reaffirms that such acts
may have extremely dangerous and far-reaching
consequences that would not only jeopardize the
progress and credibility of the peace process, but also
destabilize the entire Middle East region. The OIC also
condemns the recent escalation of acts of provocation
and incitement by Israeli extremists, including settlers,
Government officials and religious zealots, notably at
Al-Haram Al-Sharif.

S/PV.7164

The OIC therefore reaffirms the centrality of the
Palestinian cause to its member States, stresses the
Islamic, Arab and Palestinian identity of occupied
East Jerusalem, and reiterates the need for full respect
of the sanctity of its Islamic and Christian holy sites.
Moreover, the OIC reiterates that East Jerusalem
remains an integral part of the Palestinian territory
that has been occupied by Israel since 1967, the illegal
annexation of which by Israel remains unrecognized
and condemned by the international community.
The OIC continues to monitor with great concern
the plight of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails and
detention centres, which reflects the flagrant injustice
and oppression to which the Palestinian people have
been subject for decades. We express our deep concern
over the hunger strikes carried out by detainees in
protest of their abuse and captivity without charge or
trial. In this regard, we underline the responsibility of
the Security Council to ensure that Israel complies with
the rules of international law and to protect the human
rights of Palestinian prisoners.
The OIC welcomes the recent announcement on
23 April regarding Palestinian national reconciliation,
which is a prerequisite for achieving Palestinian
national aspirations and a just and lasting peace. The
OIC wishes the Palestinian people the greatest of
success in this important endeavour. The OIC also
welcomes Palestine’s recent accession to international
humanitarian and human rights law treaties, stressing
the critical importance of respect for international law,
including for the attainment of a just and lasting peace.
In conclusion, I take this opportunity to reaffirm
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation’s support for
and solidarity with the Palestinian people as they seek
to reclaim their alienable national rights, including the
rights to return and self-determination, and to establish
an independent and sovereign State of Palestine on the
land occupied by Israel since 1967, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, as well as to reach a just solution to
the question of Palestinian refugees in accordance
with General Assembly resolution 194 (III). It is the
hope of the OIC that 2014, as the International Year
of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, will see
the occupation and oppression brought to an end and
freedom and independence become a reality for the
Palestinian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia.

14-3141665/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate you, Madam President, for the way
you have led the work of the Council during the month
of April. I also thank you for convening this open
debate on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I welcome the briefing by
Mr. Robert Serry, Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process.
Bolivia aligns itself with the statemenst made by the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement and by the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
Once again, the Security Council is meeting
to discuss the situation in the Middle East, and
unfortunately, there has been little progress in
the implementation of the Council’s international
responsibilities. In this International Year of Solidarity
with the Palestinian People, we welcome the fact that
Palestine has signed 15 international treaties, most
of which were related to human rights. It is a further
sign of the will of the people and their Government
to belong to the community gathered together in this
Organization, on an equal footing, with equal rights
and obligations. We must not forget, however, that
Israel violated the agreement of 29 July 2013, under
which it was to release 104 Palestinian prisoners who
had been jailed for over 20 years. Today, 78 are free, but
26 others have not yet regained their freedom, although
their release was scheduled to take place on 29 March.
In addition, on 1 April Israel announced plans for 700
new settlements in occupied Jerusalem.
Despite the situation, Bolivia welcomes the
reconciliation process between Hamas and the
Palestinian Authority that was successfully completed
last week. We believe that it sends a powerful message
of support for the efforts of President Mahmoud
Abbas to achieve a sustainable and lasting peace and
meet the demands and expectations of his people.
The statement issued on Sunday by the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs of Palestine lamenting the horrors of
the Holocaust — which, in our view, was the worst
crime of the twentieth century — is also of utmost
importance because it provides fresh evidence that the
denialism attributed to Palestinian authorities does not
in fact exist. We regret, however, that Israel unilaterally
suspended the talks — coincidentally, that same week.
I therefore once again urge us to seek to prevent by all

66/68

29/04/2014

possible means the Palestinian people’s falling victim
to what may be one of the greatest tragedies of the
twenty-first century.
Despite the high expectations raised by the peace
process initiated on 29 July last year, reality has proven
once again that agreements and commitments are not
always honoured by their proponents. Since then,
many Palestinians, including women and children,
have been killed by Israeli attacks. In 2013 alone,
4,553 Palestinians, including children, were arrested
and jailed, adding to the 5,000 already in prison; at
least 200 homes were demolished, forcibly displacing
thousands of people; and many more homes were built
in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem — all in clear violation of international
humanitarian law. The Israeli blockade of the Gaza
Strip continues to inflict suffering, poverty and
inhumane conditions on Palestinian refugees.
We believe that Israel is not showing proof of good
faith when it acts in such a manner and when, in the
course of negotiations, it again and again postpones
discussions on substantive issues affecting the
Palestinian people, including the status of Palestine,
the illegal Israeli settlements, the status of Jerusalem,
access to water, borders, security and the situation of
the Palestinian refugees.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia defends the cause
of the Palestinian people, supports the exercise of their
rights and unequivocally condemns Israel’s crimes. Our
position remains unchanged. In addition, we reiterate
our support for the establishment of a Palestinian State,
which Bolivia recognized as soon as it was announced,
on the basis of the pre-1967 borders, with its capital
in East Jerusalem. We reiterate Palestine’s right to full
status as a United Nations Member State, with all the
rights and obligations that such a status entails, and
we highlighted that on 15 November 2013, when our
countries, Bolivia and Palestine, signed an agreement
on diplomatic relations. In addition, we are proud to
announce that we are a member of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.
We believe that, once again, the Security Council
has an important mission to help relaunch the peace
talks and above all to find a just, lasting and inclusive
agreement that will end the Israeli occupation of
Palestine and other Arab territories. Failure to exert
the utmost effort in that regard would only add to the

14-31416

29/04/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

stream of constant criticism that this important United
Nations body has been subjected to in recent years.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bahrain.
Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
you, Madam President, for convening this quarterly
debate. I would like to congratulate Nigeria on its able
leadership of the Council. I thank Mr. Serry, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
briefing.
Bahrain continues to reiterate its position with
respect to the Palestinian question, which is based on
the need to implement the relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions, respect the terms
of reference and work to find a just, lasting and
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question. Such
work can be successful only with the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital, in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
decisions of the Quartet. We continue to demand that
the illegal blockade of Gaza be lifted.
We welcome the Palestinian national reconciliation
agreement, signed in Gaza on Wednesday, 23 April,
between Fatah and Hamas. We express our hope that
the agreement will end the internal divisions and help
the Palestinian people to attain their full rights, like any
other people in the world. Most important among these
is the right to achieve a lasting solution to the situation
based on international legitimacy, the relevant United
Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, and
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. We also fully support
the aspirations of the Palestinian people in all their
efforts to achieve a just and lasting peace in the region.
We commend the historic achievement of and wisdom
shown by the Palestinian leadership in ending years of
intra-Palestinian division. We support the step taken
by President Abbas in signing the accession documents
to 15 international instruments and treaties. That is a
step in the right direction and a legitimate right of the
brotherly people of Palestine.
A peaceful settlement of the situation in the
Middle East will be achieved only through an end to
the occupation of Arab lands, including Jerusalem
and the Syrian Golan, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions; the establishment of
an independent Palestinian State on the basis of the

S/PV.7164

4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital;
and the achievement of a just and lasting peace that
guarantees the right of return to the Palestinians in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III). In addition, we assert the need to implement the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Security Council and to respect without condition the
principles of international legitimacy, particularly with
regard to the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, which
prohibits any demographic change in territories under
occupation.
The most important issue remains the continued
suffering of the Palestinian people. We are in dire need
of reaching a just, lasting and comprehensive solution
that would guarantee the basic and legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people like all other peoples. In that
regard, it is important for all parties to honour their
commitments to end the suffering of the Palestinian
people, terminate the blockade of Gaza and halt the
construction of settlements.
To conclude, King Hamad bin Issa Al Khalifa of
Bahrain has affirmed that the Kingdom will continue
to adhere to the principles of peace, freedom, justice,
self-determination and coexistence, is committed to
the implementation of the resolutions of international
legitimacy, fervently champions the spirit of
moderation, and supports the Palestinian people in
attaining the fulfilment of their alienable rights.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Robert
Serry to make a further comment.
Mr. Serry: I shall be very brief. Today has been a
long and important debate, given its timing. We have
all recognized the critical nature of the situation, and
many have been appealing for prudent and restrained
actions at this sensitive time. That is something that
we have also been underscoring, if we are not going to
lose sight of the two-State solution altogether. For my
part, I will remain stubbornly committed to that shared
objective.
Let me thank the Nigerian delegation for the smooth
manner in which today’s debate was conducted. I would
like to thank all Council members and other speakers
for having expressed appreciation for my work.
The President: I give the floor to the representative
of Israel, who has asked to make a further statement.
Mr. Goren (Israel): Listening to some of the
speakers today, I am reminded of Winston Churchill,

14-3141667/68

S/PV.7164

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

who said, “A lie gets halfway around the world before
the truth has a chance to get its pants on”. I will attempt
to give truth a fighting chance in my short reply.
I would like to emphasize that the delegations that
have praised the Abbas-Hamas unity agreement, which
in its essence has forsaken the Quartet principles,
have legitimized the path of terror over the path of
peace. May I remind everyone that those principles are
recognizing the State of Israel without prejudging what
various grievances or claims are appropriate, abiding
by previous diplomatic agreements, and renouncing
violence as a means of achieving goals.
In recent months, we have a seen a well-orchestrated
and dangerous political campaign on the issue of
Jerusalem on the part of a number of Arab delegations,
the League of Arab States and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation. The accusations made earlier
today by those delegations are a continuation of those
false charges and a distortion of the truth with no real
basis in reality. Let me be clear. Israel will respect and
grant full religious rights to people of all faiths, and
Jerusalem is an open city to all religions. With Sunnis,
Shiites and Alawites massacring each other, with
Christians fleeing the region year after year, Israel
remains an exception in a region that is embarrassingly
intolerant.
It is truly absurd to hear some of the world’s most
oppressive regimes lecture the Middle East’s only true
democracy. For example, Saudi Arabia’s policy towards

68/68

29/04/2014

women, gays and minorities is notorious throughout the
entire world. I do not think anyone in this Chamber can
take seriously any criticism by the Saudi representative
on the issues of human rights and intolerance.
The representative of Lebanon began her talk with
a poetic but wrong description of life in Jerusalem.
I would be happy to invite her for a visit to see the
real Jerusalem in all its beauty and freedom, but I am
worried that intolerance and bigotry in her own country
would not allow it. Perhaps Lebanon should consider
toning down its rhetoric and turning up the heat on the
Hizbullah terrorist organization, which has amassed an
arsenal of over 60,000 rockets in populated areas. That
is tantamount to a double war crime.
Finally, it is unfortunate that a major State in
our region, which is vying for a leadership role, has
decided yet again to adopt an unconstructive approach
and demonize the only democracy in the Middle East.
It takes a great deal of audacity on the part of that
country’s representative to criticize Israel, given that
sectarian tensions, violence, killings and religious
intolerance in his country are on the rise. “Denial is not
just the name of a river.”
The President: There are no more speakers
inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

14-31416
